
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13372/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 4, 2018                               |On May 11, 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                MUHAMAD ISHAQ
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford, Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan who is now 25 years of  age.
    He entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on May 7, 2009 when he  was
    16 years of age. He attended  a  screening  interview  and  substantive
    interview on  June  4,  2009  and  August  7,  2009  respectively.  The
    respondent refused that application on October 12, 2009 but granted him
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied minor until  July  1,
    2010. Although he appealed this decision his appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers on  December  16,  2009.  The
    appellant appealed this decision to the Upper Tribunal and subsequently
    to the Court of Appeal but permission to appeal was refused.

 3. Whilst this appeal was pending the appellant applied for further  leave
    to remain and this was refused  by  the  respondent.  His  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish on May  25,  2011  but
    his appeal was dismissed.

 4. Thereafter the appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and  on  August
    15, 2011 Senior Immigration Judge Renton dismissed his appeal  although
    preserved positive  findings  of  fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    persecuted in Afghanistan by the Taliban and that his account of how he
    had left the country and subsequently arrived in the United Kingdom was
    consistent with the objective material.

 5. Judicial review proceedings were then lodged which  ultimately  led  to
    the appellant withdrawing the application on October 22,  2012  on  the
    basis that his appeal would be remitted back to the Upper Tribunal  for
    reconsideration with the preserved findings of fact.

 6. Unfortunately, nothing appeared to happen on that appeal and on October
    19, 2015 the Administrative Court allowed the appeal on the basis  that
    the decision of Judge Frankish contained an error in law  remitted  the
    matter back to the Tribunal for further reconsideration.

 7. There was then a further delay  until  September  12,  2017  when  Vice
    President Ockelton granted permission to appeal. Upper Tribunal Judge C
    Lane found there was an error in  law  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    November 2, 2017 and it is via this route the matter appeared before me
    on the above date.

 8. As a preliminary issue I  raised  with  the  two  representatives  what
    remained in issue and what was agreed. Both representatives agreed that
    paragraphs 20 and 21 of Senior Immigration Judge Renton's decision were
    retained and would be the  starting  point  when  considering  risk  on
    return.

 9. The representatives  then  addressed  a  secondary  issue  relating  to
    whether the appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to  remain.  His
    solicitors had  written  to  the  respondent  notifying  him  that  the
    appellant intended to invite the Tribunal to grant him indefinite leave
    to remain on the basis that he had been granted discretionary leave  to
    remain before July 9, 2012 and  having  accrued  six  years  continuous
    discretionary leave he was entitled to indefinite leave.

10. With the assistance of Mr McVeety the correct policy was identified and
    this confirmed that if the appellant  had  been  granted  discretionary
    leave prior to July 9, 2012 (it is accepted he was) then as long as  he
    could demonstrate six years  continuous  discretionary  leave  then  he
    would be entitled to apply for indefinite leave to remain.

11. However, his claim to have had six years continuous discretionary leave
    centred around the fact that he relied on section 3C leave. Again, with
    the assistance of Mr McVeety the  respondent's  policy  on  section  3C
    leave was obtained and that made clear that judicial review proceedings
    did not extend section 3C leave regardless of whether  the  application
    was successful. Mr  Bedford  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not
    therefore apply for indefinite leave under this provision.

12. The two representatives agreed that the ultimate issue would be whether
    it was unduly harsh for him to relocate to Kabul and  to  consider  his
    article 8 ECHR claim.

13. The appellant gave evidence through  an  interpreter  although  it  was
    apparent that he had a good understanding of English but had chosen, as
    is his right, to give evidence through an interpreter. He  adopted  his
    recent statement dated  March  10,  2018  and  confirmed  that  he  had
    effectively been living with a former Afghani  national  who  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.  He  had  been  living
    with him since he came to this  country  and  it  appears  that  Social
    Services were initially involved in a placement. He explained that  for
    the last three years he had been legally working as a grill chef  in  a
    takeaway working approximately 21 hours a week. He  spoke  both  Pushto
    and English and he had obtained an  ESOL  qualification.  He  explained
    that he had an eight-year-old child who was a British citizen but  that
    he had not seen his son for over four years. He had not  been  able  to
    contact any family in Afghanistan and he last spoke to his family  when
    he was in Afghanistan. Where he used to live the Taliban had taken over
    the area and people who had remained there were involved in farming  as
    an occupation.

14. Under cross-examination he agreed that his English was good but that he
    had no other academic qualifications. He  had  not  contacted  the  Red
    Cross to locate his family but he  had  asked  other  friends  who  had
    returned to Afghanistan to look for his family and  he  also  tried  to
    locate his family through Facebook. To date he had been unsuccessful.

15. I asked the appellant a number of questions centred around his  private
    life and he confirmed that he worked during the evenings and spent  the
    rest of his time playing cricket for a local club for which he  was  an
    opening batsman. He would spend time with  friends,  watching  football
    and playing games on the Xbox. He had no other  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom although he had made a lot of friends since he had been here.

    SUBMISSIONS

16. Mr McVeety submitted that the starting point in this case was that  his
    claim of persecution had been accepted and he would therefore be unable
    to return to his home area.  In  considering  the  risk  on  return  he
    submitted that the appellant could only be returned to  Kabul  and  the
    issue was whether it was unduly harsh to require  him  to  relocate  to
    that area.

17. Reliance was placed on the  recent  country  guidance  decision  of  AS
    (Safety in Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118  (IAC)  and  in
    particular paragraphs 230 and 231 of that  decision.  He  accepted  the
    appellant had come to the United Kingdom when he was around 14 years of
    age taking into account the length of time it took him to arrive  here.
    He accepted that the appellant had stated he had no family in Kabul and
    that he had  never  visited  that  city.  He  also  accepted  that  the
    appellant claimed he had not had any  contact  with  his  family  since
    leaving the country. There is no  suggestion  his  physical  or  mental
    health would raise any cause for concern and  the  fact  he  had  given
    evidence through the interpreter demonstrated that he spoke  the  local
    language  and  he  had  limited  educational  and  vocational   skills.
    Ultimately, he submitted it was a matter for  the  Tribunal  to  decide
    whether it would be unduly harsh to require him to return.

18. Mr Bedford submitted that the appellant could only be returned to Kabul
    and when considering the issue of return he submitted that where  there
    was a risk the burden fell upon the respondent to dispel any doubts. He
    referred to paragraph 16 of AM (Zimbabwe) c SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64 and
    paragraph 91 of KK and Others v Sweden 59166/12.

19. Mr Bedford pointed out that whilst the appellant may have  lived  in  a
    village up to the age of 14 this was not the place the  respondent  was
    seeking to return him to. He had never been to Kabul and had no  family
    living there. He had not had any contact with his family since he  left
    Afghanistan.

20. Since being in the United Kingdom he had established a private life  as
    evidenced by his statement and oral evidence and  he  had  been  living
    with the same person ever since he arrived  having  been  placed  there
    initially by Social Services. The Upper  Tribunal  was  revisiting  the
    decision of Judge Frankish which had originally been made in  2011.  He
    submitted that taking into account  factors  set  out  in  the  country
    guidance case in paragraphs 232 to 235 it would be unduly harsh, on the
    facts of this case, to refuse his application for asylum.

21. Alternatively, he submitted the appellant had been here since May  2009
    and had established a private life. There had  been  a  long  delay  in
    dealing with his claim and he submitted there were no  adverse  factors
    to take into account under section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002. He invited me to allow the appeal.

    FINDINGS

22. This case has a horrendous history in that I am tasked with remaking  a
    decision that was originally made by Judge Frankish almost 7 years ago.
    It appears that delays occurred in the Administrative  Court  and  that
    this case was not processed as it should  have  been.  There  were  two
    significant delays which led this case to only now  coming  before  the
    court. Those delays were not brought about by this appellant and in the
    interim period he has established a private life not  only  within  his
    local community but he also is an active member of  his  local  cricket
    club and he has lawfully obtained employment.

23. Senior Immigration Judge Renton confirmed that his claim  was  credible
    and his claim was that he had been forced out  of  Afghanistan  by  the
    Taliban. He lived in an area where no returns are being  made  and  the
    respondent's current policy is to return to Kabul.

24. The appellant gave oral evidence and I accept his account that  he  has
    not had any contact with any family  since  leaving  his  country.  His
    family did not live in Kabul but lived in an area dominated by  Taliban
    and other forces. It is reasonably  likely  that  he  would  have  lost
    contact with his family and whilst he did not utilise the Red Cross  to
    try and locate his family I am reminded by  Mr  McVeety  that  the  Red
    Cross have actually suspended such enquiries although  perhaps  if  the
    enquiry had been made many  years  ago  the  situation  may  have  been
    different. He is of course now an adult so the issue of  tracing  is  a
    somewhat moot point.

25. The appellant has never been to Kabul and I accept his evidence that he
    has no family in the city.

26. The Tribunal recently affirmed that there is no article  15c  situation
    in Kabul. However, whilst generally it is safe  and  reasonable  for  a
    single healthy  man  to  internally  relocate  to  Kabul  the  Tribunal
    emphasised that a case-by-case consideration was required under Article
    8 of the Qualification Directive.

27. The Tribunal made clear that the age at which a person left Afghanistan
    was relevant as to whether this included  their  formative  years.  The
    older a person is when they leave  the  more  likely  they  are  to  be
    familiar with employment opportunities and living independently.

28. In this appeal the appellant was only 14 years of age and  living  with
    his family when he left. He did not  live  in  Kabul  and  lived  in  a
    farming location. He clearly would not have been familiar  with  living
    independently although it is possible he may have assisted  his  family
    on any land they farmed.

29. The Tribunal also stated that a person who has connections in Kabul  or
    access to financial resources will be able to  internally  relocate  to
    Kabul easier. The absence of such a support network puts this appellant
    in a vulnerable situation.

30. The appellant is in good health and has demonstrated an ability to work
    and it is arguable that if he had some form of a support  network  then
    he may well be  able  to  obtain  employment  in  Kabul.  The  Tribunal
    accepted  in  AS  that  the  objective  evidence  suggested  there  was
    available low or unskilled jobs involving manual labour there.

31. The appellant demonstrated an ability to speak Pushto although  he  had
    limited educational skills. The ability to play cricket would  not,  in
    my view, strengthen his ability to support himself.

32. Both representatives agreed that this was a  case  where  the  Tribunal
    would have to consider all the factors and then reach a decision on the
    evidence.

33. The case is finely balanced with there being a number of  factors  such
    as his health, ability to work and  knowledge  of  language  supporting
    return although they had to be balanced against  the  fact  he  has  no
    family or connections in  either  Kabul  or  Afghanistan  and  he  left
    Afghanistan when he was 14 years of age.

34. Paragraph 339O the Immigration Rules makes clear that an appellant will
    not succeed with a refugee claim if he can reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to another area.

35. Applying the case law of Januzi and AH (Sudan) and taking into  account
    the latest guidance as set out in AS I find that if the appellant  were
    returned to Kabul he would be at risk of persecution due to his lack of
    connections in Kabul, lack of a support network from  family  or  other
    people and especially having regard to the fact that he has been living
    in this country for nine years. I therefore  find  that  returning  the
    appellant to Kabul would be both unreasonable and unduly harsh.

36. As regards his article 8 claim the same factors  apply.  There  are  no
    adverse factors under section 117B of the 2002 Act. Mr McVeety did  not
    argue that the appellant had been here unlawfully. He may not have been
    entitled to indefinite leave to remain but it is clear that he was  not
    the person who has been frustrating  the  legal  procedure.  He  speaks
    English and whilst that is not a deciding factor it is a  factor  which
    counts in his favour albeit as a neutral factor as does the fact he has
    demonstrated an ability to work. In  the  circumstances,  it  would  be
    disproportionate to return him to Kabul given the case history and  his
    personal circumstances.

    DECISION

37. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

38. I have set aside the  original  decision  and  I  remake  the  decision
    allowing the appeal on asylum grounds and human rights grounds.

Signed                              Date     04/05/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as no fee was paid.

Signed                              Date     04/05/2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

