
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/13439/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 7 July  2017                           |On 17 July 2017             |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                SUTHAGAR [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr R O Ryan instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1982 and is a national of Sri Lanka.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Sharkett promulgated on 24 January 2017 which allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  20
   November 2015 to refuse the Appellants protection claim which was a fresh
   claim, a previous appeal against the refusal of asylum having  been  made
   on 31.8.2013.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Sharkett ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision. .
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing:
   a) That the Judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding that it was
      credible that the Appellant was  released  from  detention  after  the
      payment of a bribe.
   b) The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  that  although
      the Appellant did not fall into any of the risk categories highlighted
      in GJ he was at risk on return and the Judge appears to have based her
      decision solely on the fact that the  Appellant  originated  from  the
      East of Sri Lanka which was insufficient basis for departing from GJ.
7.  On 2 May 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuel  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

8. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that :

   a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) The Judge accepted at face value the Appellants claim that he had been
      released after the payment of a  bribe  without  explaining  why  that
      would lead to state interest going forward  if  the  practice  was  so
      widespread.

   c) The decision was not sufficiently reasoned for departing from  country
      guidance.

9. On behalf of the Appellant Mr O Ryan submitted

   a) The Judge gave adequate reasons for the decision  that  the  Appellant
      had been released after the payment of a bribe.  However  the  finding
      that the Appellant had been released after the payment of a bribe  was
      not central to his  risk  on  return  in  the  overall  conclusion  at
      paragraph 94 reflects.

   b) At paragraph 94 the Judge bases her decision  on  country  information
      that post dates GJ and four specific factors.

   c) The Judge was not obliged to cite every piece of  evidence  relied  on
      and she makes clear that she took it all into account.

   d) The decision was balanced in that she did not give undue weight to the
      evidence of the expert.

   e) She had also relied on the arguments set out in his skeleton  argument
      and clearly found that this supported her overall conclusions.

   f) There had been significant changes since the Appellants claim was last
      considered with new and overwhelming medical evidence that he had been
      tortured. The Judge accepted the core account of  past  detention  and
      torture.

10. In response Mr Bates argued:

   a) The expert was one of those relied on in GJ but the  court  had  heard
      from a variety but it did not  follow  that  his  evidence  was  still
      reliable as Dr Kakhki's views on Iran were now challenged.

   b) The Judge was required to say more than she did.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. The main thrust of the Respondents appeal is that the  Judge  failed  to
   give adequate reasons for departing from the country guidance case of GJ.



13. It is a trite observation that a judge need not address in detail  every
   single argument advanced before her,  nor  consider  in  isolation  every
   single piece of evidence. She must weigh all of the evidence before  her,
   and give clear reasons for her conclusions such that the parties, and  in
   particular the losing party, can understand the reasons for her decision.

14. In an extremely detailed and careful analysis of the oral,  medical  and
   documentary evidence before her the Judges concluded that this  Appellant
   may have come  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  for  passing  on
   intelligence to the LTTE (paragraph 78); he  had  suffered  in  the  past
   significant trauma resulting in a PTSD diagnosis (paragraph 79) and  that
   there was a finding by an expert that there was no plausible  explanation
   for the extensive and widespread  scarring   suffered  by  the  Appellant
   which was  consistent  with  his  account  of  torture  during  detention
   (paragraph 79).

15. It is contended that the Judge gave insufficient reasons for  a  finding
   that the Appellant was released after payment of a bribe following sexual
   and general physical torture during detention  as  this  did  not  simply
   follow from her finding that the Appellant had suffered such treatment by
   the authorities. I find that there is no merit  in  this  argument  given
   that as a starting point that the court in GJ at paragraph 275 took  into
   account that 'the seriousness of any charges against  an  individual  are
   not determinative of whether a bribe can be paid, and that it is possible
   to leave through the  airport  even  when  a  person  is  being  actively
   sought.' Therefore the fact of the payment of bribes  to  secure  release
   from detention does  not  appear  to  be  contentious.   The  Judge  also
   specifically referred to the expert report of Dr Nadarajah  at  paragraph
   74. The Doctor was one of the experts whose  report  was  considered  and
   given weight by the court in GJ : while I note  Mr  Bates  argument  that
   once an expert does not mean always an expert there must  be  some  basis
   argued by the Respondent for suggesting that the expert can no longer  be
   relied on. No such argument was advanced before the Judge. Dr Nadarajah's
   report was consistent with the  Appellants  claim  that  his  father  had
   secured his release from detention by the payment of a bribe.

16. It was also contended that the Judge failed to give  sufficient  reasons
   for going behind the country guidance case  having  recognised  that  the
   Appellant did not come within any of the risk factors identified therein.
   The Judge made clear that she understood one she was being asked  to  do,
   as Mr O Ryan put it she was 'consciously departing 'and she set  out  the
   appropriate test she had to apply at paragraph 85 of  her  decision.  She
   set out in very clear detail at paragraph 86 the arguments advanced by Mr
   O Ryan which drew together the material in his  skeleton  argument  which
   itself contained  detailed  references  to  the  background  material  at
   paragraph 17  to support the argument that there was sufficient  evidence
   postdating GJ together with material contained within the Respondents own
   CIG at paragraph 87 to justify her conclusion that the Appellant would be
   at risk on return because of extensive evidence of the ill  treatment  of
   those who were known to be or suspected to be members of the LTTE or even
   to have had loose links to the LTTE.

17. The Judge  then  went  on  at  paragraph  88  to  briefly  summarise  Dr
   Nadarajah's conclusions at paragraph 149 that given the  changes  in  Sri
   Lanka since the promulgation of GJ that there were a  number  of  factors
   that would draw the Appellant 'to the adverse attention of  the  security
   forces and put him at risk of detention and ill treatment on return'  and
   sets those factors  out  in  detail  at  paragraphs  89  onwards  briefly
   summarising those reasons at paragraph 94 .

18. While not relied on the Judge would also in my view have  been  entitled
   to take into account MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA
   Civ 829 where the Court of Appeal upheld the GJ but found  that care  had
   to be taken in  not  interpreting  GJ  too  narrowly  because  the  Upper
   Tribunal had not prescribed "that diaspora activism is the only basis  on
   which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing" a future threat and
   thus of being at risk on return. "There may, though untypically, be other
   cases where the evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that the
   Government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat  to  the
   integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of  evidence
   that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism".

19. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the  judge."  In  this  case  the  Judge  had  a
   plethora of more up to date material which she had  manifestly  read  and
   analysed and was helped by a careful  skeleton  argument  underpinned  by
   numerous references to the  relevant  background  material.  Taking  into
   account all of that material her findings were open to her and adequately
   reasoned.

20. In this case there had been an application for permission to  appeal  by
   the Appellant on the basis  that  the  Judge  had  made  no  findings  in
   relation to the risk on return  arising  out  of  the  Appellants  mental
   health issues and in a decision dated 26 May 2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Kamara directed that the renewed application  was  to  be  made  at  this
   hearing. I indicated to Mr Ryan that I intended to hear  the  Respondents
   application first and announce my decision then consider his application.
   After announcing my decision and after discussion with Mr O Ryan  he  was
   content for me to note that the Judge did fail to make any findings about
   the Appellants mental health problems but given the decision  in  respect
   of the asylum claim the error was not material  to  the  outcome  of  the
   case.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
14.7.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

