
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 November 2016                   |On 4 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   ZHI [G]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Handley, dismissing his appeal against refusal  of  asylum  as  a
    refugee from China.

 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on grounds  set  out  as
    (i) - (v).

 3. Mr Forrest accurately characterised the grounds as raising  essentially
    two issues.

 4. The first issue, ground (v), is based on the judge falling  into  error
    at paragraph 32 where he says  the  appellant  and  his  wife  have  no
    children. The evidence was  clear  that  they  have  two  children.  Mr
    Forrest submitted that this was  not  only  a  factual  but  a  legally
    material error, because the best interests of  children  are  essential
    and integral to an article 8 assessment. He accepted that the judge did
    not require to recite a mantra in terms of Razgar, and that  there  was
    no error at paragraph 33 regarding private  life,  but  the  concluding
    paragraphs carried out no proportionality exercise. This error required
    the case to  be  remitted  to  the  first-tier  tribunal  for  a  fresh
    assessment.

 5. Mr Forrest submitted that grounds (i) -  (iv)  together  constituted  a
    "reasons" challenge, and amounted to more than  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusions, all going to core issues.

 6. Each of these grounds is framed  by  reference  to  paragraphs  of  the
    appellant's witness statement in response to paragraphs of the  refusal
    letter on credibility issues. Each complains that the judge  failed  to
    take  into  consideration  the  appellant's  explanation.  Mr   Forrest
    submitted  that  the  judge  said  no  more  than  that  he  found  the
    appellant's explanations not "proper" or "plausible",  overlooking  the
    witness statement. Perhaps the strongest of these  points,  Mr  Forrest
    submitted, was at paragraph (iv), which overlooks  that  the  appellant
    gave a clear account of why he delayed for 10 years after  arriving  in
    the UK before making his claim. That explanation was not  mentioned  in
    the decision. The challenge based on inadequacy of reasoning  was  also
    sufficient to require a rehearing.

 7. Mrs O'Brien in reply accepted that the judge made an error  in  respect
    of the children,  but  she  said  it  was  plainly  not  material.  The
    appellant had not  argued  any  substantial  case  based  on  the  best
    interests of children and article 8. These were  very  young  children,
    not yet even at nursery school, neither of whose parents had any status
    to remain in the UK, and all members of the  family  were  citizens  of
    China. No protection case had been argued on the basis  of  the  family
    including two children, and an article 8 case on those facts was simply
    bound to fail.

 8. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the  reasons  challenge  was  no  more  than
    disagreement. Paragraphs 24 to 29 of the determination were to be  read
    as a whole.  The  judge  explained  why  he  rejected  the  appellant's
    explanations. Although these were recited in the witness  statement  by
    reference to paragraphs of the respondent's decision, in substance they
    were no more than repetition of and insistence upon  the  position  the
    appellant took at the  interview.  There  was  nothing  which  required
    separate analysis. Paragraph (iv) of the grounds,  on  the  explanation
    for the long delay in claiming asylum, was no different from the  rest.
    The explanation was plainly feeble and no more needed to be  said.   In
    effect, the appellant had said nothing new in his witness statement.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The appellant in the grounds and submissions has probed for such  error
    as might be found, but apart from the slip regarding the  children,  in
    my opinion that probe has found nothing.

11. The factual error regarding the children is of no importance. It is  of
    course easy to  say  that  in  principle  an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of two infant children is an important part of an  article  8
    exercise. Realistically, however, the position is  that  the  appellant
    did not advance a case based on any detriment to the interests  of  the
    children if the family were to return as a unit to China, which is  the
    outcome on which any consideration must be based. Notably, the  grounds
    in this respect are all framed on principle, without any  specification
    of  any  possible  detriment  which  was  overlooked.  Other   than   a
    generalised view of the better life prospects the children  might  have
    in the UK as compared to China, there was nothing to  consider,  either
    before Judge Handley or on a remaking. As submitted by  the  Presenting
    Officer, there could have been only one outcome.

12. Grounds (i) - (iv) are all based on  reference  to  paragraphs  in  the
    statement and in the refusal letter, and on lack of consideration,  but
    on reference to the underlying materials, as took place  in  course  of
    the hearing, they  do  not  bring  out  any  substantial  part  of  the
    appellant's case which was overlooked.

13. For example,  ground  (i)  turns  on  whether  the  appellant  gave  an
    inconsistent account of the number of people attending  the  church  of
    which he claimed to be a member. There was plainly a self-contradiction
    at the interview and the appellant  has  not  said  anything  since  to
    undermine the judge's  finding  that  he  has  "not  offered  a  proper
    explanation" for it.  That is a finding justified on reference  to  all
    the evidence, including the witness statement, which is no more than  a
    repetition: "I clarified this at Q/A 94 - 95 of my interview".

14. The one error identified is immaterial. The grounds do  not  show  that
    the decision, read fairly and as  a  whole,  is  a  less  than  legally
    adequate explanation  to  the  appellant  of  why  his  case  has  been
    dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is shall stand.


            [pic]


            4 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




