


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13183/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              8th               August               2016
                 On the 12th August 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                    MRS P
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Wilford (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mrs Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge J. McDonald promulgated on  the  21st  April  2016,  in
      which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      refusal of her protection and Human Rights claim.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  who  says  that  she  fears
      persecution were she to be returned to Sri Lanka, due her  to  imputed
      political opinion.  The Appellant, in an application for permission to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal, summarised her case as  being  that  she
      feared ill treatment upon return by or on behalf of  General  Fonseka,
      his former son-in-law Danuna Tillakaratne and Rohan Gunuratna, due  to
      her husband's suspected knowledge of their corrupt activities.  It  is
      also said that within the permission to appeal  application  that  she
      fears ill treatment from the Sri Lankan police due to this association
      having been detained, beating and raped by them in 2011.

   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge J. McDonald, in his decision, accepted  that
      the Appellant was a credible witness and that she had been arrested by
      the Sri Lankan police in November 2011 and that she  had  been  beaten
      and raped as claimed and that the  Appellant  had  been  diagnosed  as
      suffering from PTSD, the  most  likely  explanation  for  which  Judge
      McDonald found, was the treatment that she suffered in November  2011.
      However, the Judge found that the Appellant had consistently said that
      her fear was of General Fonseka and his son-in-law  Tillakaratne,  and
      that she had not at any point stated that her  fear  was  of  the  Sri
      Lankan police, despite the ordeal that she suffered at their hands. He
      found  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  General  Fonseka  or  his
      associates had at any time taken action against the Appellant  or  her
      husband apart from oral threats [116].  The Judge went on to find that
      "Given the rehabilitation on Fonseka and his associations,  I  do  not
      find, applying the lower standard of proof, that there are substantial
      grounds for believing that if the Appellant were returned to Sri Lanka
      she would face a real risk of suffering serious harm." In this regard,
      the Judge noted that although General  Fonseka  had  served  a  prison
      sentence for corruption in relation to  arms  dealings,  he  had  been
      pardoned and indeed promoted to the range of Field Marshall.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to find that there had  been  no
      submissions put forward that the Appellant's mental  health  and  PTSD
      engaged Article 3 and noted that it was an extremely high threshold.

   5. In respect of the Appellant's claim under Article 8, the  Judge  noted
      the Appellant had a child who was born in the UK  on  the  28th  April
      2015 who was at that stage 11 months old, but that she and her husband
      did not meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM as  partners,
      given that neither were British citizens  and  were  in  the  UK  with
      refugee leave or as persons with humanitarian protection.  In  respect
      of the Appellant's private life  under  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  when
      considering whether or not there would be very  significant  obstacles
      to the Appellant's integration into the country to which she would  be
      returned, namely Sri Lanka, the Judge  considered  that  although  the
      psychiatrist Dr Obuaya had said that the risk of  suicide  or  serious
      self-inflicted harm may increase if  the  Appellant  returned  to  Sri
      Lanka, and that her mental state may significantly worsen if  she  was
      forcibly returned, he found that there was no evidence that  the  type
      of treatment that Dr Obuaya envisaged would not be  available  in  Sri
      Lanka. He found that the Appellant previously had  employment  in  Sri
      Lanka and had always expressed a wish that she  could  return  to  Sri
      Lanka and continue with  her  employment.  He  found  that  the  risks
      expressed by Dr Obuaya did not amount to very significant obstacles to
      return and that the Appellant's claim therefore failed on Human Rights
      grounds.  The Judge therefore dismissed the appeal on asylum  grounds,
      on humanitarian protection grounds and on Human Rights grounds.

   6. The Appellant has now sought to appeal against that decision  for  the
      reasons set out within the application for permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal.  This is a matter  of  record  and  is  therefore  not
      repeated in full here, but I have fully taken account of the same,  in
      reaching my decision.   In  summary,  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge
      materially erred in his consideration of the Appellant's mental health
      and its implications for her ability to meet  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
      and that the Judge failed to have regard to the findings at paragraphs
      447 to 547 of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
      [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) regarding the availability and suitability  of
      mental  health  treatment  in  Sri  Lanka  for  those  suffering  PTSD
      following torture and that there were only 25 working psychiatrists in
      Sri Lanka and that such mental health institutions as  do  exist  they
      are "inaccessible and do not provide appropriate care for mentally ill
      people".  It was further stated that in Y and Another  (Sri  Lanka)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  362,  that
      the Court of Appeal had  acknowledged  that  where  PTSD  arises  from
      torture by the State, there may be a consequent unwillingness to  seek
      treatment in the country concerned and thereby disclose  the  torture.
      It was argued that the Appellant would be unable to access psychiatric
      treatment in Sri Lanka and that any treatment she did experience would
      be ineffective, given her reluctance to  recount  her  experiences  to
      those in authority and  that  the  arguable  consequence  would  be  a
      significant deterioration in her mental state, which may  inhibit  her
      ability to work and readjust to Sri Lankan  society  and  create  very
      significant obstacles to reintegration.  It was argued that the  Judge
      failed to take these factors into account when  considering  Paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi).

   7. In the second ground of appeal it was argued that the Judge had failed
      to make findings as to the Appellant's claimed fear of Rohan Gunuratna
      who had been identified as involved in the Korean meetings and  having
      threatened her and her husband in the past and that the Judge had also
      failed to make findings as to the Appellant's claimed future risk from
      the Sri Lankan police, whom she had said had  repeatedly  visited  her
      family in search of her and it is  said  that  the  Judge  erroneously
      stated that the Appellant had not asserted a fear of the  police,  but
      she had mentioned such a fear, which was recorded at paragraph  43  of
      the determination.

   8. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Robertson on the 25th May 2016, but  permission  to  appeal  was
      then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on the 28th June  2016,  in
      which he found that:

           "It is on balance arguable in light of what  was  very  recently
           decided by the Supreme Court in MP (Sri Lanka) [2016]  UKSC  32,
           that this case is sufficiently akin to that for the  conclusions
           there to be applicable here also.  The  matters  raised  in  the
           grounds are  of  less  immediate  concern  but  are  nonetheless
           arguable."

   9. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply, it is argued  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge directed  himself  appropriately,  and  that  when
      considering  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  the  Judge  gave  reasons   at
      paragraph 127 as to why the Judge did not find the Appellant's  mental
      health amounted to a significant obstacle and that the Judge  actively
      considered the risk on return to Sri Lanka as  set  out  in  paragraph
      123.

  10. It was on this basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   Oral Submissions

  11. In his oral submissions to me, Mr Wilford on behalf of  the  Appellant
      noted that the Supreme Court in the case of MP had not  in  fact  made
      any specific findings of fact, but had  referred  a  question  to  the
      Court of Justice of the European Union,  namely,  "Does  Article  2(c)
      read with Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive  cover  a  real
      risk of serious harm to the physical or psychological  health  of  the
      Applicant, if  retuned  to  the  country  of  origin,  resulting  from
      previous torture or inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  for  which  the
      country of origin was responsible?".  However, Mr Wilford agreed  that
      at paragraph 8 of the decision of the Supreme Court, it was said  that
      the Upper Tribunal had in the case evidence from a psychiatrist  which
      had showed that the Appellant in that case was suffering  from  severe
      post-traumatic  stress  disorder,  severe  depression  and  that  that
      Appellant had showed a high degree of suicidality and he  appeared  to
      have a serious determination to kill himself if he  were  returned  to
      Sri Lanka.  Mr Wilford conceded  that  the  Appellant  Mrs  P's  post-
      traumatic stress disorder and risk of suicide  was  not  said  by  her
      psychiatrist to be as severe as the psychological illness suffered  by
      the Appellant in MP, but he did ask if I did consider that the Supreme
      Court case of MP was relevant, that the appeal be stayed  pending  the
      outcome of the reference to the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European
      Union.  He argued that the Appellant may be at an  increased  risk  of
      suicide were she to be returned and that the question set out  by  the
      Supreme Court of Appeal in terms of whether or not  in  light  of  the
      continuing material risk the Appellant would be entitled to subsidiary
      protection was relevant.

  12. Mr Wilford went on to argue that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      erred in his consideration of Paragraph  276ADE  and  failed  to  take
      account of the fact that at  paragraph  454  of  GJ,  there  had  been
      evidence submitted in the Country Guidance case that there  were  only
      25 working psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka and  that  although
      there were some mental health facilities in Sri Lanka it had been said
      at paragraph 4 of the April 2013 UKBA Operational Guidance  Note  that
      money spent on mental health only really went  to  the  larger  mental
      health institutions in capital cities which were inaccessible  and  do
      not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people.

  13. However, Mr Wilford was unable to  point  me  to  any  other  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge other than what was stated in the
      Country Guidance case, regarding the lack of  treatment  in  terms  of
      counselling, recommended for the Appellant's PTSD.   However,  he  did
      argue that her psychiatric condition would affect her ability  to  get
      employment and that the psychiatrist at paragraph 65 had said that, if
      untreated, this would affect her ability to find work.

  14. Mr Wilford further argued that the Judge had failed to  make  material
      findings in respect of the threat  posed  to  the  Appellant  from  Mr
      Gunuratna and also from the police, but he did concede that there  was
      no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of a continuing threat from
      Rohan Gunuratna, apart from the earlier threats that  had  been  made.
      He further conceded that there is no evidence as found by  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, as  to  who  actually  went  to  the  Appellant's
      property in  January  2016,  as  to  whether  it  was  the  police  or
      supporters of Fonseka.

  15. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Ahmad  argued  that
      the Appellant's mental health problems were very different in severity
      to that of the Appellant in MP and that the  psychiatric  evidence  in
      this case referred to there being a low suicide  risk  and  that  this
      Appellant simply required counselling or  other  treatment,  and  that
      such counselling  did  not  necessarily  need  to  be  provided  by  a
      psychiatrist and that there was not actual evidence before  the  Judge
      that counselling was not available.  She argued that GJ had  not  said
      that counselling was not available in Sri Lanka, and argued that there
      was a high threshold before it could be  said  that  there  were  very
      significant obstacles to integration for  the  purposes  of  Paragraph
      276ADE.

  16. In respect  of  the  second  ground  of  appeal  she  argued  that  in
      submission it had been argued by the Appellant that she simply  feared
      Fonseka and Tillakaratne, and not a continued threat  from  Gunuratna,
      and that the Judge at paragraph 116 had said  the  Appellant  did  not
      fear the police.  She argued there was no material error  of  law  and
      asked me to dismiss the appeal.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  17. The Appellant in the case of MP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for
      the Home Department [2016] UKSC 32, as was noted at paragraph 8 of the
      decision of the Supreme Court, who was, according to the  evidence  of
      the psychiatrist before the Upper  Tribunal,  suffering  from  "severe
      post-traumatic stress disorder and  severe  depression"  and  who  had
      showed a high degree of suicidality and appeared  to  have  a  serious
      determination to kill himself if he returned to Sri Lanka,  such  that
      the Upper Tribunal had considered that Article 3 was engaged  in  that
      case if the Appellant were to be returned, given the risk of  suicide.
      The question posed by the Supreme Court for the Court  of  Justice  to
      the European Council was whether  or  not  "Article  2(e),  read  with
      Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive covers  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm to the physical or psychological health of the  applicant
      if returned to the country of origin, resulting from previous  torture
      or inhuman or degrading treatment for which the country of origin  was
      responsible". The threshold for breach of Article 3 in  terms  of  the
      severity of the  psychological  condition  and  risk  of  suicide  had
      already been passed.

  18.  However, the severity of the Appellant's mental  health  problems  in
      this case, is in no way  comparable  to  the  mental  health  problems
      suffered by the Appellant in MP.  Although in his  report  Dr  Obuaya,
      the Consultant Psychiatrist, had  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was
      suffering from PTSD, and that she required a  course  of  therapy,  at
      [61] of his report, he indicated that "In my clinical  opinion,  Ms  P
      has a low risk of attempting a suicidal act at present.  I based  this
      opinion on the absence of any suicidal acts historically and the  fact
      that her daughter and husband  are  likely  to  be  strong  protective
      factors against suicide.".  He went on to find at [62] that "The  risk
      of suicide or serious self-inflicted harm may, in  my  view,  increase
      moderately upon her hearing that she will definitely be  returning  to
      Sri Lanka, during the transit there and once she was back  there.   In
      all the circumstances, it is my opinion less likely that she  will  be
      able to take stock of her situation and make a considered decision  in
      an environment where she regards to be full of danger."

  19.  Therefore the Appellant, although suffering from PTSD from  her  past
      experiences at the hand of the police in Sri Lanka in 2011,  was  said
      only to have a low risk of  attempting  suicide,  which  may  increase
      significantly, were she to  be  returned.   This  is  at  an  entirely
      different level of severity to the Appellant in MP, who  was  said  to
      have had severe post-traumatic stress disorder, severe depression  and
      showed a high degree of suicidality and  a  serious  determination  to
      kill himself if returned.  In MP, it was  found  that  Article  3  was
      engaged, whereas as noted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDonald,  at
      [122], no submission was advanced on behalf of the Appellant that  her
      mental health and PTSD engaged Article 3 and  he  did  not  find  that
      Article 3 applied in the case given the Appellant's mental health  and
      PTSD.  Further,  as  Judge  McDonald  noted,  the  evidence  from  the
      psychiatrist was that the Appellant's risk of suicide  "may"  increase
      moderately, and was not a finding that it would increase.

  20. I do not consider in light of the medical evidence  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge McDonald, and in light of his findings, that  he  would
      have  found  that  the  Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  subsidiary
      protection under Article 2(e) in  terms  of  facing  a  real  risk  of
      suffering serious harm as defined under Article 15(b) in light of  her
      mental health, irrespective of which way the Court of Justice  of  the
      European Union decides the question that has been  referred  to  them.
      Her mental health condition simply was not serious enough for  her  to
      qualify for subsidiary protection on this basis.  I therefore  do  not
      consider that the basis upon which permission was actually granted  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Allen has merit, and I do not consider that it is
      necessary to stay this case pending the outcome of the referral to the
      Court of Justice of the European Union.

  21. In respect of the first ground of appeal, which argues that First-tier
      Tribunal Judge McDonald erred in his consideration of Paragraph 276ADE
      of the Immigration Rules. Criticism is made of the Judge's findings at
      paragraph 127 of his judgement in  which  he  stated  that  "The  only
      significant obstacles raised in the psychiatric  report  is  where  Dr
      Obuaya says at paragraph 62 that the risk of suicide or serious  self-
      inflicted harm may increase if the Appellant returned to Sri Lanka and
      that her mental state may worsen significantly if she were  forced  to
      return, see paragraph 64.  There is  no  evidence  that  the  type  of
      treatment that Dr Obuaya envisages  would  not  be  available  in  Sri
      Lanka.  The appellant had employment in Sri Lanka and she  has  always
      expressed a wish that she can return to Sri Lanka  and  continue  with
      her employment.  I do not find that the risks expressed by  Dr  Obuaya
      to  the  Appellant's  mental  health  amount  to  a  very  significant
      obstacle."

  22. Although reference in that regard is made  by  the  Appellant  to  the
      findings of the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  GJ  and  Others,  that
      there were only 25 working psychiatrists in Sri Lanka  and  that  such
      mental health institutions as do exist are  inaccessible  and  do  not
      provide appropriate care for mentally ill people and that the money is
      sent to the larger institutions in the cities, I  bear  in  mind  that
      treatment for PTSD, does not necessarily have  to  be  provided  by  a
      psychiatrist,  as  opposed  to  a  psychologist   or   other   medical
      practitioner. Further, the point being made by Judge McDonald was that
      there was "no evidence that the  type  of  treatment  that  Dr  Obuaya
      envisaged would not be available in Sri Lanka".  Mr Wilford was unable
      to point to any evidence being before  the  Judge,  other  than  those
      paragraphs within the Country Guidance case, which in  fact  indicated
      that treatment, for PTSD would not be available.  The fact that  there
      are a limited number of psychiatrists and that money for mental health
      is invested into the larger centres in  the  cities  and  that  mental
      health institutions are inaccessible and do  not  provide  appropriate
      care for mentally ill people, as found within GJ, does  not  establish
      that treatment for PTSD was not available. The  point  being  made  by
      Judge McDonald was there was no evidence before him that the treatment
      was not available in Sri Lanka.  On the evidence before him, that  was
      a perfectly valid comment.  The findings  in  GJ  do  not  prove  that
      treatment for PTSD in itself would not be available.

  23.  Although the Judge accepted that the  Appellant  had  been  arrested,
      beaten and raped whilst in Sri Lanka, and this was the likely cause of
      her PTSD, that in itself did not  indicate  that  treatment  for  PTSD
      would not be available in Sri Lanka or would not be effective, even if
      she was reluctant to recount her experiences to those in authority.

  24.  In my judgement the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  quite  properly
      considered the Appellant's mental health and the evidence  before  him
      in respect of her PTSD and risk of suicide,  has  fully  and  properly
      considered the  psychiatric  report  and  the  evidence  presented  in
      respect of it and the lack of evidence regarding  treatment  presented
      to him, and made findings that were  perfectly  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  her
      ability to integrate back into life in Sri Lanka, even bearing in mind
      her mental health problems.  There is no material error of law in this
      regard.

  25. In respect of the second ground of appeal, where it is argued that the
      Judge has not made any findings in respect of the claim of a  fear  of
      Rohan Gunuratna, the submission made  by  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant before First-tier Tribunal Judge McDonald  was  recorded  at
      [89], where it was said that the argument was  that  "the  Appellant's
      fear on return from Fonseka and Tillakaratne is credible".  Seemingly,
      it was not argued in closing submissions that the Appellant was  at  a
      real risk in the future from Rohan Gunuratna, but in  any  event,  the
      Judge  at  [119]  found  specifically   that   "Further,   given   the
      rehabilitation of Fonseka and his associations I do not find, applying
      the lower standard of proof, that there are  substantial  grounds  for
      believing that if the Appellant were returned to Sri Lanka, she  would
      face a real risk of suffering serious harm.".  In such  circumstances,
      the Judge has adequately and sufficiently dealt  with  the  risk  from
      General Fonseka and his associates, including Mr Gunuratna. He did not
      need make a separate specific finding  for  Mr  Gunuratna,  given  his
      finding about General Fonseka's associates.

  26. In respect of the submission that the Judge has failed to consider the
      risk faced to the Appellant from the police in the future, although at
      paragraph 116, Judge McDonald had said that "The Appellant however has
      consistently said that her fear is of General Fonseka and his  son-in-
      law Tillakaratne.  She does not at any point state that her fear is of
      the Sri Lankan police despite the ordeal  that  she  has  suffered  at
      their hands". I do note that at [43] it was said that  "The  Appellant
      says that further visits from police to their  family  properties  and
      that she is scared that if she  returns  to  Sri  Lanka  she  will  be
      arrested  again  or  killed."   The  Appellant  therefore  had  raised
      concerns regarding  the  threat  from  the  police,  but  in  her  own
      statement, she stated specifically that when she was arrested  by  CID
      officers, they were asking her about her  husband's  involvement  with
      Tillakaratne and Gunuratna. Although I do consider that Judge McDonald
      did err in stating that the Appellant had never said that  she  feared
      the police upon return, I do not consider that this error is material,
      given that in light of her own evidence, the police had arrested  her,
      questioned her and that she suffered the beating and rape, at  a  time
      when they were questioning her  regarding  her  husband's  involvement
      with Tillakaratne and Gunuratna. Given Judge  McDonald  found  Fonseka
      and his associates had been rehabilitated,  indeed  Fonseka  had  been
      promoted to Field Marshall, even if Judge McDonald had considered  the
      risk to the Appellant from the police in the future, he would come  to
      the same conclusion that the Appellant did not face any real  risk  of
      persecution or serious harm from the police  in  the  future,  despite
      having previously suffered at their hands. The police  had  only  been
      interested in her, on her own case, to find  out  what  her  husband's
      involvement with  Tillakaratne  and  Gunuranta  was,  and  given  that
      rehabilitation of Fonseka and his associates, Judge McDonald would  in
      any event have found that the Appellant was not at a  continuing  risk
      of suffering serious harm from the police were she to be returned.  No
      other reason was advanced by the Appellant for the police  having  any
      continuing adverse interest in her. I therefore do not  consider  that
      the error of Judge McDonald in this regard was a material error.

  27. In such circumstances, the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J.
      McDonald does not reveal a material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J.  McDonald  does  not  reveal  a
material error of law and is maintained.

The Appellant was granted  anonymity  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  I
consider it appropriate for the anonymity to be maintained.  I therefore  do
make an anonymity order.  Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 9th August 2016
