
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13563/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2016                       |On 17 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                SINGH JAGDEEP
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors (Bethnal Green Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of India,  date  of  birth  3  October  1977,
    appeals against the Respondent's decision  dated  3  December  2015  to
    refuse an asylum claim and refuse leave to remain with reference to the
    need for humanitarian protection.

2.   His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Blake who, on 27 June 2016, dismissed the appeal with reference to  the
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and also  rejected  a  claim
    with reference to Article 8 ECHR  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant   the   consideration   of   an
    application outside of the Rules.

3.   The initial challenge to the judge's decision is by  reference  to  the
    considerations in Section 117B(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the Act).  Essentially the point was  being
    made that the relevant evidence had been directed to:-  the  extent  to
    which the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom, the extent to which
    he was able to integrate given  his  time  here  being  about  thirteen
    years; he having entered the United Kingdom in 2003 when  he  was  aged
    about 26 years.  In  particular  the  grounds  sought  to  highlight  a
    potential difference between Upper Tribunal  case  law,  in  effect  to
    argue that the matters which the judge considered had  failed  to  give
    appropriate weight to Section 117B of the Act and there the matter lay.
     Permission was given to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy  on
    20 July 2006.  I simply note that the analysis of the  permission  does
    not disclose on what basis there might have been an  arguable  flaw  in
    the decision by the judge save that it was  granted  on  the  basis  of
    disclosing an arguable error of law.

4.   Having considered this matter I am satisfied that  the  relevant  issue
    is amongst other things addressed by the case of Forman [2015] UKUT 412
    and also more recently by the Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 803 particularly at  [61]  and  [62]  where  the  Court  of  Appeal
    observed that:

         "However, as the FTT observed, it does not follow  that  because  a
         person is able to speak English that it is in the  public  interest
         that they should be given leave to enter or remain. Section 117B(2)
         simply does not say that.  Therefore the FTT was correct to  reject
         the Appellant's argument that Section 117B(2) meant that it was  in
         the public interest that she (the Appellant)  should  be  admitted.
         Within the scheme of Part 5, her ability to speak English was  only
         a neutral factor."

5.   The judge continued,

         "However, as the  FTT  observed,  the  same  reasoning  applies  in
         relation to Section 117B(3).  Contrary to the Appellant's argument,
         it does not provide that if she is financially independent it is in
         the public interest that she be granted leave to  remain.  It  only
         indicates that it is  a  negative  factor  potentially  capable  of
         justifying her removal from the UK compatibly with  Article  8,  if
         she is not financially dependent. Again under the scheme of Part 5A
         the fact that a person is  financially  independent  is  a  neutral
         factor. As I have indicated, that  follows  the  reasoning  of  the
         Tribunal in Forman and  indicates  that  in  assessing  the  public
         interest those two matters will if met not enhance a claim so  much
         as if they are absente they will further fortify a claim  that  the
         public interest should be given the greater weight."

6.   It therefore seems to me that whatever may have  been  the  view  taken
    through the Upper Tribunal case law that the position is that these two
    matters which were particularly relied upon do not ultimately give  any
    real likelihood of a different decision being  arrived  at  by  another
    judge upon the basis of the same or very similar evidence.

7.   Accordingly whilst I found the judge's decision  contains  considerable
    brevity in analysis of the reasons, not a point being  directly  taken.
    Had the matter been looked at by another Tribunal, there  seems  to  me
    there is no real likelihood that a different decision would  have  been
    arrived at.

8.   Accordingly I  am  satisfied  that  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision
    discloses no arguable error of law and the Orginal Tribunal's  decision
    stands.

9.   No anonymity order was made and none is necessary or appropriate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

10.  I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


