
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/13354/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 July 2017                        |  On 4 August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     m m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Harris of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
     Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Iran  born  in  1974,   appeals   the
    determination of First-tier Judge Trevaskis promulgated on  17  January
    2017 to dismiss her appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to
    refuse her application for asylum on  11  July  2014.   The  procedural
    history, however, is somewhat  complex.   The  appeal  originally  came
    before Judge Trevaskis on 29 June 2016.  The judge heard oral  evidence
    from the appellant and summarised her claim and his conclusions upon it
    in the following extract from his determination:

         "47. The Appellant's claim is that she fled from Iran with her  ex-
             husband because she feared arrest, prosecution and  punishment
             amounting to persecution for alleged adultery; since coming to
             the United Kingdom, she claims  that  she  has  renounced  her
             Muslim faith, and converted to Christianity; she  also  claims
             that, before leaving Iran, she was subjected to an  attack  of
             such violence that she was forced  to  undergo  reconstructive
             facial surgery.


         48.  The evaluation of her claims turns  upon  the  credibility  of
             those   claims.    The   respondent   considers    that    the
             inconsistencies between the accounts given  in  her  screening
             interview and asylum interview undermine the credibility.  The
             appellant has dealt with those  discrepancies,  claiming  that
             the interpreters used were inaccurate.  It is  also  suggested
             that the screening interview, which took  place  on  Christmas
             Day, was rushed.  I have considered the written record of that
             interview, and I have noted that many of the answers are  very
             full, and this leads me to  believe  that  the  interview  was
             conducted at a  proper  pace.   There  has  been  no  evidence
             presented to substantiate the accusation of that the interview
             was rushed.


         49.  The appellant claims that details which were omitted from  her
             screening interview were omitted because she was told to  give
             short answers.  The introductory notes state that she will not
             be asked to go into detail about the  substantive  details  of
             her asylum claim as, if appropriate, this will be  done  at  a
             later interview.  However, some details she will be  asked  to
             provide may be relevant to her claim.  She confirmed that  she
             understood this.  While  that  may  explain  the  omission  of
             certain details, it does not explain actual  discrepancies  in
             details given in the two interviews, and I do not accept  that
             she has explained those discrepancies in this way.


         50.  The appellant claimed to have received a total  of  80  lashes
             for having tattoos; there has  been  no  medical  evidence  to
             support this, following examination of scarring.  With  regard
             to her  facial  surgery,  again  there  has  been  no  medical
             evidence, either from Iran or  from  the  United  Kingdom,  to
             verify the extent of the surgery, and the reasons for it.  She
             has no scars on her face which would be consistent with  being
             beaten to the extent claimed, causing  loss  of  consciousness
             and the need for surgery to rebuild her nose.  An  alternative
             reason for the  apparent  surgery  suggested  to  her  by  the
             respondent's representative was that of cosmetic  enhancement,
             albeit no wholly successful.  She has denied this, but accepts
             that she is from a westernised Iranian family, and she  claims
             to  have  enjoyed  a  liberal  lifestyle,  not   approved   by
             traditional Islamic families.  This background tends  to  lend
             some support for the suggestion that she  may  have  undergone
             elective cosmetic surgery, rather than suffering the  physical
             assault that she claimed.


         51.  Having travelled to the United Kingdom with her  partner,  and
             making her asylum claim immediately on arrival, it is  unclear
             why she has not been able to  provide  evidence  from  him  to
             corroborate her claims.  At that time, they were apparently in
             a continuing relationship, and I do not understand why he  was
             not asked to support her claim, as he was apparently named  as
             her dependent.  Whatever happened to their relationship later,
             I find the lack  of  his  supporting  account  undermines  the
             credibility of her claims.


         52.  She claimed that she had  to  seek  protection  from  domestic
             violence by her partner, but no evidence has been produced  of
             any report of such violence, other than a letter repeating her
             account, or of any police investigation.  Indeed,  this  claim
             was not argued before me,  and  I  assume  that  it  has  been
             abandoned; that suggests to me that  its  credibility  is  not
             established.


         53.   The  appellant  has  produced  no  documentary  evidence   to
             substantiate her claim to be the subject of an arrest  warrant
             in Iran.  She has been able to obtain  a  document  which  she
             claims is evidence of her divorce, and I therefore expect that
             she would have been able  to  obtain  the  arrest  warrant  by
             similar  means.   The  failure  to   produce   that   document
             undermines the credibility of her claim that such  a  document
             exists.


         54.  I do not find credible the claim by the appellant that she  is
             at risk of persecution in Iran by reason of being  accused  of
             adultery.


         55.  I have considered her claim to have converted to Christianity.
              Such claims, when considered by  the  tribunal,  are  usually
             supported by more evidence than in the present  case;  indeed,
             it has  been  previously  decided  that,  where  there  is  no
             supporting evidence from a pastor or similar official  of  the
             claimed church, that is often fatal to the credibility of such
             a claim.  In the present case, there is very  little  evidence
             from the appellant regarding this claim; because  it  was  not
             made as part of her initial asylum  claim,  it  has  not  been
             tested by the respondent  in  the  usual  way.   The  document
             produced as evidence of baptism is in  the  nature  of  a  pro
             forma, stating that she attended  regularly  for  worship  and
             Bible studies between August and November 2015, but  undertook
             no other ministries, apart from one  to  one  evangelism,  and
             that her activity in church life had been  restricted  through
             having a young child and  being  moved  to  Swindon.   In  the
             absence of further evidence, I am not prepared to accept  this
             document, and the very limited evidence of the  appellant,  as
             satisfying me to the required standard that she has  converted
             to Christianity.


         56.  For all these reasons,  I  do  not  find  the  claims  by  the
             appellant to  be  credible.   I  do  not  find  that  she  has
             established that she faces a real risk of persecution in  Iran
             for a Convention reason."

2.   The judge then considered the issue of risks on return in the light  of
    SB (risk on return - illegal exist) Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  and
    concluded  that  she  would  not  be  at  risk  and   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to her integration in Iran  where  her  family
    resided.  Her son's best interests would be met by staying with her and
    returning to Iran where his maternal family was  located.   The  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.  An appeal was launched  and  the  matter
    came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray on 9 November  2016.
    The judge identified no  errors  in  the  judge's  findings  about  the
    appellant's  conversion  to  Christianity  and  the  challenge  to  the
    credibility findings were unarguable and  accordingly  the  credibility
    findings  must  stand.   However  it  had  been  acknowledged  by   the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing that the judge had not made a finding
    about whether the appellant was divorced or not and whether she  had  a
    child born out of wedlock and if she had what the consequences of  this
    were.  The  Presenting  Officer  suggested  that  the  claim  could  be
    returned to Judge Trevaskis to make a decision  on  these  matters  but
    that the other findings  should  stand.   Judge  Murray  accepted  this
    suggestion and referred the matter back to Judge Trevaskis "for finding
    to be made upon these matters and based on these findings he may  leave
    the decision as it presently stands or overturn the decision  based  on
    these new findings".  The judge in obedience to these  directions  made
    the following additional findings of fact under the  heading  "risk  on
    return" on pages 10 and 11 of his decision as follows:

         "57. Pursuant to  an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  my
             decision promulgated on 12 July 2016, this matter was remitted
             to me to make findings as to whether the appellant is divorced
             and, if so, whether she has a child born out of  wedlock,  and
             the resulting risk to her and the child on return to Iran.


         58.  The appellant produced as evidence of her claim to  divorce  a
             document, with certified translation, which she claimed to  be
             her original divorce  certificate.   The  respondent  did  not
             accept the document as evidence of divorce, because it  refers
             to proceedings as  "Khula-first  round";  a  footnote  to  the
             translation describes this as a divorce initiated by the wife,
             yet it goes on to describe the divorcing party as the husband,
             and the appellant is described as  the  divorced  party.   The
             document translation makes no reference to the  term  "Talaq",
             which denotes a finalised divorce.


         59.  The appellant stated that neither she nor her  husband  wanted
             to be divorced, and only did so under duress; they have  since
             resumed cohabitation; this evidence leads me to conclude  that
             they decided to produce evidence to persuade others that  they
             were divorced, but did not in fact undergo a legally effective
             divorce.   As  noted  above,  the  appellant  did  not  recall
             evidence from her husband about this or any  other  aspect  of
             her claim.


         60.  I am therefore not satisfied to the required standard that the
             appellant was legally divorced.


         61.  It follows from this finding that her child ... was  not  born
             out of wedlock.  I am therefore not satisfied to the  required
             standard that, if the appellant and her child are returned  to
             Iran, they will be at risk of adverse treatment by  reason  of
             the appellant having given birth to her child out of wedlock.


         62.  According to SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009]
             UKAIT 00053 Iranians facing enforced return do not in  general
             face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment.   That
             remains the case even if they exited Iran illegally.   Illegal
             exit may however add to the difficulties  an  applicant  would
             face if they  had  attracted  the  adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities for another reason.  In this case,  I  have  found
             there is no evidence that the  appellant  has  attracted  such
             adverse attention.  I have found that her  claims  for  asylum
             lack credibility for the reasons stated above, and therefore I
             have concluded that she is not at risk on return,  either  for
             the reasons which she gave in support of her asylum claim,  or
             as an Iranian who left the country illegally."

3.   Permission to appeal against the decision was  refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It was noted that reliance appeared to be placed  on  a
    translated certificate submitted after the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Judge.  It was not considered  that  the  remaining  grounds  were
    arguable.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 5 June  2017.
     It was arguable that  the  evidence  of  divorce  was  irrational  and
    insufficiently reasoned  in  the  context  of  the  documents  and  the
    evidence of abuse within the appellant's marriage and  that  there  had
    been a perverse finding that the appellant should have called  her  ex-
    husband to confirm the divorce when he had left the UK.  The First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in failing to consider the risk on return as a woman
    with a child born out of wedlock.  A response was filed on 27 June 2017
    where the respondent noted that the judge had not accepted any  of  the
    appellant's claims which were the basis  for  the  asylum  claim.   The
    appellant had not been accepted to  be  divorced  as  she  claimed  and
    therefore there would be no need for an assessment of risk for a  child
    born out of wedlock given that the judge  had  not  accepted  that  the
    relationship had deteriorated.  The judge's comments with regard to the
    ex-husband related to the period when the appellant first  entered  the
    UK when there was no alleged animosity between  them  -  reference  was
    made to paragraph 51 of the determination.   The  judge  could  not  be
    found to have been in error because of  evidence  presented  after  the
    hearing.  The judge had assessed the divorce certificate in  paragraphs
    58 to 60 of his decision and in any  event  the  burden  was  upon  the
    appellant to show that according to the laws in Iran she  was  in  fact
    properly divorced: CS and Others (proof of foreign  law)  India  [2017]
    UKUT 00199.

5.   For the appellant it was argued that the comment in paragraph  59  that
    the appellant did not call evidence from her husband did not take  into
    account the finding made in paragraph  25  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant's husband had fled back to Iran and she had  not  heard  from
    him since.  This was a short point but the key significant point in the
    case.  The divorce had been finalised in September 2013  as  stated  in
    paragraph 24 of the decision and she and her husband had fled to the UK
    and their son had been born  in  March  2015.   Her  husband  had  been
    frustrated by living as an asylum seeker and wished to return  to  Iran
    and she had had to seek help as a victim of  domestic  abuse  whereupon
    her husband had returned to Iran.   Mr  Armstrong  submitted  that  the
    determination was well reasoned and the judge had  considered  all  the
    evidence.  The grounds were  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings.  The judge had not accepted any  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    asylum claim.  The appellant was not divorced and  not  at  risk.   The
    judge had referred in paragraph 51 of his decision to the  period  when
    she and her husband had come to the United Kingdom and she had  claimed
    asylum on arrival.  At that point the  judge  had  found  that  it  was
    unclear why she had not been able  to  provide  evidence  from  him  to
    corroborate her claims.  At that time they had  apparently  been  in  a
    continuing relationship.

6.   Reliance had been placed on fresh evidence provided after the  hearing.
     An expert's report was required to prove foreign law -  see  paragraph
    16 of CS (India).  No expert report had been tendered to  indicate  why
    the documents exhibited at pages G2-G12 should be accepted as  evidence
    of divorce.  There was nothing to support the complaint in paragraph 58
    about the judge's findings  in  relation  to  the  term  "talaq".   The
    appellant would not be perceived as having a child born out of  wedlock
    as the judge found.  The judge had identified  major  discrepancies  in
    the appellant's account.  The appellant's husband had returned to  Iran
    because he did not enjoy life in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  had
    found no evidence about  domestic  violence  in  paragraph  52  of  his
    determination.  The judge was entitled to comment as he did  about  the
    appellant's ability to obtain a divorce  document  but  not  an  arrest
    warrant.  There was no material error of law in the decision.

7.   Counsel submitted that the appellant had said  at  interview  that  the
    warrant had been shown to her mother.  She had said at  interview  that
    she had been hit.  There had been a letter from an independent domestic
    violence advocate dated 27 October 2015  at  pages  D1  to  D2  of  the
    bundle.  It was not clear from  paragraph  59  whether  the  judge  was
    referring  back  to  paragraph  51  or  not.   Talking  about  resuming
    cohabitation was a blatant factual error.

8.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I remind myself  that
    I can only interfere with the decision of Judge  Trevaskis  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.

9.    In  this  context  it  is  important  to  recall  that  the   negative
    credibility assessment made by Judge Trevaskis following the hearing on
    29 June 2016 were not  impugned  in  any  way  by  Judge  Murray.   The
    credibility  challenges  were  on  the  contrary  unarguable  and   the
    credibility assessment "must stand".  The sole point on which the  case
    was remitted was the issue of whether the judge believed the  appellant
    was divorced and if she was what her risk on return to  Iran  would  be
    with a child born out of wedlock and what the child's position would be
    if returned.  In this context it is worth noting that a  challenge  had
    been mounted to what the judge said in paragraph 9 of his decision:

         "After she was married, he threatened  to  have  her  arrested  for
         adultery; she and her husband agreed to divorce, which  took  place
         on 23 September 2013;  they  maintained  a  relationship,  and  she
         became pregnant."

10.  Judge Murray did not consider that paragraph 9 of the decision went  to
    the core of the claim and added:

         "I find that the judge has understood the sequence  of  events  and
         the relevant points in issue.  The wording  of  this  paragraph  is
         poor."

11.  It is not a case in which Judge Trevaskis was invited  to  revisit  his
    credibility  findings.   They  were  to   stand.    He   assessed   the
    documentation and the position of the appellant on return in the  light
    of those findings.  I do not find that the judge in paragraph 59  erred
    in referring to his previous findings and in particular what he said at
    paragraph 51.  The grounds raised the issue of domestic violence but as
    is pointed out by Mr Armstrong this was dealt with in paragraph  52  of
    the decision.  The judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  produced  a
    document which was claimed to be the original divorce certificate.   He
    was not satisfied with  what  was  said  in  the  document  and  as  Mr
    Armstrong points out the appellant had not provided an expert report in
    support of her case.  The post-decision material does not identify  any
    material error on the part of the judge.  In short the complaints  made
    are mere expressions of disagreement with the judge's findings. On  the
    judge's analysis the child was not born out of wedlock and would not be
    subject to adverse treatment on return.  The child's best interests had
    been taken into account in paragraph 65 of the decision.

12.  In revisiting his decision the judge dealt with  the  issues  on  which
    the appeal had been remitted.  I find no material error of law  in  the
    judge's approach to the matters he had been directed to assess.

13.  The appeal against the decision of Judge  Trevaskis  is  dismissed  and
    his decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

