

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13345/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham     |Determination Promulgated|
|On 11th June 2013                      |On 30th July 2013        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

                                   Between

                           KHAN MOHAMMED AHMADZAI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B. Bedford instructed by Sultan Lloyd solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor asylum seeker on 28th March 2009. He
      has a date of birth of 1st January 1993, that being a notional date of
      birth allocated  to  him,  there  being  no  dispute  that  it  is  an
      appropriate indication of his age, even if his precise date  of  birth
      is not known. The asylum claim he made  two  days  after  arrival  was
      refused, but on account of his age he was granted discretionary  leave
      to remain until 1st July 2010.


   2. The nature of the asylum claim is well known to the parties and  there
      is no need to set out here a  detailed  recital  of  it.  For  present
      purposes it is sufficient to say that there were  several  aspects  to
      his claim. The appellant is an orphan, his parents having been  killed
      in a bombardment when he was 8 or 9 years  old.  Thereafter  he  lived
      with two elder brothers and an elder sister with a maternal uncle, who
      lived in Kabul, making frequent visits and providing food  and  money.
      One brother, who had worked for the Americans, was killed  when  shots
      were fired at a car he was travelling in.  The  other  brother  worked
      clearing landmines and  lost  both  his  legs  in  an  explosion  that
      happened about three years before the appellant  left  Afghanistan  to
      travel to the United Kingdom, the journey arranged by  agents  engaged
      by his brother. Another problem described by the appellant was that he
      had injured a relative of a local girl when  he  came  to  remonstrate
      with the appellant for having spread  rumours  about  the  girl.  That
      relative was a policeman and so would be able to  cause  problems  for
      the appellant should he return. He would be at risk for those  reasons
      in his local area and would be at risk of coming to harm  if  returned
      to Kabul because, as a child, he would face a risk of  recruitment  by
      the Taleban and possibly of sexual exploitation.


   3. The appellant did not, as he might have done, seek to  appeal  against
      refusal to recognise him as a refugee,  that  right  of  appeal  being
      provided for by section 83 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002. Instead he waited until his discretionary leave was about to
      expire before making an application for further leave to  remain.  His
      appeal  against  the  immigration  decision  that   accompanied   that
      application was dismissed by  Immigration  Judge  Andrew  following  a
      hearing on 27th October 2010, the judge finding that  the  appellant's
      claim to have a well founded  fear  of  persecutory  ill-treatment  on
      return to Afghanistan, now that he was very nearly an adult,  was  one
      that had not been made out. The judge dismissed  the  appeal  also  on
      humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

   4. The immigration judge accepted the appellant's account of the death of
      his parents and the fate that befell both brothers. But  she  did  not
      accept that any risk arose on that account, as was  evidenced  by  the
      time that had passed since those events had occurred during which  the
      appellant remained at home  without  difficulty.  Nor  did  the  judge
      accept as true the account of the injured policeman.

   5. The judge made this important finding:

           "Whilst he is an orphan he is not without family in Afghanistan.
           Whilst he claims not to  know  the  whereabouts  of  his  uncle,
           brother and sister he has not shown they are no longer alive."


      Although recognising the existence of the duty to trace relatives, the
      judge said she couldn't  accept  that  negated  the  burden  upon  the
      appellant to show that adequate  reception  facilities  would  not  be
      available on return  to  Afghanistan.  She  noted  that  although  the
      appellant relied upon  evidence  that  he  had  made  an  unsuccessful
      attempt to use the services of the Red Cross he had provided the  name
      of just one relative, and that with a different spelling than the  one
      disclosed in his other appeal documents. The judge thought that if the
      appellant had provided the Red Cross with his uncle's name, as he  had
      said he  had,  then  that  relative,  as  a  taxi  driver,  "would  be
      reasonably easy to trace". Further, the judge noted that the appellant
      had made no attempt to trace his sister.

   6. Although the appellant was then still not  quite  18  years  old,  the
      judge concluded that the appellant, who she had found not at  risk  in
      his home area, would not be at risk on return to Kabul and said:

           "I do not consider it would be unreasonable for the appellant to
           remain in Kabul following his arrival there."

   7. On that basis the judge dismissed the  appeal  on  protection  grounds
      and, having found an absence of family life, rejected  the  article  8
      claim  because  she  was  satisfied  that  there  would   not   be   a
      disproportionate interference with the appellant's  right  to  respect
      for his private life should he be returned to Afghanistan.

   8. The appellant secured permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. This
      was on the  basis  that,  although  Judge  Andrew  accepted  that  the
      respondent had failed in her duty to seek  to  trace  the  appellant's
      relatives in Afghanistan, an obligation  of  the  Reception  Directive
      (2003/9/EC of January 2003 as transposed  into  domestic  law  by  the
      Asylum Seekers (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005), she  made  no
      finding  as  to  whether  that  breach  of  duty  had  prejudiced  the
      appellant's claim. The grounds challenged other aspects of the  First-
      tier Tribunal determination also.

   9. That appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  31st
      January 2011. By then the appellant was an adult, being just 18  years
      and 1 month old. That led the  deputy  judge  to  the  conclusion,  at
      paragraph 19 of his determination, that:

           "Whatever the  situation  may  have  been  section  55  and  the
           obligation on the Secretary of State to make efforts  to  locate
           family members no longer apply. It follows that if  errors  were
           made by the Immigration Judge on those points then  they  cannot
           be said to be material.


           The reason for that  is  that  the  appellant's  representatives
           effectively argued that the appellant was entitled to asylum  by
           reason of age. His claim based on his membership of a particular
           social group was rejected by the immigration judge with  reasons
           that cannot be impugned and he is not entitled to refugee status
           on the position at the date of the hearing....."

  10. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal having been granted,  this
      was one of the appeals considered in KA (Afghanistan)  &  Ors  v  SSHD
      [2012] EWCA Civ 1014. The principles by which those appeals were to be
      determined having been set out in that decision, the  appeal  of  this
      particular appellant was remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the
      consent of the parties. It is helpful to  set  out  the  statement  of
      reasons in full:

           "The parties are agreed that for the reasons set out below,  the
           appellants appeal to the Court of Appeal against the decision of
           the Upper Tribunal dated 9 February 2011 should be  allowed  and
           remitted for re-determination of the article 8 ground  according
           to law.


           The FTT took account of the appellant's having family to  return
           to in its consideration of proportionality under article 8.  The
           FTT erred in drawing inferences against KA for failing to  trace
           his family without taking account of the  secretary  of  state's
           failure to do so, in circumstances in which, on  the  particular
           facts of this  case  as  found  by  the  tribunal,  the  tracing
           exercise might have borne fruit.  When  the  UT  considered  the
           matter on appeal it simply held that the failure was immaterial.


           The Secretary of State accepts that had the FTT  properly  taken
           account of the Secretary of State's failure to trace it may have
           reached a different conclusion on  the  evidence  (and  to  that
           extent KA has suffered a disadvantage).  The  proper  course  of
           action is to allow the appeal and remits the matter to the Upper
           Tribunal on article 8."


  11. It is important to note the limited extent of that remittal. The issue
      at large for reconsideration is not the appellant's  claim  on  asylum
      grounds but his human rights claim, founded upon the  submission  that
      there would be a breach of his protected rights under article 8 of the
      ECHR as a consequence of the immigration decision under  appeal,  that
      being a refusal to vary the appellant's leave.  As  a  consequence  of
      that decision the appellant has leave to remain only under section  3C
      of the Immigration Act 1971, which will cease with the final  disposal
      of this appeal. That would mean, if he is unsuccessful in his  appeal,
      he would no longer have any lawful  basis  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom, although no removal decision has been made.


  12. Before examining the facts in this particular appeal it  is  necessary
      to look at the principles to be applied to the analysis of  them  that
      is to be carried out, as were identified by the Court of Appeal in  KA
      & Ors.


  13. The main  thrust  of  the  complaint  being  made  was  that,  if  the
      respondent's duty to trace had been discharged it would or might  have
      confirmed the asserted lack of family support available  upon  return.
      That  was  capable  of  being  "a  powerful  indicator  of  the  well-
      foundedness of an asylum claim".

  14. Applying what was termed "the Rashid / S  line  of  authority  to  the
      present context, concerning the  loss  of  benefit  of  policies  that
      should have been but were not  applied,  while  bearing  in  mind  the
      Ravichandran  principle that the Tribunal should examine the  position
      as at the date of  the  hearing,  but  recognising  that  the  current
      circumstances might include a present need to remedy injustice  caused
      by past omissions to act in accordance with legal obligations, Maurice
      Kay LJ identified the complexity of the principles  to  be  unravelled
      and applied:

           "It is a complicated question and not simply  a  matter  of  the
           systemic breach entitling these appellants, without more ado, to
           the allowing of their appeals with remittals to the Secretary of
           State to considered grants of leave  to  remain,  which  is  the
           primary relief sought. Nor  does  it  admit  of  the  simplistic
           analysis that the appellants were over 18 when their cases  came
           before the FTT or the UT and, as a consequence and in accordance
           with  the  Ravichandran  principle,  the   breach   had   become
           irrelevant to the requisite  consideration  of  their  cases  by
           reference to the circumstances prevailing at  the  time  of  the
           hearings. When the Rashid / S principle applies, it modifies the
           strict application of RRavichandran.".

  15. At paragraph 25 of his judgement, Maurice Kay LJ set out  the  guiding
      principles that we must now apply, which recognise that the assessment
      is fact specific in any particular case and that there  is  no  single
      answer to the question posed in cases of this nature:


           "... much  will  turn  on  their  specific  facts.  There  is  a
           hypothetical spectrum. At one end is an applicant  who  gives  a
           credible and cooperative account of having no  surviving  family
           in Afghanistan or of having lost  touch  with  surviving  family
           members and having failed, notwithstanding his best  endeavours,
           to re-establish contact. It seems to me that,  even  if  he  has
           reached the age of 18 by the time his appeal  is  considered  by
           the  tribunal,  he  may,  depending  on  the  totality  of   the
           established facts, have the basis  of  a  successful  appeal  by
           availing himself of the Rashid/S principle and/or section 55  by
           reference to the failure of the Secretary of State to  discharge
           the duty to endeavour to trace.  In  such  a  case  Ravichandran
           would not be an insurmountable obstacle. At the other end of the
           spectrum is an applicant whose claim to have no surviving family
           in Afghanistan is disbelieved and in respect of whom it is found
           that he has been uncooperative so as to frustrate any attempt to
           trace his family.  In  such  a  case,  again  depending  on  the
           totality of established facts, he may have  put  himself  beyond
           the bite of the protective and corrective principle. This  would
           not be because the law seeks to punish him for his mendacity but
           because he has failed to prove the risk on  return  and  because
           there would be  no  causative  link  between  the  Secretary  of
           State's breach of duty and his claim to protection. Whereas,  in
           the first case, the applicant may have lost the  opportunity  of
           corroborating his evidence  about  the  absence  of  support  in
           Afghanistan by reference to a negative result from the  properly
           discharged duty to endeavour to trace, in the second case he can
           establish no such disadvantage..."


  16. With than in mind, we move on to examine the evidence offered  by  the
      appellant, who gave oral evidence before us at the  hearing,  and  the
      competing submissions advanced. The questions to be addressed  include
      the following:


        a. Did this appellant give a credible and  cooperative  account  of
           having no surviving family in Afghanistan or having  lost  touch
           with them?
        b. Did he use his best endeavours to re-establish contact?
        c. What findings of fact can be drawn  from  the  determination  of
           Judge Andrew that should inform this enquiry?
        d. Was the appellant uncooperative in an attempt to  frustrate  any
           attempt to trace his family?


  17. The appellant adopted an updated and recent witness  statement,  dated
      6th June 2013. In that statement he said:


           "I confirm that after arriving in the United Kingdom I have  not
           had any contact with any of my family members. However,  I  have
           always explained that I left behind my  brother  Tahseeldar  and
           sister who were living with my maternal uncle in Kabul..."

  18. Before the appellant gave oral evidence the representatives made clear
      the respective positions adopted. For the  respondent  Mr  Singh  made
      clear that it was not accepted that the  appellant  had  lost  contact
      with his relatives in Afghanistan; that he  had  failed  to  cooperate
      with the attempts that were made, by the Red Cross, to trace relatives
      in that he had provided inadequate information to them to ensure  that
      any attempt to contact relatives would be  unsuccessful,  so  that  he
      would be returning to Afghanistan as an adult who could look to  those
      relatives for assistance in re-establishing himself. Mr  Bedford,  for
      the appellant, said that the appellant had  lost  contact  with  those
      relatives, had done all that could be expected of  him  to  facilitate
      the tracing attempt made by the Red Cross and that his claim was to be
      assessed on the basis that he would have no family members  to  assist
      him on return.


  19. Expanding upon that submission, Mr Bedford said that  the  appellant's
      case is that his brother and sister moved to Kabul, to stay with their
      uncle, at the same time that the appellant left Afghanistan  and  that
      the whereabouts of the uncle's home was unknown to the appellant.

  20. In the screening interview, which took place shortly after his arrival
      in the United Kingdom, the appellant was asked to provide  details  of
      his family in Afghanistan. He said that he had  been  living  in  Bark
      village in Logar Province where he had lived  since  birth.  He  lived
      there with his brother, Tahseldar, who had lost his  legs  in  a  mine
      explosion. He mentioned also his sister, and said that her whereabouts
      were "not known". He made no mention at all of his maternal uncle, who
      he was later  to  explain  lived  and  worked  in  Kabul  and  visited
      regularly and provided food and money, now that his brother was unable
      to work. In respect of his brother he said, in answer  to  a  question
      asking for his present address:

           "Still in Afghanistan. He was at my home in Lowgar as far  as  I
           am aware."


      Contradicting that, he said at a later interview that the brother,  as
      well as his sister, had moved to Kabul. His  evidence  before  us  was
      that his brother and sister moved to live with his uncle at about  the
      same time that he had left to travel to the United  Kingdom.  He  said
      also that he himself had never visited Kabul and he was  not  provided
      with his uncle's address and  so  had  no  idea  where  his  remaining
      relatives were now living and that he had had no contact with them.

  21. The appellant said that he had  tried  "many  times"  to  re-establish
      contact with his relatives in Kabul. The evidence established that  he
      did approach the Red Cross in May 2009 and the  appellant  produces  a
      letter from that organisation dated 23rd December 2009 the content  of
      which, given its potential significance, I reproduce in full:


           "Dear Khan,


           Tracing enquiry regarding Tahsil Dar


           We refer to your enquiry of 6th May 2009 and  very  much  regret
           that with the details  you  have  given  us,  the  International
           Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has been unable to obtain  any
           information from any of the sources given regarding the  present
           location of your relative.


           We would like to assure you  that  all  appropriate  sources  of
           information have been tried and we are very sorry our  enquiries
           in this case have been unsuccessful.


           Please bear in mind that even though the ICRC has been unable to
           find your relative, this does not mean that your relative cannot
           be traced through other channels.


           Following our investigation we now consider  your  case  closed.
           However, should any information reach us in the future  we  will
           not fail to inform you. Alternatively, should you obtain any new
           appropriate additional information, we will be pleased to review
           the case.


           Please feel free to discuss any of the above with us. I am sorry
           that we do not have more welcoming news."

  22. A number of things may be noted about this evidence. On its  face,  it
      is plain that the tracing enquiry has been requested in respect of the
      appellant's brother only. That is reinforced by the reference, in  the
      body of the letter to "your relative", in the singular.  Secondly,  it
      appears that the appellant has provided the Red Cross with a  somewhat
      different  spelling  of  his  brother's  name  than  he  has  used  in
      proceedings before the Tribunal. No explanation is offered  for  that,
      but we do not consider this, in  itself,  of  any  real  significance.
      Thirdly, and more significantly, there is nothing at all  to  indicate
      that the appellant has provided details of his sister or his  maternal
      uncle, the latter being the  obvious  focus  of  any  tracing  enquiry
      because the appellant says that his siblings moved to stay with him in
      Kabul.


  23. In his recent  witness  statement,  prepared  for  this  hearing,  the
      appellant says that he remembers an interview with the Red Cross  when
      he did provide full details of all his family members,  including  his
      uncle. That assertion has to be considered in the context not just  of
      the absence  of  any  reference  by  that  organisation  to  the  most
      obviously significant relative in carrying  out  those  enquiries  but
      also in the light of the appellant's evidence as a  whole,  the  judge
      having found, for reasons that cannot  now  be  challenged,  that  the
      appellant had advanced a false account about  aspects  of  his  claim,
      such as the whole episode of the difficulties with the police  officer
      who came to remonstrate about rumours being spread  about  his  female
      relative.

  24. This is hard to reconcile with the request being a genuine attempt  to
      trace relatives, disclosing a cooperative approach by the appellant to
      achieve that outcome. Indeed, a failure to  provide  the  most  useful
      information, which would be that the  relatives  were  now  living  in
      Kabul with the maternal uncle who was working as a taxi driver,  seems
      likely to frustrate the whole purpose of the attempt  to  trace  those
      relatives.


  25. We do not accept that the appellant did disclose details of his  uncle
      and sister to the Red Cross when asking for tracing  enquiries  to  be
      carried out so that his hope was that the attempt would fail.

  26. This is important because there is no reason at all to  suppose  that,
      had the respondent made an attempt to discharge the duty to carry  out
      her own tracing enquiries,  the  appellant  would  have  provided  any
      better information, if that could be  avoided,  given  the  additional
      information secured during the screening process. It  also  reinforces
      the respondent's  case  that,  tracing  enquiries  were  not  in  fact
      required because the appellant was able  to  contact  those  relatives
      should he choose to do so.

  27. In his oral evidence at this hearing the appellant described, for  the
      first time, how he had made attempts himself to trace  his  relatives.
      He said that last year, that is at some time during 2012, he had given
      to a friend who was returning to visit his village in Logar  a  letter
      containing his present contact details in this country and asked  that
      friend to "give this letter to anyone, my uncle or anyone". There  are
      two difficulties with this. First, it is hard to see why the appellant
      thought a visit to the village was likely to achieve delivery  of  the
      letter to his uncle because now that all family  members  were  living
      with the uncle in Kabul there is no disclosed reason for him to  visit
      the  village.  Secondly,  if  this  were  true  it  is  impossible  to
      understand why no mention of it were made in  the  witness  statement,
      prepared with the assistance of his solicitors, for this  hearing,  in
      which the appellant  deals  specifically  with  his  response  to  the
      finding of the judge at the earlier appeal that "he was not  satisfied
      that I had done enough to try and find my family in Afghanistan".

  28. When cross examined about  this  at  the  hearing  By  Mr  Singh,  the
      appellant attempted to explain the reason for thinking that a visit to
      the village may serve to  establish  contact  with  his  relatives  by
      saying that he was not sure, in fact, whether or not his  brother  and
      sister went to stay with his uncle in Kabul:

           "The thing is when I left Afghanistan they said  they  may  have
           gone to Kabul so I thought they may have done so."


      When it was put to him that in his witness statement he had said that:


           "... I have always explained  that  I  left  behind  my  brother
           Tehseeldar and my sister who were living with my maternal  uncle
           in Kabul...."


      he said simply that this was "wrong".

  29. We have no doubt at all that this is an untruthful  embellishment  and
      that no such attempt was made by the appellant to  take  advantage  of
      the friend's visit to locate his family.

  30. In the recent witness statement, which the appellant adopted  as  part
      of his evidence, the appellant summarised the nature and extent of the
      private life he has  established  since  his  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom in 2009.

  31. He said that it was precisely  because  he  was  unable  to  establish
      contact with relatives in Afghanistan that the relationships he formed
      here were  so  important  to  him.  In  that  respect,  he  refers  in
      particular to the bond he  has  established  with  his  foster  family
      allocated to him  on  arrival  by  Social  Services.  But  we  do  not
      understand Mr Bedford to  be  suggesting  that  the  nature  of  those
      relationships is such as to create family life.  And,  absent  is  any
      real  evidence  of  continuing  dependency.  However,   although   the
      appellant no longer lives with that family,  we  do  accept  that  the
      relationships subsists in some respect and form an important  part  of
      the private life the appellant enjoys here.

  32. The appellant describes how he has pursued his education here and  the
      bundle prepared by his representatives includes copies of the  various
      certificates and qualifications he has obtained.

  33. He describes also how he has developed  an  active  and  happy  social
      life, being involved in  working  with  the  Children's'  Society  and
      playing cricket with friends. In sum, he says he now feels settled  in
      the United Kingdom and wishes to make his home here as he sees a  good
      and secure future for himself. Having lived here for the time  he  has
      he says:

           "My way of thinking has completely changed now  and  I  know  it
           will be extremely difficult for me to  return  to  living  in  a
           strictly  controlled  and  restrictive  society   such   as   in
           Afghanistan."

  34. Mr Bedford submitted that the appellant falls "at the top end  of  the
      KA spectrum". He sought to argue that the appellant was  "believed  in
      saying that he was not in  contact  with  his  family".  But,  in  our
      judgement, that is not a  correct  analysis  of  the  outcome  of  the
      initial appeal hearing and the  determination  of  Judge  Andrew,  who
      plainly did not accept that the appellant was a witness  so  truth  in
      all that he said about that.


  35. In any event, having heard oral evidence from the  appellant,  and  it
      having been made unambiguously clear before that took place  that  the
      issue was challenged and so at  large,  we  do  not  accept  that  the
      appellant's uncle, having had sufficient commitment to  the  appellant
      to visit the village home regularly, provide food and  money,  and  to
      take in to his own home the appellant's injured brother and his sister
      after arrangements had been made for the appellant  to  come  to  this
      country would have kept from him the details of where the  appellant's
      only surviving relatives would be living. There has  been  offered  no
      reason whatever why such an extraordinary decision  should  have  been
      made by the appellant's uncle and we do not  accept  that  to  be  the
      case.

  36. When asked what was the disadvantage suffered by the  appellant  as  a
      consequence of the respondent's failure to discharge her duty to trace
      relatives, or attempt to do so,  Mr  Bedford  said  that  key  to  the
      decision was that the appellant did have family  to  return  to.  But,
      given the conclusions  we  have  set  out  above,  that  advances  the
      appellant's case not at all. That is because as, on  our  findings  of
      fact, the appellant did not  cooperate  with  the  attempt  to  trace,
      effectively frustrated the attempt that was made by the Red  Cross  to
      ensure that it would not succeed and plainly would not have cooperated
      with any attempt that may have been made by the respondent, there  was
      in fact no causative link between the respondent's failure to make any
      attempt to trace relatives and the failure of his claim.

  37. With that in mind, we examine the appellant's claim that he should now
      succeed on the basis of an infringement of his rights under article  8
      of the ECHR as a consequence of the decision under challenge, which is
      a refusal to vary his leave by way of the grant of  further  leave  to
      remain.

  38. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

      Right to respect for private and family life?


      1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family  life,
      his home and his correspondence. ?


      2. There shall be no interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the
      exercise of this right except such as is in accordance  with  the  law
      and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of  national
      security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for
      the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of the  rights
      and freedoms of others.

  39. In R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 Lord Bingham set out the questions
      that should be addressed in taking a structured approach  to  carrying
      out the assessment that  is  required.  Although  Razgar  was  a  case
      concerning a removal decision, it is uncontroversial that the approach
      is the correct one in a case such as this where the challenge is to  a
      decision of another kind. Those questions are:


           (1) Will the proposed removal be an  interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life??


           (2) If so, will such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8??


           (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law??


           (4) If so,  is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others??


           (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?

  40. It is clear that the appellant, being a person who has been living  in
      this country since 2009, will have established a private life and that
      the consequence of his being required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
      being a consequence of him having no  lawful  basis  to  remain  here,
      would be such as to bring about an interference with his enjoyment  of
      that private life. The second question returns a positive  answer,  as
      although the appellant has spent only just over three  of  his  twenty
      years living here, so that most of his youth and formative years  have
      been spent in Afghanistan, even those three years in  the  life  of  a
      young adult represent a significant part of his experience. We  accept
      also, as he has described in his statement, that  his  life  here  has
      been very different from the way of life in Afghanistan, so that  that
      difference will be noticeable to him in his every day activity  should
      he now return to his country of nationality.


  41. The third question needs to be addressed with some care.  On  the  one
      hand, it might be  considered  that  since  the  respondent  made  her
      decision after having failed to discharge a  duty  to  seek  to  trace
      relatives which duty, if it had been discharged, may or may  not  have
      shed light upon and so informed the  decision  that  was  subsequently
      made to refuse the appellant's claim, that the decision  itself  must,
      necessarily, be  unlawful.  However,  as  is  made  clear  by  KA,  at
      paragraph 17, this consequence does not flow "without more ado" to the
      conclusion that the appeal must  be  allowed,  just  as  it  does  not
      follow, as the deputy Upper Tribunal Judge thought, that just  because
      the appellant had attained his  majority  the  failure  to  trace  was
      irrelevant (see para 14 above).

  42. Having said that, we recognise that the discussion before the Court of
      Appeal concerned the protection claim whereas we  are  here  concerned
      only with the appellant's claim under article 8. It seems to  us  that
      the position is  this:  If  there  were  a  causal  link  between  the
      respondent's failure to trace and the refusal of his claim  then  that
      would render the decision itself unlawful in which case there would be
      no need to progress any further  with  the  questions  posed  by  Lord
      Bingham. The decision which led to the interference would be one  that
      would not be in accordance with the law and  so  would  itself  be  an
      unlawful interference. But here the  position  of  this  appellant  is
      otherwise. As I have explained, there is no causal  link  between  the
      respondent's  failure  and  the  decision  under  appeal  because  the
      appellant does not fall, as Mr Bedford suggests, at the higher end  of
      the spectrum identified by Maurice Kay LJ but at the  very  bottom  of
      it. In the refusal letter, as well as  expressing  reservations  about
      the factual basis of the appellant's claim the respondent went  on  to
      assess it taken at its highest and still concluded  that  it  was  not
      made out.

  43. Having reach this point we do not understand  Mr  Bedford  to  suggest
      that the fourth question could return anything other than  a  positive
      answer, which in our judgement it clearly does. That brings us to  the
      final question of proportionality.

  44. The appellant came to the United Kingdom to advance a claim to  be  in
      need of international protection that was found to be  not  made  out.
      That included findings that he had given an entirely false account  of
      some of his experiences in Afghanistan. We are satisfied that  he  set
      out to frustrate the attempt that was  made  to  locate  relatives  in
      Afghanistan. If he had  cooperated  with  that  attempt  by  providing
      correct and complete information, as we have found he could have  done
      but chose not to, then he could have been  safely  reunited  with  his
      relatives in Kabul soon after his arrival here. But he did not do  so.
      The consequence is that he received precisely that to which  a  proper
      application of the respondent's policy  entitled  him  to,  which  was
      discretionary leave to remain until he could face preparations for his
      return upon reaching adulthood.

  45. He has used his time in the United Kingdom  to  good  effect.  He  has
      received some education, collected some qualifications,  including  in
      spoken English and matured into  the  person  he  is  today  with  the
      support of his foster family, social  workers,  teachers  and  others.
      That will stand him in good stead to  assist  him  in  re-establishing
      himself in his country of nationality where he can look to a  relative
      who has provided him with substantial support and  assistance  in  the
      past to do so again.

  46. Even if, which we do not accept to  be  the  case,  the  appellant  is
      unable to contact his uncle or siblings on return to Kabul,  there  is
      insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  he   cannot   expect   to
      successfully re-establish himself as a young adult  returning  to  his
      home country after a relatively short period of years living abroad.

  47. However, as we have made clear, we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
      would be able to re-establish  himself  with  the  assistance  of  his
      relatives in Kabul. Mr Bedford referred us to evidence of difficulties
      faced by those  returning  to  Afghanistan  but  accepted  that  those
      difficulties are largely alleviated by having family members to who to
      look for support.

  48. Drawing all this together we are satisfied that any interference  with
      the appellant's private life will be proportionate to  the  legitimate
      and lawful aim being pursued. The appellant will be able to  establish
      afresh a private life in Afghanistan, which although will be different
      from that he enjoys here, will be one enjoyed in his  own  country  of
      nationality. In addition, he  will  have  the  benefit  of  access  to
      relatives, which he does not have here.

  49. For all these reasons this appeal to the Upper Tribunal, restricted as
      it is by the terms of the  remittal  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  to  a
      reconsideration of the article 8 claim, is dismissed.



                               Signed






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                                   17 July 2013
