
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13122/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 4th July 2016                    |On : 5th July 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     NB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Junior, Counsel instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1981.  As this  case
       concerns his claim for international protection I make an  order  for
       anonymity in the following terms:

           "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
           Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the
           Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these
           proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
           indirectly identify the Respondent (original appellant) in  this
           determination identified  as  NB.  This  direction  applies  to,
           amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings"

       Background and Matters in Issue Before the First-tier Tribunal

    2. On the 17th May 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin)  granted
       the Appellant permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal (Judge G. Andrews) to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  a
       decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

    3. The Appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2001.
       He did not come to the attention of the authorities  until  the  12th
       February 2012 when he was arrested; he claimed asylum that same  day.
       The basis of his claim was that his father had been a  politician  in
       the United National Party (UNP). The family were Muslim  Tamils.  The
       Appellant had been involved in his campaigns. As  a  result  of  this
       activity he was assaulted on several occasions. In April 1998 he  was
       hospitalised for a period of 3-4 weeks after  one  attack;  in  March
       1999 he was detained at a police station  and  tortured  for  a  day,
       following which he spent a  further  three  days  in  hospital.   His
       father had managed to secure his release through bribery and his  own
       political influence.  On both occasions the Appellant was  warned  to
       desist from his political campaigning. The Appellant went into hiding
       after his release and his departure from Sri Lanka was arranged.

    4. The Appellant states that he entered the UK at sometime in  2001.  He
       did not make a valid asylum claim until February 2012  after  he  was
       apprehended by the Immigration Service. The Appellant claims to  have
       had some involvement with the Tamil diaspora in the UK but he limited
       his political involvement on the advice of his father.

    5. The Respondent found the Appellant's evidence to be inconsistent.  It
       was not accepted that he had tried to claim asylum after his  arrival
       and the long delay weighed against him. The Respondent found there to
       be no current risk even if the claim were true.

    6. On appeal the Appellant relied on asylum and Article 8  grounds.  The
       refugee claim was as summarised above. His Article 8 claim rested  on
       his relationship with R, a Sri Lankan Tamil who arrived in the UK  in
       2008. She had been involved  with  the  LTTE  and  had  been  granted
       asylum. She now has Indefinite Leave to Remain.

       The Determination

    7. The First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  the  Appellant's  father  was
       involved at a local level in  the  UNP  and  that  it  was  therefore
       entirely plausible that the Appellant, as his teenage son, would have
       been involved in his work.   The  Tribunal  accepted,  on  the  lower
       standard of proof, that the  Appellant  was  assaulted  in  1998  and
       arrested and tortured in 1999.  It  accepted  that  he  was  on  both
       occasions warned to stop his political work. It was not accepted that
       the Appellant had been significantly assaulted on any other occasion.
       It was not accepted that any risk arises to the Appellant as a result
       of his political activities in the UK.  It was  found  that  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities have not shown any real interest in the  Appellant
       since 1999 when he was released from custody.  Although the  Tribunal
       accepted that there were problems in the  Appellant's  home  area  in
       2012 when Buddhist Monks set fire to more  than  200  houses  in  the
       Muslim community, it was not found that there is any current risk  to
       the Appellant in Sri Lanka. His father's profile was much higher than
       the Appellant's, and  he  has  now  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  without
       suffering persecution  (having  previous  fled  to  Singapore).   The
       submission that the Appellant would put himself at risk  by  resuming
       his political activity on return is rejected on the basis of his  own
       evidence that in the 15 years he has spent in  the  UK  he  has  only
       attended a couple of events  between  2012  and  2014.   Taking  into
       account the guidance in GK & Others (post civil  war  returnees)  Sri
       Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) the Tribunal found there  to  be  no
       real risk and dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

    8. In respect of the Article 8 the determination does  not  address  the
       Immigration Rules at all. The Tribunal accepted that the Appellant is
       married to R and that she is settled in the United  Kingdom  for  the
       purposes of the Immigration Rules. She was formerly  a  refugee.   It
       was therefore accepted that the Appellant has a family  life  in  the
       UK. It was further accepted that the Appellant has lived  in  the  UK
       for "many years" and that he has a private life here. Article  8  was
       therefore  engaged.   In  conducting  the  proportionality  balancing
       exercise the Tribunal accepted that R cannot reasonably  be  expected
       to go to Sri Lanka since she is a refugee. The Appellant could return
       and visit her here but that will be difficult and expensive.   If  he
       applied for entry clearance to come to the UK  as  her  spouse,  that
       would entail a separation of  uncertain  duration  and  there  is  no
       guarantee that he would succeed.  Against those matters  weighed  the
       public interest in removing a person who entered  the  UK  illegally,
       had remained here unlawfully for a number of  years  and  had  worked
       without permission to do so. Little weight could be attached  to  the
       relationship with R since it had been commenced at a  time  when  the
       Appellant's status was unlawful. Little weight could be  attached  to
       his private life, since that had been established when  he  was  here
       unlawfully.  The Appellant lived in Sri Lanka for 19  years.  He  has
       parents and extended family there. He is still relatively  young  and
       is therefore well equipped to develop his life in Sri  Lanka.   There
       being no exceptional reasons  to  show  that  his  removal  would  be
       disproportionate, the appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.




       The Grounds of Appeal

    9. It is submitted that the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       contains the following material errors of law:

        i) Failure to properly assess the Convention Ground

           It  is  submitted  that  on  the  Tribunal's  own  findings  the
           Appellant has established that he suffered past persecution  for
           reasons of his political opinion.   The Tribunal  erred  in  its
           finding that the Appellant had not demonstrated that he had been
           "significantly assaulted" since on its own findings he had.

           Before me Mr Junior sought to widen the attack on this aspect of
           the decision, submitting that the Tribunal  could  not  sensibly
           have reached the conclusions it did as to current risk in  light
           of its findings on past persecution.

       ii) Failure to assess the medical evidence

           The Appellant had submitted medical evidence demonstrating  that
           he had scars and psychological sequalae arising from his torture
           in 1999. This has not been considered.

      iii) Failure to give "proper weight" to the Article 8 claim

           It is submitted that there is a failure to consider  the  impact
           of separation on R.

       My Findings

   10. Grounds 1 & 2 are wholly without merit. Permission  appears  to  have
       been granted because of  the  suggestion  in  the  grounds  that  the
       Tribunal  made  a  finding  that   the   Appellant   had   not   been
       "significantly assaulted" when it had already been found that he  had
       been hospitalised and tortured. Had that been the finding there would
       indeed have been a misdirection in respect of what  might  constitute
       "serious harm".  That  is  not  however  what  paragraph  29  of  the
       determination says:

           "... I am satisfied to the lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
           appellant was assaulted in  April  1998  and  was  detained  and
           tortured as claimed in March 1999. I also  find  that,  on  both
           occasions, he was warned not to  be  involved  in  politics  any
           more. However, he has not persuaded me that he was significantly
           assaulted on any other occasions, and I find that he was not"

                                                            [emphasis added]

   11. The Tribunal expressly accepted the evidence that the  Appellant  was
       detained  and  tortured.  In  those  circumstances  any  omission  to
       consider the medical evidence was entirely immaterial.  The  Tribunal
       accepted that the Appellant  was  assaulted,  detained  and  tortured
       because of his  involvement  in  his  father's  campaigning,  ie  for
       reasons of his political opinion. In a cogent and rational assessment
       based on the binding country guidance of GJ it went on to  find  that
       the Appellant is not at risk in Sri Lanka today, some 16 years later.
       That was a finding open to the Tribunal and any  suggestion  that  it
       did not properly consider the Refugee Convention is  entirely  devoid
       of reason.

   12. In respect of Article 8 the grounds submit that the Tribunal  "failed
       to give adequate weight to the strong family life relationship"  with
       R and the impact upon her of any separation.  In particular Mr Junior
       emphasised that the Tribunal was bound to give greater weight to  the
       fact that she was a refugee who could not return to Sri Lanka.

   13. The determination addresses Article 8 at paragraphs  41-47.  Specific
       regard has been given to the fact that she is a refugee who cannot be
       expected to return to Sri Lanka: see paragraph 47 (i).   I  have  had
       regard to the evidence of R, set out in her witness  statement  dated
       2nd March 2016.   The sum total of that evidence is that she and  the
       Appellant met on the 24th September 2015. They were  married  by  the
       15th November 2015  and  it  is  their  intention  to  live  together
       permanently. There is no exposition of how she might be  affected  by
       his removal. It is difficult  in  those  circumstances  to  see  what
       greater attention the Tribunal could have paid to this aspect of  the
       claim.  Parliament has specifically legislated to  provide  that  the
       weight to be attached to qualifying relationships formed  by  persons
       who are here unlawfully is  "little":  s117B(4)  of  the  Nationality
       Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended).    The  First-tier
       Tribunal was therefore bound as a matter  of  law  to  attach  little
       weight to the Appellant's relationship with R.   Parliament has found
       that in circumstances where one party to the marriage is  in  the  UK
       unlawfully a "little weight" is an "adequate  weight".  There  is  no
       error in the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal.

       Decisions

   14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law  and
       it is upheld.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               4th July 2016
