
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13031/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision &  Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 July 2017                       |On 27  October 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


                                   Between

                                     FMN
                                    Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:  Ms A Patyna, of Counsel, instructed by Gurney Harden Solicitors
Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                       DECISION AND REASONS

ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal has its  origin  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 22 October 2015, whereby the claim of the Appellant  for  refugee
    status was refused. There was an  associated  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom (UK). His ensuing appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was heard on 25 April 2016 and  dismissed  on
    18 November 2016.

THE ASYLUM CLAIM

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1983. He is a Tamil
    speaking Muslim. The material facts comprising  the  substance  of  his
    asylum claim is as follows.


 3. He first entered the UK  on  14  November  2009  with  entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  until
    15 November 2011, extended until 30 October 2015.

 4. On 5  May  2014  he  took  some  photographs  of  himself  attending  a
    demonstration in London against a Buddhist  group  in  Sri  Lanka  that
    campaigns against Muslims, and stored these on his laptop.

 5. On 26 July 2014 he  travelled  to  Sri  Lanka  with  the  intention  of
    marrying his partner, a Sri Lankan national studying in the UK, whom he
    met in 2011. They had been living together and she became pregnant.  In
    late 2012 she returned to her family in Sri Lanka.

 6. While the couple married Islamically on  10  August  2014,  his  wife's
    family did not consent to the union and  reported  him  to  the  police
    alleging his involvement in the LTTE. In consequence, he  was  arrested
    on 2 September  2014,  detained,  interrogated  and  tortured  and  the
    photographs stored on his laptop were examined. He was accused of being
    an LTTE member and accused of insulting the Buddhist  culture.  He  was
    released after 10 hours  following  the  payment  of  a  bribe  on  the
    condition that he returned to the police station on 15 September  2014;
    a failure to do so would lead to the detention of his wife and child.


 7. The Human Rights Commission in Sri Lanka took no action  following  his
    report of the torture he endured in detention. He returned to the UK on
    12 September 2014 leaving behind his wife and child and claimed  asylum
    at port.

 8. The asylum claim was based on the asserted fear that in  the  event  of
    enforced return to Sri Lanka he would be at risk  of  mistreatment  for
    failing to report to the authorities regarding an accusation that he is
    an LTTE member and  for  insulting  Buddhist  culture.  The  claim  was
    supported by medico-legal evidence and a  diagnosis  of  Post-Traumatic
    Stress Disorder (PTSD).

 9. While the Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  Appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations in the UK and may have been arrested by the  authorities
    for reasons other than claimed, fundamentally, the claim that there was
    a future risk was rejected as untruthful or unreliable.

DECISION OF THE FtT

10. The FtT, in essence, endorsed the Secretary  of  State's  decision  for
    reasons of its own. The FtT accepted the diagnosis of PTSD and accepted
    the  Appellant's  account  of  arrest,  detention  and  torture  as   a
    consequence of his in-laws reporting him to the authorities, and  that,
    his release was secured by the payment of a bribe. The FtT nevertheless
    found that on the Appellant's own admission  the  authorities  were  no
    longer interested in him,  and  that  this  was  supported  by  limited
    questioning he was exposed to at the  airport  on  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka. The FtT did not thus accept the Appellant was required to report
    and rejected the contention that there was an extant arrest warrant for
    him given the lack of evidence about it and the relative ease by  which
    copies  could  be  obtained.  The  FtT  further  considered  that   the
    authorities may well have examined the Appellant's  laptop  and  viewed
    the photographs on it, which may  have  provoked  an  adverse  reaction
    giving rise to some of his ill-treatment, but concluded that  this  was
    unlikely to be the cause of any further interest on return.


11. Dealing with the medical evidence the FtT observed that  the  Appellant
    was fit to give evidence and noted that a  course  of  therapy  for  12
    months should result in his recovery for his PTSD. The  FtT  noted  the
    risk of suicide was not adequately reasoned by the medical evidence and
    that the risk was not present and contingent  upon  the  Appellant  not
    being allowed to remain here. Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed  on
    all grounds.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on  all  grounds
    on 4 May 2017.


13. The Respondent gave notice opposing the appeal for the reasons set  out
    in a rule 24 response dated 22 May 2017.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

14. I have considered the submissions made by the  representatives  at  the
    hearing. While Mr Wilding made a valiant attempt to defend an otherwise
    careful  and  detailed  decision,  I  am   satisfied   that   the   FtT
    uncharacteristically fell into  error.  I  consider  that  the  central
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant are correct and  that  this
    is a case in which it has been demonstrated that the delay between  the
    hearing of the appeal and the decision has affected the FtT's  analysis
    of the evidence and issues considering the findings made.

15. The Appellant's challenge to the FtT's decision are two-fold. It is not
    necessary to traverse them in detail as I  consider  the  following  is
    sufficient to vitiate the decision.


16. I have carefully considered the jurisprudence set out  in  the  grounds
    that relate to the issue of delay and have done so in the light of  the
    decision in RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 868.


17. The decision of Sambasivam v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2000] Imm AR 85 is referred to in the decision of RK (as cited).  That
    was the case where an asylum  seeker  unsuccessfully  appealed  to  the
    Court of Appeal after a delay in promulgation of four months after  the
    hearing. In that case the Appellant referred to a statement made by the
    IAT in Mario [1988] Imm AR 281 at 287 stating;

         "In an  area  such  as  asylum,  where  evidence  requires  anxious
         scrutiny, the Tribunal will  usually  remit  the  case  to  another
         adjudicator where the period between the hearing and the  dictation
         of the determination is more than three months."

18. This is being referred to as the "rule of thumb" approach  where  there
    is a delay in promulgation.


19. At paragraph [16] of Sambavisam, Potter LJ referred to this as "no more
    and no less than a useful statement of guidance to  practitioners  upon
    the usual attitude and likely decision of the IAT in a  case  where  an
    issue essential to the disposition of the claim for asylum depends upon
    a careful weighing of the credibility  of  the  applicant  and  yet  it
    appears that the delay between hearing date and the preparation of  the
    determination exceeds three months." He went on to state:

         "in the absence of special or  particular  circumstances,  that  is
         plainly a useful and proper rule of thumb which, in the  experience
         of the Tribunal, it is broadly just to apply, the twin reasons that
         substantial delay  between  the  hearing  and  preparation  of  the
         determination then does the assessment of credibility issues unsafe
         and that such a delay tends to undermine the loser's confidence  in
         the correctness of the decision once delivered."


20. He went on to state "in cases of delay of this kind, the matter is best
    approached from the starting point  that,  where  important  issues  of
    credibility arise, a delay of over three  months  between  hearing  and
    determination will merit remittance for rehearing unless, by reason  of
    particular circumstances, it is clear that the eventual outcome of  the
    application, whether by the same or a  different  route,  must  be  the
    same."


21. There is no dispute that the judgement of Potter LJ needs to be read in
    the light of the judgement of the Court of  Appeal  in  RK  and  it  is
    important to note that the factual circumstances in RK  were  different
    to the present appeal- credibility was not an issue and did not require
    consideration of oral evidence given by a witness(es).


22. In my judgement, the decision in RK requires a nexus to be  established
    between any undue delay and any defect in the evaluative process.


23. Having considered the decision in the light of the  submissions,  I  am
    satisfied that there is such a nexus established. This was a case  that
    centred upon the Appellant's credibility. While it is the case that the
    FtT accepted key elements of the account, it is equally clear  that  it
    rejected others. Central to the FtT's conclusion that the Appellant was
    not at risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  was  its  disbelief  that  the
    authorities interest in the  Appellant  was  ongoing.  The  FtT  placed
    reliance on the Appellant's admission at interview that he was  not  of
    interest to the authorities. While the FtT was entitled  to  take  that
    evidence into account, it is silent as to whether the Appellant's claim
    in his later witness statement of the authorities searching for him and
    the harassment  of  his  wife's  uncle  to  ascertain  his  whereabouts
    following  his  arrest  in  September  2014,  was  factored  into  that
    assessment. While  the  recital  of  the  evidence  is  extensive,  the
    assessment of the evidence is by comparison  relatively  short,  and  I
    cannot be satisfied from the decision that it can be inferred that  the
    FtT took this evidence into account. While the challenge is  narrow,  I
    am persuaded that the omission could have been as a consequence of  the
    delay which infected the decision thus rendering it unsafe.


24. My conclusion is informed by the second ground which I also consider is
    made out. The FtT considered protection under Article 3 based on a risk
    of suicide, but did not consider the appeal on  the  basis  of  whether
    there would be  a risk to the Appellant on return  at  the  airport  in
    light of his acceptance of his arrest, ill-treatment and  diagnosis  of
    PTSD and, whether this gave rise to a real risk of further  questioning
    and detention and consequent ill-treatment in-line with extant  country
    guidance and up-dated background evidence suggesting, inter alia,  that
    returnees were likely to be questioned on  arrival.  The  argument  was
    made in counsel's  skeleton  argument  before  the  FtT  and  has  been
    mistakenly overlooked. I consider that this further  demonstrates  that
    the delay infected the decision-making process.


25. Thus, for those reasons, I am satisfied that the Appellant has made out
    the grounds and  I  have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  decision
    involves the making of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  is
    thereby set aside.


26. As to the remaking of the decision, both representatives submitted that
    if both grounds were made out, the correct course to adopt in a case of
    this nature would be for the appeal to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because it would enable a judge to consider  further  evidence
    and make findings thereon.


27. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  this  is  the
    correct course to take. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and  the  appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to hear afresh by a different judge.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family.  The direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.
 Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Bagral                             22  October
2017


