


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA/13525/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Liverpool                      |Decision Promulgated              |
|On: 24th May 2017                        |On: 12th June 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MMM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose, instructed by Broudie, Jackson and
                       Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION ON 'ERROR OF LAW'

 1. The Appellant is a national of Angola. Her  age  is  disputed  but  she
    claims to have been born in 1999. She appeals  with  permission[1]  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge AJ Parker)  to  dismiss  her
    protection appeal.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case  concerns  a  claim  to  international  protection  involving
    allegations of sexual exploitation. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant or  any  member
        of her family.  This direction applies to, amongst others, both the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background


 3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 10th March 2015. She told  officers
    that she had lived with her father in Cabinda. Her  father  had  worked
    for FLEC and when she was a child the government had burned down  their
    home as a result. In February 2012 she and her father  had  attended  a
    demonstration; he was arrested and ill-treated. Some months  later  her
    father went to work and never came back.  The  Appellant  claimed  that
    following  her  father's  disappearance  she  began  to  be  abused  by
    government soldiers, who would come to her  home  and  rape  her.    In
    September 2014 a friend of her father, whom she knew as  'Uncle',  told
    her that he would get her out of Angola. He would bring her to  the  UK
    and she could get a job here.   'Uncle'  said  he  would  pay  for  the
    journey if the Appellant had sex with him. She did this and he arranged
    her trip.  They travelled with another  Angolan  man  and  three  other
    girls.  Upon arrival she was taken to  a  large  house  where  she  was
    informed that she was to work as a prostitute. After a few days she was
    taken on a long train journey and asked to wait at a station.  She  did
    so but no one came back to get her. The Appellant slept rough. After  a
    few days she approached a man whom she heard  speaking  Portuguese.  He
    referred her to the authorities.


 4. The Appellant claimed to have been born in 1999 and so  was  placed  in
    the care of Leicester Social Services (LSS).  They doubted her  claimed
    age. On the 2nd February  2015  two  social  workers  employed  by  LSS
    conducted an age assessment. They concluded that the  Appellant's  year
    of birth was 1994.  A summary of their conclusions was provided to  the
    Appellant, the Respondent, the Competent  Authority  and  in  turn  the
    Tribunal. It is headed 'Outcome of Age Assessment' and is dated the 9th
    March 2015. It is very  brief.   It  records  that  the  Appellant  was
    advised that the full report would not be disclosed to the Home  Office
    without her express permission, or unless it was ordered  by  a  court.
    The conclusion reached is that the Appellant was at least 20 years  old
    at the date of assessment. The following reasons  are  given  for  that
    conclusion:

         "You have no documentary  evidence  to  support  your  age,  ID  or
         nationality


         Your physical appearance strongly suggest that you are not the  age
         you claim to be


         Your  given  account  of  your  experiences  and  journey  lack  in
         consistency and credibility


         Taking into the opinions and views of  all  the  professionals  and
         agencies involved with you"


 5. The Respondent referred the Appellant's case to the Competent Authority
    (CA). Having initially found there to be reasonable grounds to  believe
    that the Appellant had indeed been trafficked, in a decision dated 24th
    September 2015 the CA reached the conclusion ('the  conclusive  grounds
    decision') that the Appellant was not a victim of modern slavery.   The
    author  identifies  a  number  of  alleged   inconsistencies   in   the
    Appellant's account. For instance, her decision to remain in  her  home
    in Cabinda after soldiers had come there and raped her is found  to  be
    inconsistent with the claimed events.  The credibility of  the  account
    is further damaged by "the fact it is believed you attempted to deceive
    the UKVI regarding your true age". Overall the account is rejected.

 6. The Appellant's claim to protection was rejected by the Respondent in a
    detailed letter of refusal dated 24th November  2015.   The  Respondent
    did not accept that the claim engaged the Refugee Convention.  She  did
    not  believe  the  Appellant's  account  in  respect  of  her  father's
    involvement with  FLEC.  This  was  because  the  Appellant  had  given
    inconsistent accounts about what he did.  Her evidence about the  house
    being set on fire and her father disappearing was found to be  "vague".
    The Respondent rejected the trafficking claim because  CA  had  already
    done so.   As to the Appellant's claimed age,  the  Respondent  adopted
    the assessment made by LSS and concluded that she was an adult.

 7. The Appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  that  came
    before Judge AJ Parker on the 6th September 2016.  The  Appellant  gave
    oral evidence. Judge Parker's findings are  set  out  in  his  decision
    dated 19th September 2016.

    The First-tier Tribunal Decision


 8. The determination  records  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant in respect of her age. Mrs Johnrose submitted that  according
    to the terms of her own policy the Respondent was  obliged  to  conduct
    her own evaluation of the Appellant's age independently  of  the  local
    authority; her failure to do so rendered her overall decision unlawful.
    The 'Outcome of Age  Assessment'  report  did  not  contain  sufficient
    reasons to be deemed Merton[2] compliant. Reliance was  placed  on  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v LV [2015] EWCA Civ 1142. The  age  assessment  before  the
    Tribunal was in summary form. The Tribunal  noted  that  neither  party
    had,  at any stage,  requested an adjournment in order  that  the  full
    report be obtained.  Given this, the Tribunal concluded [at 36] "I  can
    only assume the parties were happy with the summary report  presented",
    and [at 37] "I find the summary of the report is accurate and there  is
    no credible evidence to the contrary that it is not. The Appellant  and
    her representatives have had ample time to obtain their own age  report
    and have not done so".  Proceeding to make  its  own  findings  on  the
    Appellant's age, the Tribunal finds that she is over 20 years old: "she
    certainly appears to be this age in appearance and demeanour".

 9. Having made this finding, the Tribunal went on to agree with  the  Home
    Office that her evidence about all material events had been  vague  and
    contradictory.  The  asylum  appeal,  insofar  as  it  related  to  her
    father's disappearance and her repeated rape  by  government  soldiers,
    was dismissed for want of credibility.

10. In respect of the claim to have been trafficked,  the  Tribunal  placed
    its reliance squarely  on  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  CA.  The
    Tribunal notes that  Mrs  Johnrose  had  asked  it  to  reach  its  own
    conclusions on the evidence, but the Tribunal felt unable to  do  this:
    "I find the Appellant's claim not to be credible and  therefore  having
    examined the trafficking decision, I find there are no errors in it and
    find she was not trafficked in line with their report".

11. The appeal was thereby dismissed on all grounds.

    The Appeal

12. There is  one  simple  point  raised  on  appeal.   The  only  evidence
    available at the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  was  the
    summary from  LSS.  It  is  submitted  that  this  could  not  possibly
    demonstrate that a Merton compliant assessment  had  taken  place.  The
    Respondent has a duty, arising from public  law  as  well  as  her  own
    published policy, to satisfy herself as to the Appellant's age and  she
    had failed to do so. That error, replicated by  the  Tribunal,  led  to
    flawed findings as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility,  which  in  turn
    effected both the trafficking and asylum assessment.   If the Appellant
    had been a child at all material times it would be unsurprising if  her
    evidence was "vague" and in places. If the ground of appeal is made out
    the entire edifice of the reasoning must fall.

    The Secretary of State's Response


13. In her 'rule 24  response'  the  Respondent  adopts  and  endorses  the
    Tribunal's reasoning and submits that there are no material  errors  in
    the determination. Before me (at an 'error of law hearing' on the  29th
    March 2017) Mr Harrison submitted that the report provided by  LSS  was
    adequate.  It  was  on  its  face  a  summary  of  a  Merton  compliant
    assessment. The summary records that the Appellant was advised that the
    full age  assessment  would  not  be  disclosed  to  any  third  party,
    including the Respondent, unless she gave her express permission. It is
    Mr Harrison's understanding that this is a  correct  statement  of  the
    legal position. Unless the Appellant requests the full Merton compliant
    report, or a Court orders it to be disclosed, no other  party  can  see
    it. It was not therefore the Respondent's fault that  she  didn't  have
    it.


      Discussion and Findings on 'Error of Law'

14. In a written decision dated the 11th May 2017 I found as follows.


15. The task of the First-tier Tribunal in this  appeal  was  to  determine
    whether the Appellant was at risk in Angola. This required it to assess
    whether her account  was  true,  and  whether  she  had  in  fact  been
    trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation. The parties  before
    me agreed that the question of the Appellant's age was central to  both
    these matters, since the findings of LSS had formed the cornerstone  of
    the reasoning of the CA, and in turn the Respondent's conclusions as to
    risk.


16. It is the Appellant's contention that in its approach to  the  question
    of age, the Tribunal made two related errors.


17. The first was the assumption that the LSS age assessment  was  reliable
    at all. The Tribunal acknowledged the Appellant's submission that  this
    document was not a Merton compliant assessment, and yet at paragraph 35
    to 38 makes no clear finding  on  whether  or  not  it  was.      I  am
    satisfied that this complaint is made out. The Tribunal was not obliged
    to accept that findings of the social workers at all, much less in  the
    scant form that they were expressed. If a Merton compliant  report  had
    been produced, then of  course  that  was  something  that  could  have
    attracted significant weight, but no finding was made to  that  effect.
    The  Tribunal  purports  to  have  made  its  own  assessment  (at  the
    insistence of Mrs Johnrose) at 38, but as Mr Harrison agreed, this  was
    hardly a holistic evaluation.

18. The second was that the Tribunal appeared to proceed on the basis  that
    the summary assessment had to be accepted because the Appellant herself
    had not challenged it, or  even  asked  for  it  to  be  produced:  see
    paragraph 36.  This was an error of fact. The Appellant had  asked  for
    it to be produced, and had  given  her  express  consent  to  it  being
    disclosed to the Respondent, as long ago as July 2015.   Even  if  that
    were not so, the Tribunal has  manifestly  failed  to  weigh  into  the
    balance the Respondent's failure to consult  or  produce  the  document
    herself; it was afterall a piece of evidence upon which she  sought  to
    rely.   The Respondent's own guidance on this  matter  illustrates  why
    that was important:

         5.3 Obtaining the local  authority's  age  assessment  Case  owners
         should request a full copy of the local authority's age  assessment
         and confirmation from the local authority that it has been  carried
         out in compliance with the guidelines in the Merton case.  In  some
         instances local authorities may still feel unable  to  share  their
         full age assessment with the Agency citing data  protection  and/or
         confidentiality concerns. Whilst  accepting  that  the  information
         contains sensitive personal data, it should be pointed out  to  the
         local  authority  that  there  is  provision   for   sharing   such
         information with the Agency within the Data Protection Act 2008.


         This approach reflects the findings of the judge in A & WK v SSHD &
         Kent  County  Council  [2009]  EWHC  939  (Admin),  where  it   was
         considered that, "since it  [the  local  authority  assessment]  is
         being obtained for the benefit of the Home Office as  well  as  the
         authority, it is in my judgement entirely reasonable that it should
         be disclosed to the  Home  Office.  Only  if  the  full  report  is
         available can it be seen whether there are any apparent flaws in it
         and whether it is truly Merton compliant. And  sight  of  the  full
         report will be essential if there is any challenge  raised  to  the
         decision by the Home Office."


         Case owners should discuss with the relevant  local  authority  and
         obtain in writing, at the very least their  assessment  conclusion,
         the reasons on which their conclusion is  based  and  an  assurance
         that  their  assessment  complies  with   the   local   authority's
         assessment policy and the guidelines  in  the  Merton  case.  Where
         applicants have been assessed as adults by the local authority, but
         maintain they are children, it is important to establish the  local
         authority's reasons for their decision on age. The applicant should
         be asked to provide the age assessment or  provide  permission  for
         the local authority to disclose it (where the  local  authority  is
         reluctant to do so). If an applicant refuses to  disclose  the  age
         assessment, this should be taken into consideration when  assessing
         all evidence in  the  round,  and  if  appropriate  raised  in  the
         substantive decision and at  any  appeal.  In  particular,  if  the
         applicant has refused to provide the full age assessment before the
         appeal hearing, the  caseworker  should  consider  writing  to  the
         tribunal asking for  an  order  that  the  claimant  discloses  the
         assessment and, if necessary, this application  should  be  pursued
         further at the Case Management Review (CMR) or appeal hearing.


         Finally, if evidence relating to an  applicant's  age  conflict,  a
         judge may want to compare  the  experience  and  qualifications  of
         those completing the evidence (often medical evidence submitted  by
         a paediatrician and a local authority age assessment). In order  to
         defend the local authority age assessment at  appeal,  case  owners
         should ask local authorities to include  with  the  age  assessment
         report, the social workers' age  assessment  experience  (including
         length of practise) and qualifications.


19. It is apparent from the  decisions  of  the  Competent  Authority,  the
    Respondent and the First-tier Tribunal how important  the  decision  of
    the social workers in  Leicester  turned  out  to  be.  Their  negative
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility was to form the basis for the
    decisions made by all  three  decision-makers  that  followed.  It  was
    therefore of real importance that those three bodies could be satisfied
    that the social workers had conducted a lawful assessment, by following
    the correct procedures and asking all the  relevant  questions.  It  is
    very difficult to see, on the basis of the summary form 'Outcome of Age
    Assessment', that this had been done.


20. For those reasons I was satisfied that the grounds of appeal  are  made
    out, and determined that that the decision must be set aside.


    The Re-Made Decision

      The Appellant's Evidence

21. The Appellant gave oral evidence  and  adopted  her  witness  statement
    dated 18th August 2016.  She maintains that she was born in  1999,  and
    is  national of Angola.  The Appellant states that she  never  attended
    school as a child but that her father would teach her things at home.


22. The Appellant describes being aware of her  father's  involvement  with
    FLEC during her childhood. She knew that  it  involved  him  wearing  a
    green uniform and that he would carry a gun, but she does not know what
    role he might have had or the details of the  problems  he  might  have
    had.

23. In 2010 or 2011, when the Appellant was 11 or 12, she was at home  with
    her mother and brother. She was getting ready for bed.   She  does  not
    have a great deal of recollection  about  what  happened  but  she  can
    remember people screaming. In her statement she says that after  a  few
    days she found out that there had been a fire and that her  mother  and
    brother had been killed.  The rumour was that the fire had been started
    by  government  soldiers.   The  Appellant's  bundle  contains   colour
    photographs of what are said to be scars sustained during the fire.

24. The Appellant's father rebuilt their home and she remained living there
    with him.  The Appellant can recall attending a demonstration with  her
    father, and him being detained for 1 day. She says  that  sometimes  he
    would drink and blame himself for  what  happened.  He  disappeared  in
    April or June 2012. He went to the market but never came back.

25. The Appellant stayed living in the family home. She got some help  from
    a neighbour.  She learned to cook and look after herself.  Towards  the
    end of 2012 government soldiers started coming to the family home. They
    raped the Appellant. She does not like to talk about what  happened  to
    her.

26. The Appellant finally left Angola with the help of a man whom she  knew
    to be a friend of her father. His name was Joao. He had visited her  on
    a couple of occasions and had suggested that she should leave  Cabinda.
    He said that he would help her find her father. When he told  her  that
    it would cost money, and she said  that  she  had  none,  he  suggested
    "another way to pay".   The Appellant had sex with Joao and  he  agreed
    to get her out. They travelled to Luanda by boat and stayed in a  house
    for three days.  Then Joao and his friends took  the  Appellant  to  an
    airport and arranged for her to go "somewhere she would have  a  better
    life".  The Appellant travelled with three other girls,  none  of  whom
    knew each other.

27. After they arrived in the UK they were taken to  a house with  lots  of
    rooms.  The Appellant was informed that  her  "job"  was  going  to  be
    having sex with men.  Then Uncle Joao took the Appellant on  a  journey
    by train. He dropped her at a  station  (which  she  now  knows  to  be
    Leicester) and told her to wait for him there. She waited overnight  at
    the station but he never returned.

28. At the hearing the Appellant was asked to comment on the age assessment
    process. She remembers meeting a  social  worker  called  Goodluck  who
    asked her questions for about three hours about her life. When she told
    him about her father and her past he and the interpreter had  shared  a
    joke. He said that "he like this kind  of  story".   The  other  social
    worker told the Appellant to look in the mirror and told her  that  she
    looked like she was older than 20. They did not believe  that  she  had
    been born in 1999.   The Appellant was subsequently given a  number  to
    call to complain about Goodluck and the other social worker. She  spoke
    with someone called Jessica and told them that they had laughed at her.
    Jessica had apologised and said that they should not have done that.

    Age


29. By the date of the re-making the full age assessment report had  become
    available.  Mr Harrison confirmed that having had an opportunity to see
    the full report, the Secretary of State maintained her challenge to the
    Appellant's claimed age. The assessing social workers are identified as
    Goodluck Msangi and Surjan Sharma. The assessment is said to have taken
    place  on  the  30th  January  2015  and   the   5th   February   2015,
    approximately two months after the Appellant's arrival in the UK.


30. The report begins by recording how the Appellant came into contact with
    LSS. She states that she had been left in a train station by her  uncle
    Joao and that she had stayed there for 5 nights before she saw a  black
    man speaking Portuguese on the telephone. She approached him and  asked
    for help. The report confirms that LSS were contacted by  a  member  of
    the public, (whose name and mobile telephone number are supplied). This
    gentleman told LSS that he speaks only a little  Portuguese,  his  main
    language is French and that he had seen  her  and  thought  she  needed
    help.  Later the report notes that the Appellant said that she had come
    to the UK with belongings, and that someone else had them:  she  "would
    not share who".    Social  workers  contacted  the  police  about  this
    element of the claim who advised that after the member  of  the  public
    had called them about the Appellant, officers  had  viewed  CCTV  going
    back three weeks, but could see no  sign  of  the  Appellant  being  at
    Leicester station.

31. The Appellant advised the social workers that she had come to the UK to
    look for her father, but at other times said that it  was  because  she
    wanted to claim asylum. The social workers observed on more  than  once
    occasion that the Appellant became  tearful  and  distressed  when  she
    spoke about her father and his disappearance; she also cried when asked
    about having sex with  Joao.    At  all  other  times  during  the  age
    assessment process she appeared "calm",  "very  confident"  and  "self-
    assured".  The authors of the report record [at page 5]; "in  our  view
    and experience, this appeared to be very unusual even having taken into
    consideration   [the   Appellant's]   developmental   level,   cultural
    background and recognition of experiences during her journey which  may
    have increased resilience".

32. As to her appearance both social workers  considered  that  she  looked
    older than twenty. This view was  shared  by  the  Appellant's  initial
    foster carers, the interpreter used in the age assessment  process  and
    Police  Constable  Carolyn  Boyce  who  interviewed  the  Appellant  in
    relating to the possible sexual  abuse.  The  foster  carers  who  were
    looking after the Appellant at the date of  the  assessment  reportedly
    thought her to be about 19 years old.  The carer reported that she  had
    had conversations with the Appellant which indicated that she was older
    than her claimed age of 15; for instance she had told  the  carer  that
    she wanted to have a white partner so that her children would be  light
    skinned.  She had weaves in her hair which she advised  social  workers
    she had  done  herself,  learning  from  the  internet.  Foster  carers
    reported that the Appellant has never had any concerns with  self-care.
    She was provided with sanitary towels,  waxing  beauty  and  skin  care
    products, all of which  she  was  able  to  use  independently  without
    guidance. She was able to dye her hair herself.  She had denied  having
    ever had access to any of these products in Angola.

33. In respect of her education  the  report  notes  that  there  was  some
    discrepancy in the Appellant's evidence. She  had  consistently  denied
    having any sort of formal education.  She  said  that  her  father  had
    taught her at home, for instance to read the Bible, but then said  that
    he had not  been  to  school  himself.   He  spoke  only  Kimbomdo  and
    Portuguese. Then at one point she mentioned having gone to school;  she
    retracted this and said that she was talking about a friend having been
    at school. She  became  agitated  when  challenged  about  this.    The
    Appellant consistently stated that she had never heard  English  before
    she arrived in this country (in late  November  2014).  Social  workers
    observed however that the Appellant demonstrated  her  ability  in  the
    English language throughout the age assessment process.  She  corrected
    the interpreter and  was  able  to  confidently  write  down  names  in
    English. She replied in English when asked whether she wanted  a  break
    or a drink. Their observations accorded with  information  provided  by
    the foster  carers,  who  reported  that  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    communicate very competently in English within two hours of her arrival
    in their home in January 2015. On the 13th January 2015  she  had  been
    assessed for entry into an ESOL class as  being  at  levels  2-3.  That
    means that she is judged to able to hold a conversation in English.


34. The Appellant told the social workers  that  she  had  lived  with  her
    mother, brother and father  until  she  was  about  8  years  old.  She
    remembers her house being on fire. She says that her mother rescued her
    and then when she returned to save her brother, they were both  killed.
    Her father rebuilt their home from  galvanised  steel.  There  were  no
    utilities or sanitation in the whole village.   After  her  father  had
    disappeared she just wanted to wait for him to come  home.   When  Joao
    offered her a way out she believed that he would help her to  find  her
    father. She went with him to the house in Luanda where she stayed for 6
    months. There were a family in the house but she  was  not  allowed  to
    interact with them. She denied knowing the names of the two adults  and
    five children who lived in the house. She stayed in her room and  would
    be provided with food. She later stated that she had watched television
    with the children and that was how she had learned to use a television.

35. Foster carers advised that the Appellant was "very competent" at  using
    a computer, the iPad and mobile telephone, and required no  support  in
    using these things.  It is noted that the  Appellant  had  consistently
    denied having used any of these technologies before her arrival in  the
    UK.  On the 14th February 2015 it came  to  social  workers'  attention
    that the Appellant had set up her own YouTube channel, and had posted a
    film where she commented on issues  surrounding  skin  colour.  It  was
    called "Light Skin and Dark Skin" and she could  be  seen  speaking  in
    English about whether the colour  of  skin  can  determine  a  person's
    ethnicity.  The video was removed from  YouTube  after  social  workers
    told the Appellant that they had seen it. When she was asked  about  it
    she "reacted by smiling" and  saying  nothing.  When  asked  by  Surjan
    Sharma why she had denied being able to speak English the Appellant had
    replied "I don't need to answer this".   The Appellant  also  commented
    on someone else's film on YouTube. Her comments  were  in  English  and
    again related to skin colour.


    My Findings


36. I deal first with the Appellant's age. I  am  satisfied  that  the  age
    assessment  report  now  produced  is  detailed,  lengthy  and   Merton
    compliant. The Appellant was clearly aware of what the process was for,
    and she was given an opportunity to provide relevant evidence. She  was
    put on notice that the social workers doubted her claimed age.  She was
    asked about her background, her family circumstances  and  history  and
    her ethnic/cultural origins were considered. The social workers  probed
    her credibility because they had reason to believe that she was  not  a
    child as claimed: those reasons were  the  lack  of  documentation  and
    their assessment that her appearance strongly suggested  that  she  was
    over 20.  A number of reasons are given for why they do not accept that
    she is a child. These are:


           a) her appearance;


           b) the discrepancies in her evidence about her background;

           c) the discrepancies in her evidence about her  journey  to  the
              UK;


           d) the fact that all other  professionals  who  have  interacted
              with her
            agree that she seems to be an adult. These  include  the  police
      officer
           who investigated her allegations of sexual abuse  by  Joao,  and
           two sets of foster carers.


37. Before me the Appellant gave evidence to the  effect  that  the  social
    workers had behaved badly,  and  that  she  had  been  laughed  at  and
    intimidated throughout the  assessment.  I  place  no  weight  on  that
    evidence. I note that the Appellant  has  been  represented  throughout
    this process.   There is no  evidence  before  me  that  she  made  any
    complaint as she now alleges.    Ms Johnrose  was  aware  of  no  steps
    being taken in the past to  address  the  matters  now  raised  by  the
    Appellant.


38. Some of the 'discrepancies' that arise from the age assessment  attract
    little weight. I am not for instance minded to attach any weight to the
    allegation that the man who found  the  Appellant  in  Leicester  train
    station denied that  he  spoke  Portuguese,  as  she  had  claimed.  No
    evidence is produced that he had given social workers that information.
    Nor do I consider that there is  any  inconsistency  in  the  Appellant
    stating on one hand that she came to the UK to find her father, and  on
    the other that she wanted to claim asylum.


39. There are however matters recorded in the age assessment that seriously
    damage the Appellant's credibility, including her claim  to  have  been
    born in 1999.

40. First amongst these are the discrepancies in respect of her ability  to
    communicate in English, and her skills in using modern technology.  The
    Appellant told the social workers that she lived in a home  constructed
    out of galvanised steel which had  no  running  water,  electricity  or
    sanitation. She had never been to school (a statement to  the  contrary
    was retracted) and nor had her father.  She had  never  heard  English,
    nor used the internet, before she arrived in this country.  She  claims
    to have arrived in the UK at the end  of  November  2014  and  yet  was
    observed by  her  foster  carers  to  have  been  able  to  communicate
    effectively in English within hours of being  in  their  home  in  mid-
    January 2015. They said that she was "very competent" in using a mobile
    phone that she had purchased herself, a laptop and an iPad. She did not
    require any assistance in using any of  these  technologies.   I  agree
    with Mr Harrison that it is wholly improbable that a girl who has grown
    up in very basic circumstances with no education at all and no exposure
    to modern technologies would be able, within six weeks of  her  arrival
    in this country,  to communicate effectively in  English  and  use  the
    internet to such a degree  of  proficiency.   The  evidence  about  the
    YouTube film, and the comments posted by the Appellant on another film,
    are particularly striking. I do  not  believe  that  someone  from  the
    Appellant's claimed background  would  even  think  of  posting  social
    commentary like that on the internet within weeks of her arrival  in  a
    new country, never mind having the ability to do so.

41. The social workers also noted  that  the  Appellant  was  able  to  use
    various beauty products, including putting weaves in her own  hair  and
    using coloured dyes. That in itself would be unremarkable for a teenage
    girl, but when set  in  the  context  in  which  the  Appellant  places
    herself, is wholly incongruous. The Appellant claims to have lived with
    her father in the most basic of circumstances and  denied  ever  having
    had access to any of these products before, yet  within  weeks  of  her
    arrival was  able  to  construct  "elaborate"  hairstyles,  use  waxing
    strips, weaves, and skin care products. Again, it seems  very  unlikely
    that the Appellant would be  able  to  use  these  products  with  such
    proficiency had she not had access to them before. This must cast doubt
    on her claim that she had spent all of her previous years living  in  a
    galvanised steel shelter with no running water or electricity.

42. The report further reveals discrepancies in the evidence that go to the
    chronology. In her witness statement the Appellant said that when  Joao
    took her to Luanda they had stayed in a house  for  3  days;  she  told
    social workers that she was there for 6 months.  She  claimed  to  have
    slept rough at Leicester railway station for 5 nights; the police could
    find no trace of her on CCTV.

43. Having considered the report in detail, and  in  particular  the  views
    expressed by the Appellant's foster  carers,  I  am  satisfied  on  the
    balance of probability that her year of birth is  considerably  earlier
    than 1999.  The Appellant has provided inconsistent evidence about  her
    childhood  and  journey  to  the  UK.  She  has  exhibited   behaviours
    consistent with her being an adult. All of the professionals  that  she
    has had interaction with since her arrival believe her to be an  adult;
    the opinion of the foster carers, police officer and social workers  is
    based on her behaviour as well as her appearance and demeanour.

44. I am unable to conclude, even to the lower standard, that the Appellant
    has given a truthful account of her childhood and the reasons  why  she
    came here.  At the centre of her account is a fire that  destroyed  the
    family home, and killed her mother and brother.   In her statement  the
    Appellant says that she was getting ready for bed when it happened. All
    she can remember is hearing people screaming and being put  outside  by
    her mother. She says that a few days later she "found out"  that  there
    had been a fire.   It may, in view of the trauma involved, be plausible
    that a victim of such an event would  'block  out'  her  memories.  The
    evidence in the statement is however to be  contrasted  with  what  the
    Appellant told social workers: "[She] remembers her house being on fire
    with her mother and brother in it. [She] explained that her mother  did
    manage to rescue her but when she returned back into the house  to  get
    her brother they were both trapped and died".    I  note  that  in  her
    asylum interview a further discrepancy arises  in  that  the  Appellant
    told the interviewing officer that she and her family were  all  asleep
    when the fire started.  She was able to recall being on fire herself.

45. On the lower standard of proof I do not accept that the events that the
    Appellant described in her childhood took place, that she  was  brought
    from Cabinda by an old friend of her father, that she was a child  upon
    her arrival in this country, that  she  was  left  in  Leicester  train
    station for 5 days or that she in fact arrived in this country when she
    claims to have done. On the evidence before me I find  it  to  be  more
    likely that she came to this country as an adult, and that she  was  in
    the UK for a considerable  amount  of  time  before  she  came  to  the
    attention of the authorities.

46. I cannot rule out the possibility that the Appellant has suffered  some
    trauma in her life. The social  workers,  and  indeed  the  immigration
    officer who conducted her  asylum  interview,  noted  that  she  became
    tearful when talking about her father, and about being forced  to  have
    sex in order to leave Angola.   I saw the same emotional  reaction  for
    myself when she  gave  her  oral  evidence.  I  have  seen  the  colour
    photographs which do appear  to  show  that  the  Appellant  does  have
    extensive scarring, in particular to her feet.  There is a  possibility
    that she is a victim of persecution and/or trafficking, albeit  not  in
    the manner that she has described.   In the  absence  of  any  credible
    evidence about what the true account might actually be, I am unable  to
    find  that  the  Appellant  is  at  risk  today.  To  do  so  would  be
    impermissible speculation.

47. The protection claim must accordingly be dismissed.   Ms  Johnrose  did
    not pursue a discrete human rights claim before me, conceding that  any
    private life case would stand and fall with the protection issues.


      Decisions


48. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


49. The decision is remade as follows:

    "the appeal is dismissed on protection and human rights grounds".


50. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   10th
                                  June 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 2nd November 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
Martins

[2][3] R (on the application of B) v London Borough of Merton [2003] EWHC
1689 (Admin)

