
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13087/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th July 2016                             |On 24th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    Mr MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McKenzie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [  ]  1976.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on a student visa on 15th October  2011  using
    his Sri Lankan passport.  He applied for leave to remain as  a  student
    on 23rd January  2013  and  this  application  was  refused.   On  22nd
    November 2013 the Appellant claimed  asylum  and  was  served  with  an
    IS151A as an overstayer.

 2. On 21st October 2015 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    asylum application.  In refusing the application the Secretary of State
    noted the Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon a fear that if he
    returned to Sri Lanka he would face mistreatment due to  his  political
    opinion.

 3. The Appellant appealed the refusal of the Secretary of  State  and  the
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Scott  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 8th March 2016.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 15th April 2016 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not to be in  need  of
    humanitarian protection.  The Appellant was however granted  anonymity.
    No application is made to vary the anonymity direction and consequently
    it remains in place.

 4. On 21st April 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     Those Grounds of Appeal noted that the key facts  in  the  applicant's
    history had been accepted by the Secretary of State, including that the
    applicant had been detained in September 2011 on suspicion of assisting
    the LTTE, tortured and released the following month, on  payment  of  a
    bribe.  It was noted that the question for  the  Tribunal  was  whether
    those facts placed the applicant at risk on return to Sri Lanka in  the
    light of the guidance given in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  It was noted in the Grounds of Appeal that
    the judge had held that they did not for  reasons  which  she  gave  at
    paragraph 33 onwards of her judgment.  The secondary issue was  whether
    the Appellant's removal would breach Article 3 because of her  risk  of
    suicide.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal set out four grounds:-

       . That the judge had reversed the standard of proof and/or failed  to
         make findings to the appropriate standard.

       . The judge's findings were inconsistent with country guidance.

       . The judge failed to consider the guidance in GJ as  to  psychiatric
         facilities.

       .  The  judge  misunderstood  crucial  aspects  of  the   psychiatric
         evidence.

 6. On 4th May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission  to
    appeal.  On 13th May 2016 the  Secretary  of  State  responded  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.

 7. Thereafter, the matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Monson
    at Field House on 6th June.  The hearing before  Judge  Monson  was  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In a decision  and  reasons
    handed down on 15th June 2016 the judge found:-

      a) That  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
         Appellant's appeal on Article 3 ECHR (mental  health/suicide  risk)
         grounds and under Article 8 did not contain an error  of  law,  and
         accordingly that part of the decision stands.

      b) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  Appellant's
         appeal against a decision to recognise him as a refugee did contain
         an error of law and the decision was set aside.

 8. Judge Monson gave directions that there would be a further  hearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal before him to re-make the  decision  on  the  asylum
    claim and that the hearing would proceed by  way  of  submission  only.
    None of the findings of fact on the asylum claim made by the First-tier
    Tribunal were preserved.

 9. It is on that basis that the appeal appears before me in my list.   The
    Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Mr McKenzie.   Mr  McKenzie
    is extremely familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and  he  is  the  author  of  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer Mr Tufan.

Preliminary Issue

10. As a preliminary issue I raised with the parties  why  the  matter  was
    listed before me, bearing in mind the normal protocol and the  specific
    fact that Judge Monson had reserved the  matter  to  himself.   Neither
    legal representative was able to answer that  question  but  there  was
    unanimous agreement that the matter should proceed as scheduled  before
    me and that I should be the determining judge rather than Judge  Monson
    as to adjourn to a further date would merely delay this matter.  It  is
    on that basis that the appeal comes before me.

The Issue

11. The issue is a relatively straightforward one, namely  whether  on  the
    facts of the case the Appellant falls within the  risk  categories  set
    out within GJ.

The Law

12. The law is set out in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The  head  note  to  that  authority
    states:-

         "(1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in  Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka. Its focus is on preventing both (a) the  resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)   If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan  security  services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from  the
             airport. Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities
             are or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after
             arrival in their  home  area,  where  their  arrival  will  be
             verified by the CID or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.



             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
                  rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the
                  Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                  record, or who are associated with  publications  critical
                  of the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant. Individuals whose name appears on a  "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE  during  the  civil  war.  In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces. That will be a  question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.

         (10)     Consideration must always be  given  to  whether,  in  the
             light  of  an  individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
             during the  civil  war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
             (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the
             Qualification  Directive).  Regard  should  be  had   to   the
             categories  for  exclusion  set  out   in   the   "Eligibility
             Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of
             Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by  UNHCR  on  21
             December 2012".

Submissions/Discussion

13. Mr McKenzie indicates the starting point is to look at the  Appellant's
    interview record and I am referred to question 136 therein.  That is  a
    long question but Mr McKenzie submits that it is clear from the answers
    given therein that the authorities  believed  that  the  Appellant  had
    connections with the LTTE.  He refers me to the  four  risk  categories
    set out at paragraph 7 of the head note of GJ emphasising that  amongst
    those category of people who would be at real risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka are individuals  who  are,  or  are
    perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.   Mr  McKenzie
    submits the Appellant, judging from the detention  which  he  suffered,
    the questions asked of him and the torture, is believed by the security
    forces to have been involved with ongoing LTTE activity and,  as  such,
    he falls within the first of these  risk  categories,  namely  that  of
    persons perceived to have a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka.  He comments that if the authorities  did
    not believe he was involved in LTTE activities,  then  they  would  not
    have detained him.  He points out that the fact that the Appellant  was
    detained,  which  only  came  to  an  end  when  he  escaped,  and  the
    seriousness  of  the  ill-treatment  which  he  suffered,  created   in
    themselves a clear risk that such persecution would be repeated.

14. Mr McKenzie also points out that the Appellant comes within the  fourth
    risk category under GJ, namely a person on a computerised  "stop"  list
    accessible to the security forces at the airport comprising a  list  of
    those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.

15. Mr McKenzie accepts that the Tribunal  in  GJ  did  not  give  specific
    guidance as to who would be subject to an arrest warrant and  therefore
    included on the "stop" list,  but  he  refers  me  to  expert  evidence
    provided therein of Dr Chris Smith whose evidence  he  points  out  was
    corroborated in GJ by the  evidence  of  a  Sri  Lankan  lawyer,  Anton
    Punethanayagam, and by further expert  witness  evidence  of  Professor
    Good.  He submits that the evidence in GJ shows it is possible  to  use
    bribery as a method of  release  from  detention  as  occurred  in  the
    Appellant's case and that this has no bearing on whether or not someone
    is of interest to the authorities.  He asked me to allow the appeal.

16. Mr Tufan acknowledges the issue is simply whether or not the  Appellant
    comes within the risk categories of GJ.  He does  however  consider  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State  that  there  are  credibility  issues
    within Section 8 of the 2004 Act, namely that the Appellant came to the
    UK with entry clearance as a student in 2011 but never applied at  that
    stage for asylum.  He submits that the Appellant could quite reasonably
    have been detained by the authorities but that this in itself would not
    bring him within the risk categories and that at  most,  the  Appellant
    was unwittingly accused of helping someone within the LTTE.  He submits
    that the Appellant does not come within that risk category and that  he
    is of no significance to the authorities  whatsoever.   He  likens  the
    Appellant to the second Appellant in GJ and  that  he  is  not  someone
    actively seeking to destabilise the Sri Lankan state.  He asked  me  to
    give consideration to paragraphs 430, 432 and 433 of GJ and to conclude
    that the Appellant would not be perceived as having a significant  role
    in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora
    and/or a renewal of hostilities within  Sri  Lanka.   He  asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

17. In brief response, Mr McKenzie points out that Section 8  of  the  2004
    Act does not  apply.   And  that  the  Appellant  was  not  accused  of
    unwittingly helping the LTTE,  but  was  deliberately  accused  and  an
    arrest warrant was issued for him because he escaped.

Findings

18. This appeal has a lengthy history and I am now asked to rule, based  on
    a factual matrix of this case, as to whether or not the Appellant falls
    within the risk categories of GJ and in particular two risk categories,
    namely whether the Appellant is an individual  who  either  is,  or  is
    perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state because he is perceived to have a significant role in relation to
    post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka, and whether his name would  appear  on  a
    computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport comprising a list of
    those against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.

19. Certain facts do not appear to be in dispute.  These include  the  fact
    that the Appellant was arrested, that he escaped  and  that  an  arrest
    warrant for him was issued.  I  have  considered  in  some  detail  the
    Appellant's asylum interview particularly at paragraph 136,  and  there
    appears to be evidence within that that indicates  quite  clearly  that
    the Appellant was detained on the basis that he was  questioned  as  to
    whether he had connections with the LTTE.  He was further, it  appears,
    tortured and it is reasonable to assume that for  such  methods  to  be
    carried out, the authorities held a belief that the Appellant did  have
    association with the LTTE.

20. Paragraph 27 of the Notice of Refusal states:-

         "The Sri Lankan government's objective is no longer to find  people
         with perceived involvement in the LTTE, rather they are focusing on
         those that are  actively  seeking  to  revive  the  LTTE  or  Tamil
         separatist organisations.  In effect, past LTTE  membership  is  no
         longer a concern to the Sri Lankan authorities.   Therefore  it  is
         considered you do not engage this risk factor".

21. Whilst acknowledging that the position in Sri Lanka has moved on,  that
    statement does not engage with paragraph 7(a) of the head note  to  GJ.
    It is clear that based on the evidence, which is not  challenged,  that
    the authorities perceived the Appellant to be a  threat  because  of  a
    relationship with the LTTE.  That  is  compounded  by  the  Appellant's
    escape and by the fact that he would potentially be on a list of people
    appearing on a computerised stop list due to the arrest warrant that is
    outstanding.

22. In such circumstances, and addressing the  narrow  issues  as  set  out
    herein, I am satisfied that this is an Appellant who falls  within  the
    risk categories set out within GJ and  for  these  reasons,  and  these
    reasons alone, the Appellant's appeal succeeds on asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 21st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
