

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: AA/13796/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |    Determination Promulgated|
|On 29th May 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                   HARRIES

                                   Between

                            MR QUDRADULLAH SAHARI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms N Nnamani
For the Respondent: Mr P Della, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant and Proceedings

   1.   The appellant was born on 13th March  1994  and  is  a  national  of
      Afghanistan.  He appealed  on  14th  October  2013  before  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Elek  (the  Judge)  against  the  decisions  of   the
      respondent to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom
      and to remove him to Afghanistan. Permission  to  appeal  against  the
      Judge's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  refused  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Ford on 20th November 2013.  He found that it  was  not
      arguable that the Judge erred by failing to giver proper consideration
      to the appellant's profile when considering the reasonableness of  the
      appellant's re-location to Kabul.  He gave the following reasons which
      set out the relevant background:


         The appellant's profile is that he is the son of a military officer
         whose mother was  forced  to  marry  a  Taliban  leader  after  the
         appellant's father  disappeared.   Judge  Elek  accepted  that  the
         appellant was at real risk of persecution in his home area and that
         the state could not afford him protection there.  Judge  Elek  gave
         full and thorough consideration to  the  appellant's  circumstances
         and background in the context of the current situation in Kabul and
         found that it was reasonable to expect the appellant  to  re-locate
         there.  He considered the appellant's age and the  fact  he  had  a
         contact in Kabul who, the appellant had stated,  knew  his  parents
         and was  from  his  village  and  now  works  for  a  human  rights
         organisation in Kabul. There is no identifiable material  error  of
         law in the approach to re-location.


         It is not arguable that  Judge  Elek  should  have  considered  the
         respondent's duty to trace the appellant's family  given  his  age,
         failure to co-operate and his evidence  about  his  uncle  and  his
         mother.  Judge Elek gave proper consideration to the recent case of
         EU & Ors 2013 EWCA Civ 32 in this regard.


         The appellant argues that Judge Elek engaged in speculation that  a
         letter on Ministry of Justice letter head was from the Ministry  of
         Justice.  The appellant himself speculates  that  the  Ministry  of
         Justice letterhead was in fact an indication that the document  had
         been notarised.  The appellant did not provide a  proper  certified
         translation of the document at the hearing and has still  not  done
         so.  There is no arguable error of law.


   2.   The appellant successfully renewed his application for permission to
      appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  On 11th December  2013  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Eshun  granted permission in the following terms:


         The grounds focus on the judge's finding at para 26 in respect of a
         letter purporting to be on the headed  paper  of  the  Ministry  of
         Justice in Kabul, which the appellant said he received in September
         2011. As the letter was not officially translated into  English  by
         the appellant's solicitors, the Judge took the  unprecedented  step
         of allowing the appellant to read the letter in Pushto with an oral
         translation by the court interpreter. The grounds  argue  that  the
         judge speculated that the letter was in fact from the  Ministry  of
         Justice.  I agree with FtTJ Ford  who  earlier  refused  permission
         that the appellant/grounds also speculated that the letterhead  was
         in fact an indication that the document had  been  notarised.   The
         resolution of this conflict  goes  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
         appellant is able to safely relocate to Kabul.


         In order to resolve  this  issue  I  direct  that  the  appellant's
         solicitors commission an English translation of the said letter and
         submit it to the UT and a copy to the respondent 7 days before  the
         hearing.


         It is arguable that in refusing the earlier application, FtTJ  Ford
         introduced a new issue,  namely  the  appellant's  failure  to  co-
         operate with the respondent in tracing his family.


   3.    The matter accordingly came before  me  to  determine  whether  the
      making of the decision in the First-tier tribunal involved the  making
      of an error on a point of law.


Background Information


   4.   The core finding of the Judge in issue is contained at paragraph  33
      of  her  determination  where  she  states  that   after   a   careful
      consideration of the background information and  the  profile  of  the
      appellant that it would not be unreasonable for him to be returned  to
      Kabul.  At paragraph 29 of the determination the  Judge  stated  that:
      "most significantly it is apparent from the  correspondence  presented
      to the court that the appellant does have contacts in Kabul  which  he
      has already put to good use". At paragraph 30 of the determination the
      Judge stated that she had already found that the  appellant  had  been
      able to access support as evidenced in his own statement regarding his
      friend Hamid and Hamid's father, as well as the letter produced to the
      court from the Ministry of justice.


   5.   The paragraph of the determination dealing with  the  letter  is  at
      number 26 as follows:


         26.   ....  He (the appellant)....stated that he has a close friend
         Hamid who lives in London and Hamid's father knows his uncle Lagber
         and in around August 2011 he spoke to Hamid and told  him  that  he
         has a problem whenever he tried to contact his  uncle.  Hamid  told
         him he would ask his father to try to contact the appellant's uncle
         and find out about his family.  Hamid's father went to the  uncle's
         house to ask for information, who told him that he could  not  help
         the appellant because he was afraid of the Taliban.  Hamid's father
         then went to see Mr Gholam Sarvar who  works  for  a  human  rights
         organisation in Afghanistan; "Gholam is from my village and knew my
         father and mother.  Gholam has written a letter confirming that  my
         mother was forced to marry  the  Taliban  commander  and  that  the
         Taliban took my  mother  and  siblings  to  a  private  place."  He
         received the letter in  September  2011  and  he  believed  he  had
         included it in his appeal bundle.   It  was  not  included  with  a
         translation.  However the letter was identified and  the  appellant
         read it out in Pashtu and the interpreter told the  court  what  is
         said in English.  Of particular note was the heading  on  what  was
         clearly headed paper.  The court was told that the heading was  the
         Ministry of Justice.  I  accept  that  the  letter  came  from  the
         Ministry of Justice in Kabul. What is apparent from this letter  is
         that the appellant clearly has contacts and friends in Afghanistan,
         which is consistent with his evidence that  his  family  was  well-
         regarded in their community.  He has a friend who contacted his own
         father, who approached a friend, who wrote for him a letter on  the
         headed paper of the Ministry of Justice in Kabul.


   My Consideration of the Issues and Submissions

   6.   The appellant's ground of appeal is that the Judge has picked on one
      small aspect
      of the case, namely the heading of the letter with the words "Ministry
      of Justice" and has speculated to build a whole edifice of  assertions
      concluding, in error, that the appellant  has  contacts  in  Kabul  to
      provide protection for him. It is asserted that it is speculation  and
      not fact that there is such protection.


   7.    In accordance with the direction of Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  the
      letter in question has now been translated.  The translation  shows  a
      heading on the letter of "Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Ministry  of
      Justice".  It is from Mr Gholam Sarwar
       and the content is as set out in paragraph 26 above; Mr Sarwar  signs
      the letter as: "Head (representative) of the Machalghoo village".

   8.   The respondent indicated opposition to the appeal under Rules 24  on
      the grounds that the Judge is submitted to have appropriately directed
      herself; she drew conclusions from the letter which were open  to  her
      to make.  It  is  further  submitted  that,  with  respect  the  Upper
      Tribunal, it is for the appellant to provide evidence to  support  his
      case, including translated documents, and  not  for  the  Tribunal  to
      direct such evidence to be obtained. The tracing issue is submitted to
      have been considered and dealt with at length by the Court  of  Appeal
      in EU & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 32.


   9.   Ms Nnamani submitted to me for the respondent that  in  relation  to
      the tracing issue that Judge has been  dismissive  and  she  submitted
      that the issue of age remains relevant to the issue of risk on return.
      I find no error disclosed by the Judge's approach to either issue.  At
      paragraph 16  of  her  determination  the  Judge  took  on  board  the
      observations of the Upper Tribunal about that the provisions  applying
      to the assessment of the evidence of a child and she  was  mindful  of
      these in assessing the evidence.  The Judge took account of the  lower
      age assessment for the appellant.


  10. I find no error on the part of the Judge in finding, at paragraphs  24
      and 25 of the determination, that any failure of the respondent's duty
      to trace was irrelevant in the light of the appellant's now undisputed
      age of over 17 years and therefore an adult  in  accordance  with  the
      case of EU & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 32. I consider that the  case  of  EU
      was directly relevant to the  issue  before  the  Judge  and  she  has
      considered and appropriately applied the case law.


  11.  Ms Nnamani   submitted to me for the appellant that  the  speculation
      of the judge arising from the letter includes the  findings  that  the
      letter came from the Ministry of Justice and that it came  from  Kabul
      from a person working for the  Ministry  of  Justice.  The  letter  is
      submitted not to show those features and not to be capable of  showing
      that there is protection for the appellant in Kabul.


  12. I do not accept the submission that the Judge's findings flowing  from
      her consideration of the letter and its content are unsustainable. The
      letter does  not  explicitly  come  from  Kabul  but  the  appellant's
      evidence in his statement dated 5th March 2013,  at  paragraph  8,  is
      that the author of the letter, Mr Gholam Sarvar,  works  for  a  human
      rights organisation in Kabul. In these circumstances I find  that  the
      Judge did not reach conclusions which were not reasonably open to her.
      The letter is not the sole basis on which the  Judge  determines  that
      the appellant can safely be returned to Kabul.  I  am  satisfied  that
      taking  the  determination  as  a  whole  the   Judge   undertook   an
      appropriate, relevant and sufficient  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      situation on return to Kabul. At paragraphs 27 and 28  she  considered
      his  particular  situation  in  the  context  of  background   country
      information.

  13.  Aside from the letter, the Judge took account in paragraph 34 of  her
      determination that the appellant spent the first 15 years of his  life
      in Kabul, he speaks the language of Afghanistan  and  understands  the
      culture; he is from a well-educated family and returns with additional
      skills and  education  acquired  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge
      concluded that the appellant would be able  to  find  his  own  ethnic
      group in Kabul; she  found  that  the  appellant  had  confidence  and
      assurance and was not  a  target  for  the  Taliban  in  Kabul.  These
      findings  are  not  without  reference  to  the  letter  but  are  not
      exclusively based upon the letter, as opposed to  country  information
      also taken into account by the Judge.


  14. Looking at the totality of the Judge's determination  I  am  satisfied
      that she  has  reached  sustainable  conclusions  which  are  properly
      supported with reasons.  I find that  she  has  not  reached  findings
      which were not reasonably open to her on the evidence before her.


Decision


  15.  I find that the making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did
      not involve the making of a material error on a point of  law  and  it
      follows that the Judge's decision stands and this appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  In  the
    absence of any application I find nothing to show such an order  to  be
    necessary.

Signed



J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated 20th June 2014
