
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 April 2017                      |On 5 May 2017                         |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [h B]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Capel (Counsel instructed by Hammersmith &
                    Fulham Community Law Centre)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  I shall refer to the parties as  "the
    appellant" and "the Secretary of State" who  is  the  respondent.   The
    appellant has been granted permission to argue  grounds  of  appeal  in
    respect of a Decision  and  Reasons  by  First  -tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Barker) ("FTT") promulgated on 20 July 2016 in which he  dismissed  the
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.



Background

2.   The appellant, whose date of birth is [ ] 1994, is a citizen  of  Iran.
     He is Muslim and he is Azeri by ethnicity.  The basis of his claim was
    that he had distributed anti-Government leaflets with friends for  fun.
    The police  were  called  but  he  managed  to  evade  capture  and  he
    subsequently left Iran.  He had no knowledge  of  the  content  of  the
    leaflets.  He has no political profile  and  has  no  particular  anti-
    Government stance.

First-tier Decision and Reasons

3.   In a full and well-reasoned Decision and Reasons  the  FTT  dealt  with
    the main aspect of the appellant's claim at [30 to 44].  The FTT  found
    that the appellant was not at real risk of  persecution  for  political
    opinion or imputed political opinion. The FTT found that his  claim  of
    distribution of leaflets was not credible.  It was accepted that he had
    given  a  consistent  account  [36]  but  for  reasons  which  are  not
    challenged, the FTT  found the appellant to be lacking  in  credibility
    as to the core of his claim.  None of those findings and/or conclusions
    are the subject of challenge in this error of law hearing.

4.   The FTT went on to consider  risk  on  return  with  reference  to  the
    country guidance  decision  of  SB  (Iran)  [2009]  UKAIT  00053.   The
    appellant  relied  on  an  expert  report  from  Dr  Kakhki.   The  FTT
    considered  risk  on  return  and  having  regard  to  the  appellant's
    ethnicity and military service.  It found that the expert report  which
    dealt with those issues did not displace the country  guidance  in  SB,
    albeit that the country guidance is now somewhat out of date.

5.   In dealing with those issues at [45] the FTT concluded that :-

         "The appellant left Iran at the age of 16 and is currently 21 years
         of age.  This puts him within the normal range for military service
         in Iran.  I accept that the appellant may  face  difficulties  from
         the authorities because of his absence during these years and  that
         these could add to problems on return to Iran."

Grounds of Appeal

6.   In grounds of appeal the  appellant  contended  that  the  FTT  made  a
    material error of law by failing to make a clear findings  of  fact  in
    terms of what was  meant  by  "could  face  punishment",  "problems  of
    return" or "may face difficulties from  the  authorities".   These  are
    significant issues relevant to the appellant's claim that  he  faces  a
    risk on return.  The FTT ought to have made clear findings  in  respect
    of those matters. It was unclear how the FTT dealt with  those  aspects
    of his claim.

7.   The second ground of appeal was that the FTT failed to place weight  on
    or have regard to the relevant country expert opinion relied on by  the
    appellant.

8.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman on 10 March 2017.  Judge Chapman stated:-



         "...

         2.   The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
             appeal  which  was  made  in  time,  assert  that  the   judge
             materially erred in law:

             (i)  in failing to reach a clear finding of fact as to whether
                  in  accepting  at  [45]  that  the  appellant  'may   face
                  difficulties from the authorities' due to his  failure  to
                  undertake military service to date because of his  absence
                  from Iran and that these would 'add to problems on return'
                  that this would or could amount to persecution; and

             (ii) in failing to have regard to relevant  evidence  viz  the
                  expert opinion of Mr Kakhki in five material  respects  as
                  to why he considered the appellant was  reasonably  likely
                  to be imprisoned and his Azeri  ethnicity  was  likely  to
                  exacerbate the risk of ill-treatment.

         3.   I find that there are arguable errors of law in  the  decision
             and reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Barker  for  the
             reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.

         4.   Permission to appeal is granted."

Rule 24 Response

9.   The Secretary of State in a response dated  24  March  2017  stated  as
    follows:-

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal on the basis that  paragraph  45  of  the  FtT
         judgment is vague and does not seem to engage with the argument  or
         evidence in respect of what would actually happen to the  appellant
         on return (although this is not a concession that there would be  a
         breach of the UK's protection responsibilities).  The Secretary  of
         State does not oppose the Upper Tribunal considering  the  question
         itself by way of a substantive hearing limited to that issue."

Error of law hearing

10.  The matter was listed before me for substantive hearing  on  the  issue
    of risk on return.  Miss Capel had not received a copy of the  Rule  24
    notice and was prepared to argue a full error of law  application.   Mr
    Armstrong in essence accepted that there were issues material  to  risk
    on return that needed to be given further focus and  acknowledged  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had been vague.

11.  Miss Capel submitted that there needed to be  clear  findings  of  fact
    made in order to assess risk on return and that the  appropriate  venue
    would be for the matter to be remitted for hearing  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on that specific issue.

Discussion and Decision

12.  At the end of the hearing I found material errors of law  in  that  the
    FTT failed to make proper findings of fact as to the  risks  on  return
    having concluded that the appellant "may  face  difficulties  from  the
    authorities" and that these would "add to his problems on  return"  and
    that it failed to place sufficient weight on the expert report.   These
    were material matters going to the issue of  risk  on  return  and   in
    respect of which the FTT ought to have made clear findings of fact  and
    given reasons together with an explanation for the statements  made  at
    paragraph [45] quoted above.  The FTT otherwise determined  the  appeal
    fully and  clearly  in  dismissing  the  appellant's  claim  linked  to
    political opinion.  However, insofar as risk on return is  affected  by
    military service, the appellant's Azeri ethnicity and illegal exit, the
    FTT failed to make proper findings of fact and to assess  the  risk  on
    return to Iran.

Notice of Decision

13.  I find a material error of law  and  the  determination  shall  be  set
    aside insofar as that part of  it  deals  with  risk  on  return.   The
    findings and conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal from [1  to
    42] are upheld and preserved.

14.  The matter is to be remitted for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross (excluding Judge Barker).

15.  The hearing shall focus only on the limited issue  of  risk  on  return
    including military service, ethnicity and illegal exit.

16.  The parties may refer to the country guidance case  SB  (Iran)  insofar
    as  it  deals  with  relevant  issues  relating  to  military  service,
    ethnicity and illegal exit.

17.  The matter is listed for hearing accordingly.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2.5.2017
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

