
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13498/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 November 2017                     |On 23 November 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    [s s]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nizani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1997.   He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent dated  26  November  2015
    refusing to grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard
    by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Cohen on 25 May 2017.   The  appeal
    was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 21 June 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and this was refused
    by the First-Tier Tribunal on 17 July 2017.  A further application  for
    permission to appeal was lodged with the Upper Tribunal and  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on  12  September  2017.   The
    permission states that the Judge may have erred in  his  assessment  of
    credibility in that  it  is  arguable  that  paragraph  36  contradicts
    paragraph 43.  Permission was  therefore  granted  on  all  credibility
    issues.  With regard to ground 2 (17) and (18), the  permission  states
    that it appears that the Judge may have meant "credibility" as  opposed
    to "plausibility" at paragraph 35. At paragraph  39  the  judge  states
    that there were  "significant  further  elements"  of  the  appellant's
    evidence that he found implausible, but he did not detail these in  his
    decision. The permission states that it is arguable that  he  may  have
    impermissibly taken "implausibility" into account and,  given  that  he
    referred to these as "significant further  elements",  it  is  arguable
    that any such error of law  is  material.   Permission  is  refused  re
    Ground 2 (13) and  (14)  but  is  granted  re  (15)  which  deals  with
    corroboration as at paragraph 33 of the decision the Judge states  that
    the appellant has not submitted any evidence to support  his  claim  of
    his uncles and father being actively involved in the Taliban and  there
    are no photographs, which are often produced in  similar  appeals.  The
    permission  states  that  this   indicates   an   erroneous   approach.
    Permission is refused re ground 3 (a procedural irregularity capable of
    making a material difference to the outcome  of  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings) and permission is granted  re  ground  4  when  the  Judge
    states that the manner in which the appellant gave evidence before  him
    is further damaging the credibility of this appeal as a whole.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file.   This  states  that  the  Judge's
    findings at paragraphs 36 and 43 do not  impact  on  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim as this was only one of several findings made by  the
    Judge.   The  response  states  that  the  Judge  does  use  the   term
    "plausibility" but may have meant "credibility".  It  states  that  the
    Judge has made adequate findings of fact at paragraph  25  onwards  and
    has given adequate reasons for the findings made.

The Hearing

 4. An additional ground was submitted on the morning of the hearing at the
    end of the skeleton argument lodged on behalf of  the  appellant.   The
    additional ground refers to the Judge's approach to risk on return with
    reference to family support and Westernisation.  I asked the Presenting
    Officer for his views on  this.   He  asked  that  the  ground  not  be
    included as he had  not  prepared  the  case  on  this  basis.   Having
    considered  the  decision  and  permission  I  decided  to  allow   the
    additional ground relating to Westernisation to be included.   I  broke
    the court and gave the Presenting Officer time to consider this.

 5.  There  were  no  other  preliminary  issues  and  Counsel   made   her
    submissions.  She submitted that (8) to (12) of the grounds  of  appeal
    state that the Judge did not give anxious scrutiny to the case and made
    contradictory findings at paragraphs 36 and 43 of the decision.   These
    deal with  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Treatment  of
    Claimants Etc Act 2004.  I  accepted  that  these  two  paragraphs  are
    contradictory.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 43 the Judge  found
    that Section 8 applied to this appellant and this was a factor when  he
    came to his conclusion and his assessment of credibility was  therefore
    affected.  Counsel submitted that the appellant was  a  minor  when  he
    came to the United Kingdom and that has to be taken into  account  when
    considering the fact that he passed through safe countries on  his  way
    here.  As this was not in the refusal letter Counsel submitted that the
    Judge was not entitled to raise this issue however, I find that is  not
    the case, this issue is relevant.  She submitted it was not  raised  at
    the hearing. This is an issue that  always  has  to  be  considered  in
    asylum cases.

 6. Counsel went on to the Judge's reference  to  the  appellant's  account
    being implausible.  At paragraph 35 he makes this  statement  and  then
    states that he finds there are significant discrepancies going  to  the
    core of the appellant's claim.   He  again  mentions  "implausible"  at
    paragraph 39.  He does not however set  out  "the  significant  further
    elements" of the appellant's evidence which he finds to be implausible.
     I was asked to consider (17) and (18) of the grounds dealing with this
    point and I was referred to the cases of Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1223
    and HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  She submitted that it is difficult
    for people living under totally different  circumstances  to  refer  to
    matters being implausible and she submitted that little  weight  should
    be placed on the Judge's findings at these paragraphs.

 7. Counsel then went on to deal with corroboration and paragraph 33 of the
    decision in which the Judge states that the  appellant  has  failed  to
    submit any reliable further evidence in support of  his  claim,  either
    about his uncles or his father or the appellant being involved with the
    Taliban.  She submitted that corroboration is not necessary  in  asylum
    claims and at paragraph 33 it was improper for the Judge to state  that
    photographs are often produced in similar appeals.  She submitted  that
    the UNHCR guidebook states that a person fleeing from persecution  will
    probably have arrived with the barest necessities and  very  frequently
    even without personal documents.

 8. Counsel then dealt with ground 4 which states:  "The  Judge  failed  to
    give reasons for concluding that the manner in which the appellant gave
    evidence was further damaging to the credibility of this  appeal  as  a
    whole". She submitted that  this  must  be  an  error  as  he  has  not
    explained what manner he is talking about.  I was referred to the  case
    of MK v SSHD (Pakistan) [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).   In  particular  I  was
    referred to paragraph 16 which states that a Judge has to  explain  why
    he reaches a finding.  She submitted that this statement by  the  Judge
    is unreasoned, unexplained and is not illustrated.

 9. She submitted that the appellant is a young person and this has  to  be
    taken into account by the Judge when making his decision.

10. She then went  on  to  the  additional  ground  of  Westernisation  and
    submitted that on return to Afghanistan the appellant will be perceived
    as Westernised.  I was referred to the skeleton  argument  produced  at
    the first hearing and she submitted that the Judge erred in the way  he
    approached risk on return.  At paragraph 23 of that  skeleton  argument
    the UNHCR eligibility guidelines record  that  AGE's  are  reported  to
    target individuals who are perceived to be  Westernised  due  to  their
    imputed support for the government and the international community, and
    she submitted  that  the  appellant  falls  into  this  category.   She
    submitted that on return it is  likely  that  this  appellant  will  be
    targeted.  He is in this risk category and could even be considered  to
    be a spy for a Western country.  She submitted that this appellant  has
    no access to traditional support mechanisms in Kabul and would have  no
    access to shelter and has no skills that would fit  the  Afghan  labour
    market.  She submitted that this was not  taken  into  account  by  the
    Judge at the first hearing and should have been and  should  have  been
    compared to the objective evidence.  I was then referred to the Refugee
    Support Network Report which states that men  arriving  in  Afghanistan
    from the United Kingdom with  family  support  may  have  that  support
    withdrawn if they are found to have brought shame on their family.  She
    submitted that this was argued before  the  Judge  at  the  First  Tier
    hearing and that the Judge's approach to the  Westernisation  situation
    is flawed.  In  paragraph  42  of  the  decision  he  states  that  the
    appellant said he did not have a beard but he actually did have a small
    beard and so the Judge rejected the appellant's claim that he would  be
    targeted on return.  She submitted that this is  not  determinative  to
    risk on return.

11. Counsel submitted that there are a number of errors of law which,  when
    taken together, amount to a material error of law.

12. The Presenting Officer made his submissions  relying  on  his  Rule  24
    response.  He submitted that at paragraph 43 when the Judge states that
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act applies  and  goes  against  the  appellant's
    credibility, this is an acceptable finding and the Judge  was  entitled
    to make that finding in his decision.

13. With regard to the Judge's reference to "implausibility"  he  submitted
    that the way the clauses are worded makes it clear that what  he  means
    in "credibility".  I was asked to read the whole of paragraph 35.   The
    Judge sets out  the  law,  sets  out  the  past  claim,  sets  out  the
    credibility findings and sets out risk on return in  his  decision.  He
    submitted that there is  no  material  error  of  law.  The  Judge  was
    entitled to make the findings he made at paragraph 35.

14. With regard to paragraph 33 and corroboration he submitted that  as  no
    specific cases were referred to by the Judge it is clear  that  he  was
    only making a general comment and this is not an error of law.

15. He submitted that the Judge's comment that he did not like  the  manner
    in which the appellant gave his evidence is not an error.  It is  clear
    from the decision that the Judge considered  the  appellant's  age  and
    looked at his situation as an individual and he  does  not  require  to
    give specific reasons.

16. With regard to Westernisation I was referred to  paragraph  42  of  the
    decision and the guidelines.  The Judge does not just refer to his lack
    of a beard, he states that on return the appellant will be in the  same
    position as millions of the population in Afghanistan and he  does  not
    have any distinguishing features or a profile.  He does not  find  that
    the country situation in Afghanistan  or  in  Kabul  as  sufficient  to
    enable the appellant's appeal to be allowed on human rights grounds  or
    grounds of humanitarian protection.  He  submitted  that  there  is  no
    merit in this additional ground.

17. The Presenting Officer submitted that if I find that there  are  errors
    of law they are not material and the decision should stand.

18. Counsel submitted that with regard to Section 8 the Judge was wrong  at
    paragraph 43 to  take  this  into  account  and  hold  it  against  the
    appellant.  He submitted that the Judge has not used  anxious  scrutiny
    and that plausibility is not the same as credibility  and  he  has  not
    explained a number of his findings.

19. Counsel submitted that with regard to corroboration the  Judge  is  not
    entitled to make a general reference to other cases and he has  a  duty
    to give reasons for all his findings.  She submitted that she disagrees
    with the Presenting Officer regarding the  Westernisation  point.   She
    submitted that the Judge has  not  properly  considered  the  objective
    evidence on this and that this appellant is an individual who has spent
    a long time while he was a child outside Afghanistan and his profile is
    not what matters, it is his situation on return and his genuine fear of
    the Taliban.  She submitted that not  only  will  he  be  found  to  be
    Westernised on return but he is an individual who fears the Taliban and
    the  UNHCR  eligibility  guidelines  make  reference  to   stigma   and
    discrimination against those who return to Afghanistan  after  spending
    time abroad.  The objective evidence makes  it  clear  that  there  are
    specific risks associated with growing up abroad and the Judge has  not
    taken these into account.

Decision and Reasons

20. Having carefully considered the grounds of appeal and the permission  I
    find that there are errors of law in the Judge's decision.  I now  have
    to decide if they are material errors of law.

21. Section 8 does apply to this appellant but he was very young and he was
    in the hands of an agent.  I do not believe that this should go against
    his credibility to any great extent. The judge was not wrong to mention
    it but it should only have affected his  credibility  assessment  in  a
    minor way.

22.  I   cannot   accept   the   Presenting   Officer's   submission   that
    "implausibility" should be changed to "credibility" in the decision  as
    it is mentioned more than once. This is an error.  "Plausibility" is  a
    different concept to "credibility".

23. With regard to corroboration, corroboration is not required  in  asylum
    claims.  I am sure the Judge was aware of this. I find it was an  error
    to refer to evidence which had been before him in other Afghani  asylum
    appeals although he did not name any of the cases.

24. With regard to the Westernisation point I find that this is  important.
    I allowed it to be dealt with at this hearing as it was referred to  in
    the previous skeleton argument so it was before the Judge  but  he  did
    not take it into account.  He refers to the appellant's profile and the
    fact that he does not have a beard but  he  has  not  referred  to  the
    relevant case law and objective evidence, which  makes  it  clear  that
    young men who have lived for most of their lives abroad, on  return  to
    Afghanistan are considered to be Westernised and may even be considered
    to be spies. This is a serious matter which the Judge should have given
    weight to.  On return the  appellant  is  likely  to  have  no  support
    network and the Refugee Support  Network's  After  Return  Report  2016
    emphasises the risks that former unaccompanied minors face if  returned
    to Afghanistan, and the fact that they are targeted due to their status
    as returnees.  I find that the Judge has not engaged with the  detailed
    objective evidence before him  about  this  and  so  has  not  properly
    considered risk on return.

25. I also find that the Judge made an error when he  stated  that  he  was
    unhappy with the manner in which the appellant gave  his  evidence  but
    goes no further, so we are left with no explanation of what it  was  he
    objected to.

26. I therefore find that there are a  number  of  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision and when these are taken together I find that there is
    a material error of law due to a lack  of  anxious  scrutiny  when  the
    Judge made his decision.  It is clear that he did not properly consider
    the objective evidence and the risk on  return  to  this  appellant  in
    Afghanistan.

Notice of Decision

27. I find that there are material errors of law in  the  Judge's  decision
    promulgated on 21 June 2017.

28. I direct that the First-Tier decision  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal
    remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing  by  a  Judge
    other than Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Cohen.

29. Anonymity has not been directed.







Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray



