
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13296/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 21 November 2016                  |
|Determination given orally at the    |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     IY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rachel Francis, Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant is a Palestinian born on 6 December 1991.   He  appeals
       with permission given in the Upper Tribunal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       McWilliam against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Traynor who in a determination promulgated on 20 June 2016  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal against the refusal of asylum.

    2. In brief, the appellant set out his claim as being that he had worked
       for the Palestine Liberation Army and effectively had  been  involved
       in spying for them against Hezbollah and Al Assir who is  the  leader
       of an extremist Islamic group.  The judge considered the evidence and
       found that the appellant was not credible.  He made, I consider,  two
       material errors of law in his decision.  Firstly, he ignored evidence
       given in a statement by NM who said that the appellant had worked for
       his former boss who is the head of  security  nicknamed  Silick.   NM
       gave details of the appellant's activities but that evidence was  not
       considered by the judge nor was evidence given in a statement by  the
       appellant's mother relating to  a visit by the  Lebanese  authorities
       to the family home.

    3. Secondly, and more importantly, the appellant's evidence  was  backed
       up by a expert report from Miss Sheri Laizer who is well-known as  an
       expert in Middle Eastern matters.  Her report is detailed and  it  is
       notable in that it deals specifically with the appellant's statements
       and indeed with allegations made in the letter of refusal.   However,
       the judge really did not deal with that report.  His  only  reference
       to it is at paragraph 72 of the determination.  He does not give  any
       reasons for rejecting what  is  set  out  in  the  report.   That,  I
       consider, is a further and indeed an important material error of  law
       in this case.  I therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
       Judge.

    4. This is a matter in which the evidence has to be considered in  great
       detail and further evidence  heard  from  the  appellant  and  it  is
       therefore appropriate that I remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for a hearing afresh on all issues.




  Directions

        1. The appeal is remitted to a hearing in the First-tier at  Taylor
           House to be heard    afresh on all issues.

        2. An Arabic interpreter is required.

        3. Time estimate:  three hours.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 1 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
