
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13424/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2016                    |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      kn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  However, I  have
    for the purposes of this appeal I refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal where Master KN was the Appellant.   The
    Appellant was born on 10 December 2001 and is 14 years old.   He  is  a
    national of Sri Lanka, having left Sri Lanka when he was 9  or  10  and
    travelling through various countries.  He claimed asylum in the UK on 7
    August 2013.  In a decision promulgated on 22 June 2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Mays  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds  and  under  Article  3.   The
    appeal was against the refusal of the Respondent dated 19 November 2015
    to grant the Appellant asylum and humanitarian protection and  also  to
    refuse the Appellant's claim  under  Articles  2  and  3  and  8.   The
    Respondent however granted the Appellant discretionary leave to  remain
    until 28 April 2018 on the basis that the Appellant is an unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor and there are inadequate reception arrangements in
    Sri Lanka.

 2. Mr Kotas relied on the Respondent's grounds for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  He  said  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    analysis of fact-finding by the judge.  It was submitted that the judge
    made an error in paragraphs  [71]  to  [73]  of  the  decision  in  her
    consideration of the appellant's best interests and her  conflation  of
    those best interests with risk on return to Sri Lanka and that this was
    a material error which could not be divorced  from  the  judge's  wider
    analysis of the Appellant's risk on return to Sri Lanka.  It  was  also
    argued that the judge had failed to apply the Court of Appeal  guidance
    in DS Afghanistan EWCA [2011] in that it was argued that the judge  had
    confused the grant of discretionary leave in the UK with an  acceptance
    by the UK authorities that the Appellant could not be returned  at  his
    age.

 3. Mr Bandegani accepted at the outset that the judge had made an error in
    her Article 8 consideration and submitted that  [71]  to  [73]  of  the
    decision should be disregarded as this  error  was  not  material.   In
    relation to DS Afghanistan Mr Bandegani submitted that  in  effect  the
    judge was simply making statements of fact; I referred Mr Kotas to  the
    Respondent's comment  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  the
    Appellant qualified for leave as an unaccompanied minor and that "there
    are inadequate reception arrangements in  their  own  country".   As  I
    indicated at the hearing I am satisfied that it was simply not the case
    that the judge confused this with  an  acceptance  that  the  Appellant
    could not be returned to Sri Lanka.  The judge made  her  own  findings
    including, at [73] that the Appellant had no family in  Sri  Lanka  who
    could offer him support.

 4. Mr Bandegani identified that the real complaint by  the  Respondent  in
    the grounds of appeal (although not  developed  by  Mr  Kotas)  was  in
    relation to the Upper Tribunal decision of ST Sri Lanka UKUT [2013] and
    the fact that  Judge  Mays  distinguished  the  appellant's  case.   Mr
    Bandegani referred me to paragraph 65 of ST  Sri  Lanka  where  it  was
    accepted that:

         "where a child or young person has a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         trafficked or exposed to sexual abuse, this is a  form  of  serious
         harm sufficient to  engage  international  protection  and  can  be
         evidence of fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason:  usually
         membership of a particular social group, vulnerable to such form of
         harm"

 5. It was not  disputed  that  the  above  is  a  proper  basis  on  which
    protection can be granted to a child/young person and I further  accept
    that the judge properly directed herself in relation to  ST  Sri  Lanka
    which I note was a reported decision and not a country guidance case.

 6. At paragraph 73 of ST Sri Lanka Mr Justice Blake commented in  relation
    to the country conditions in Sri Lanka.   Paragraph  73(a)  of  ST  Sri
    Lanka was not relied on by the Respondent in the grounds for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  However, unlike the Appellant in this
    case, ST not only had a grandmother in Sri Lanka but also had relatives
    in the UK with whom he was in contact and who were  in  a  position  to
    contribute to his material support and care in Sri Lanka.

 7. Mr Bandegani pointed to the fact that Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Mays, at page 16, had set out that the Appellant's paternal  uncle  had
    helped him escape but that he had not had any contact with  this  uncle
    since he left Sri Lanka and does not know  his  whereabouts  (paragraph
    [61] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal).  That finding was not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.

 8. Mr Bandegani submitted that the uncle in the  UK  did  not  attend  the
    hearing, there was no explanation for his non-attendance,  he  was  not
    before the Upper Tribunal and there was no evidence of any support that
    he provided the Appellant.  Therefore It was submitted that  in  effect
    this uncle could not be seen, in the way that the relatives in ST  were
    seen, to be "in a position to contribute to his  material  support  and
    care" on return to Sri Lanka.  At paragraph [55] the  judge  found  the
    Appellant's foster father Mr Raja to be a credible  witness.   Mr  Raja
    had given evidence that the Appellant had no contact  with  his  family
    and set out the limitations of the contact with his  UK  uncle  who  is
    essentially someone who is trying to find people  who  would  be  in  a
    position to assist the Appellant in Sri Lanka but had been unsuccessful
    in those attempts.  The judge noted at [71] that the  Appellant  spends
    regular time with this uncle.  However there is no error in the judge's
    finding that the Appellant's circumstances are substantially  different
    from that of the young person ST Sri Lanka who had two relatives in the
    UK with whom he had contact and who were in a position to contribute to
    his material support and care.

 9. Paragraph 73(c), at page 22, of ST Sri Lanka  indicated  the  situation
    for ST was completely different from that of this Appellant.  As  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Mays found at paragraph [74] of her decision
    the Appellant in this case was not assisted and protected  in  the  way
    that the Appellant in ST was when he became separated from his parents.
     There has been no challenge to Judge Mays' findings that the Appellant
    in this case, who was 9 at the time, was ill-treated including physical
    ill-treatment  in  detention.   The  judge  clearly  distinguished  the
    Appellant's circumstances from the facts of ST.  However ST  Sri  Lanka
    was not country guidance and therefore there was no error even  if  she
    had not.

10. Judge Mays properly directed herself, including  at  [75],  that  state
    protection does not have to be so effective as to eliminate the risk of
    harm on which the claim for refugee protection is founded but  went  on
    to find, taking into account the range of evidence that was before her,
    that this Appellant would not have sufficient protection,  in  relation
    to 'becoming liable to  be  trafficked,  sexually  abused  or  becoming
    destitute".

11. Although the Respondent, at paragraph 2 of the grounds of permission to
    the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the judge gave no lawful  reason  as
    to why this Appellant would be left homeless  in  Sri  Lanka,  that  is
    incorrect on the basis of the findings that the judge  made  (including
    at [62], [63], [73] and [74] about the Appellant's lack of family).  In
    addition, although the Secretary of State asserted that the Appellant's
    experiences in the camp in Sri Lanka were "not materially  relevant  to
    assistance available, in fact, one might logically say  that  he  would
    more likely to be assisted because of that experience" that  cannot  be
    right given that Judge Mays accepted that the Appellant was  previously
    subjected to ill treatment in the camp.  At [78]  the  judge  concluded
    that the Appellant would be at risk on return and I am  satisfied  that
    there is no error in this finding.

12. I am  not  satisfied  therefore  that  any  error  the  judge  made  in
    considering Article 8 matters is material, if that is indeed  what  she
    did.  As set out by Mr Justice Blake in ST  Sri  Lanka,  summarised  at
    head note, number 4, the best interests of the child  are  relevant  in
    Section 83 appeals only to the extent that they "illuminate  the  claim
    that  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee  or   entitled   to   humanitarian
    protection".  I am satisfied that that was what Judge Mays was doing in
    her consideration of  the  Appellant's  best  interests.   It  did  not
    detract from her very careful consideration, for which she gave  cogent
    reasons, as to why the Appellant in this  case  would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.

13. As I indicated at the hearing I am satisfied the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law and that  decision  shall
    stand.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable and therefore no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
