
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13068/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2017                        |On 8 June 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                      S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt of Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the Appellant, S, against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright promulgated on  15  February  2017  in
    which he  dismissed  her  appeal  for  protection  on  asylum  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds, and human rights grounds.


2.   Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant-Hutchison on  13  March  2017  but  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gill on 6 April 2017.  Judge Gill expressed the grant of
    permission as being 'reluctant', and confined the grant  of  permission
    to just one of three grounds that had been presented on the Appellant's
    behalf.  I shall turn in due course to the specific ground.


3.   The Appellant's identity, date of birth, and nationality have  been  in
    issue in this appeal.  The Appellant claims  to  originate  from  North
    Korea.  She says she does not know her true date of birth or  even  her
    full true name - in due course she adopted a single forename,  S.   She
    acknowledges that she has spent much of  her  life  in  Mongolia,  with
    visits to China, and she  has  stated  in  the  course  of  her  asylum
    interviews that her main languages  are  Mongolian  and  English.   The
    Secretary of State says that the Appellant is in fact SM, a citizen  of
    Mongolia with a date of birth of 26 October 1977.   It  was  indeed  in
    this identity that the Appellant obtained a visa in  December  2010  to
    enter the United Kingdom and in due course  entered  pursuant  to  that
    visa.


4.   In fact, the records show that the Appellant made  an  application  for
    entry clearance on 14 October 2010 via the British Embassy  in  Beijing
    for entry clearance to travel to the UK as a visitor accompanied by her
    mother, but that application was refused on 22 October 2010.  A  second
    application for entry clearance that year on 3 December  2010  resulted
    in the grant of a visa issued on 7 December  2010.   The  Secretary  of
    State has produced details of those  two  visa  applications  including
    photographs  and  fingerprint  details  which  are  a  match   to   the
    Appellant's bio data now  readily  available  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Indeed, the Appellant does not deny that she is associated  with  those
    two  applications  but,  as  I  have  indicated,  disputes  that  those
    applications were made in her true identity.


5.   In this context it is accepted by  the  Appellant  that  she  presented
    herself in the identity of SM when she arrived in the UK on  7  January
    2011.  Subsequently, when arrested in relation to an assault  in  April
    2011 she again gave her identity as being SM, and  again  it  was  this
    identity that she presented to the West London Magistrates' Court on 26
    April 2011  when  she  pleaded  guilty  to  a  charge  of  racially  or
    religiously aggravated harassment and battery in respect of  which  she
    was sentenced to a conditional discharge for twelve months and  ordered
    to pay compensation and costs.


6.   It has been said by the Secretary of State that the identity of SM  was
    also utilised in 2002.  An application was made at the British  Embassy
    in Ulaanbaatar on 8 March for entry clearance to travel to the UK as an
    employee, and indeed a visa was issued on 18 March 2002  to  that  end.
    The Appellant has consistently denied any association with this earlier
    application of 2002.


7.   The fact of  the  earlier  application  was  raised  both  in  the  NRM
    trafficking decision that was made in the Appellant's case on  28  July
    2014 - a 'conclusive grounds' decision rejecting  her  claim  to  be  a
    victim of trafficking on the standard of a balance of  probabilities  -
    and in the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 23 October  2015
    issued by the Secretary of State rejecting the claim  for  asylum.   It
    should be emphasised from the outset that this was not the  only  issue
    relied upon either in the trafficking decision  or  in  the  protection
    claim decision for refusing the Appellant's claims.


8.   Be that as it may, the matter having featured in the RFRL,  it  in  due
    course became the subject of a Direction by the First-tier Tribunal  in
    relation to preparation for the substantive hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  On 26 February 2016, ahead of a hearing then  set  down
    for 9 March 2016, the Appellant's representatives wrote to the Tribunal
    requesting an adjournment.   The  adjournment  was  sought  on  'mixed'
    grounds.  In part the  adjournment  application  raised  the  issue  in
    relation to the documentation with regard to the 2002  application  for
    entry clearance,  but  it  also  raised  other  issues  in  respect  of
    preparation of the appeal on the Appellant's side.


9.   Nonetheless, this culminated in a Direction issued by the  Tribunal  on
    26 February 2016 which, amongst other things, stated:

         "The Respondent shall use her best endeavours to file and serve the
         following additional evidence:

         1.   Copies of any fingerprint evidence linking the Appellant known
             as S to records of SM and


         2.   copies of any records of entry clearance applications made  by
             SM  together  with  any   supporting   evidence   particularly
             photographs and passports."


10.  As I say, there is on file extensive details  in  respect  of  the  two
    applications made in 2010 but in the event no documents were  filed  in
    respect of the 2002 application.


11.  The appeal was subsequently adjourned  again  at  the  request  of  the
    Appellant's  representatives.  However,  this  second  request  for  an
    adjournment was focused on the state of preparation of the  Appellant's
    case rather  than  making  further  allusion  to  the  absence  of  any
    materials in respect of the 2002 application.




12.  It is the 2002 application that has become the focus of  the  challenge
    before the Upper Tribunal. Indeed the brief summary of  the  history  I
    have given above emphasises the circumstances of the  2002  application
    and the circumstances in which it has become the focus of consideration
    at the present time.  Otherwise it seems to me it  is  unnecessary  for
    present purposes to set out herein any more particular  detail  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history or indeed the basis of her claim.  Such
    matters are summarised in some considerable detail in the documents  on
    file, most particularly in the cover sheet to the Respondent's  bundle,
    in the RFRL itself, and  indeed  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I do not propose to set out all  those  matters  again
    but will refer to the chronology as is incidental for the  purposes  of
    this Decision.


13.  As adverted to,  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  a  victim  of
    trafficking was rejected by a 'conclusive grounds' decision on 28  July
    2014, and then in due course on 23 October 2015 her  claim  for  asylum
    was also refused.  The Appellant appealed the protection aspect of  the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal by way of  Notice  of  Appeal  dated  6
    November 2015.  Necessarily much of what she relied upon in respect  of
    her claim to be a victim of trafficking also related to her  claim  for
    protection.


14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  In the Decision the Judge sets out the history and chronology
    in the opening paragraphs before going on to review the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim with, if  I  may  say  so,  meticulous  cross-
    reference to the relevant supporting documents.  The Judge also goes on
    to review and summarise the basis of the Secretary of State's  decision
    both in respect of protection  and  Article  8  grounds,  and  also  in
    respect of discretionary leave. The Judge then reviews the documents at
    paragraphs 19 and 20 of his decision before setting out from  paragraph
    21 to paragraph 31 details of the hearing including in  particular  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant.  In this context it is to be noted that
    there was only the one witness.  No supporting  witnesses  were  called
    and  necessarily  therefore  no  notes  of  evidence  in  relation   to
    supporting witnesses are set  out  in  the  Decision.  The  Judge  then
    directed himself as to the burden and standard of proof - in respect of
    which no criticism has been made before  me  -  before  going  on  from
    paragraph 36 to set out his findings and conclusions.  In this  context
    it is helpful to perhaps emphasise  at  this  stage  what  is  said  at
    paragraph 36: "I have had regard to the oral and  documentary  evidence
    and submissions and looked at all matters in the round  with  the  most
    anxious scrutiny."


15.  The Judge's particular evaluation of the  Appellant's  credibility  and
    reasons for rejecting it are set out at paragraph 39,  which  commences
    this way: "However, in the round, I find that I am not  satisfied  that
    the  Appellant's  account  is  a  consistent  and  credible  one,   the
    credibility of the Appellant being fatally undermined by, amongst other
    things, the following: ..."  There then follows fourteen  subparagraphs
    the fourteenth of which is further subdivided  into  subparagraphs  (a)
    through to (i).


16.  Having set out those matters the Judge then goes  on  to  consider  the
    supporting psychological report prepared on the Appellant's  behalf  by
    the Helen Bamber Foundation (in particular at paragraph  42),  and  two
    expert reports prepared in support of the Appellant's appeal (paragraph
    43).


17.  The Judge then reached his conclusions at paragraph 46 in these terms:

         "In light of the above, I conclude that the Appellant does not have
         a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Mongolia  (for  the
         avoidance of doubt there also being no suggestion by Ms Moffatt for
         the Appellant that failed asylum seekers per se  were  at  risk  on
         return there).  She does not therefore qualify  for  asylum  and  I
         also find that she  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
         (Articles 2, 3 and 4 ECHR falling with the asylum  claim,  applying
         the same standard of proof under the  Human  Rights  Convention  as
         under the Refugee Convention)."


    (Article 4 of  the  ECHR  prohibits  slavery  and  forced  labour,  and
    therefore the reference therein may be seen to be an expression of  the
    rejection by the Judge of the Appellant's claim to have been  a  victim
    of trafficking.)


18.  The Appellant raised three grounds of challenge to the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Grounds 2 and  3  both  related  to  the  Judge's
    approach to the expert evidence.  In this regard Judge Gill stated that
    those grounds were unarguable: "It is unarguable that  the  Judge  made
    his credibility assessment in isolation from the  expert  report";  and
    "The Judge unarguably gave adequate reasons in his  assessment  of  the
    expert's evidence".  I respectfully agree with the  analysis  of  Judge
    Gill in this regard.


19.  The ground upon which permission was granted is headed in  the  Grounds
    this  way:  "Failure  to  take  any,  or  any  proper  account  of  the
    Respondent's failure  to  evidence  her  assertions".   The  ground  is
    amplified at paragraphs 6-10 of the Grounds  of  Appeal  and  has  been
    further amplified in the course of submissions before me by Ms Moffatt.




20.  The Secretary of State has made a Rule 24 response dated 26 April  2017
    which submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made adequate findings
    of fact in respect of the Appellant's  credibility  and  in  particular
    reached  a  sustainable  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had   "clear
    propensity for deception as shown in her own account".  Mr Whitwell  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State relies upon the Rule 24  response  and
    has  additionally  amplified  that  and  made  some  response  to   the
    submissions of Ms Moffatt.


21.  Before addressing the substance of the ground of challenge I  make  the
    observation that, in my judgment, the Grounds do not constitute a  fair
    reflection of the level of weight accorded by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to the issue in relation  to  the  2002  visa  application.   The
    Grounds argue at paragraph 7 that:  "The  2002  visa  application  was,
    therefore, central to the Appellant's credibility".  In my judgment, it
    was not central either in the context of the decision of the  Secretary
    of State or in due course  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, as will be seen in the later analysis.


22.  In a similar way it seems to me stating at paragraph 10 of the  Grounds
    that the Judge had relied "heavily" on the 2002 visa  application,  was
    to mischaracterise the nature of the significance of  that  application
    to the overall decision of the Judge.  Indeed it  is  now  acknowledged
    that the paragraphs of the Judge's decision cited at  paragraph  10  of
    the Grounds - subparagraphs (iv) to (ix) of paragraph 39 - do  not  all
    relate to the 2002 application: it is only subparagraphs (vii), (viii),
    and (ix) that are potentially relevant.


23.  For completeness I should also add that there was  some  discussion  in
    respect of the use of the word "readily" at paragraph 9 of the  Grounds
    of Appeal in the context of  the  availability  to  the  Respondent  of
    details of the 2002 application.  In my judgment, that was  essentially
    a subjective term.  The degree to which such documents  were  available
    to the Respondent is not something that either party, it seems  to  me,
    is in a very good position to give any information at the present time.
    Be that as it may, ultimately I am not troubled or concerned by the use
    of that particular word in the overall context of this appeal.


24.  In the premises of the Grounds reliance has also  been  placed  on  the
    cases of Cvetkovs (visa - no file produced - directions) Latvia  [2011]
    UKUT 00212 (IAC) and R (SF) v The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWHC 2705 (Admin).


25.  The head note of the case of  Cvetkovs  at  paragraph  1  is  in  these
    terms:

         "Where a visit visa application is refused because the Visa Officer
         is not satisfied of the Appellant's intentions as a result of  only
         limited documents being produced and translated; and the Respondent
         breaches Procedure Rules by failing to send  documentation  to  the
         Tribunal, directions  can  be  given  indicating  that  unless  the
         Respondent complies with the Rules it may be that the Tribunal will
         assume that the appeal is unopposed."


    In my judgement the words "it may  be"  in  that  citation  are  to  be
    emphasised. Moreover it is to be noted that  it  was  absolutely  clear
    that there was nothing to suggest that the  Appellant's  appeal  herein
    was unopposed before the First-tier Tribunal.


26.  On its face, Cvetkovs does not appear  to  be  on  point.   The  matter
    becomes  yet  clearer  upon  further  consideration  of  Cvetkovs.   At
    paragraph 5 it is apparent that the Judge had been  presented  with  no
    Respondent's bundle in the file whatsoever, and at paragraph 6  it  was
    identified that this failure to produce the application  form  and  the
    material submitted with the application  was  in  breach  of  the  then
    applicable Rule 13 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005. Those circumstances are plainly and clearly very  different
    from the circumstances that pertain in the present case.  The Direction
    given by the Tribunal on 26 February 2016 was not an absolute direction
    but one to "use her best endeavours": it has not  been  contended,  and
    indeed  Ms  Moffatt  confirms  very  sensibly   that   it   was   never
    contemplated, that the absence of a response to the Directions was such
    that it could be suggested that the Appellant's case should succeed  on
    that basis alone.


27.  Indeed, when the matter was explored during the course of  the  hearing
    today Ms Moffatt - who had initially referred to the submission  before
    the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 15 of the Skeleton Argument to the
    effect that "no weight" on the Respondent's submissions on the passport
    should be attached by the Tribunal - acknowledged that Cvetkovs was not
    authority for the contention that no weight should be accorded  to  the
    facts and circumstances surrounding the  2002  application.  Indeed  Ms
    Moffatt very correctly acknowledged that she could not go so far as  to
    make that submission.  I return to  the  consequence  of  this  in  due
    course.


28.  The other case referred to in the Grounds of Appeal was SF, which is  a
    judicial review case in  the  context  of  trafficking.   The  case  is
    authority for the following proposition, as set out in the headnote:

         "When determining a challenge to a gateway decision as to whether a
         person, especially a child, was a victim  of  trafficking  for  the
         purposes of the Convention on Action Against Trafficking  in  Human
         Beings the court should adopt a more rigorous or searching level of
         scrutiny as opposed to the ordinary test  of  reasonableness,  both
         because the decision related to the fundamental  right  not  to  be
         held in slavery  or  servitude  guaranteed  by  Article  4  of  the
         Convention for the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
         Freedoms and because it arose in an area in which the court had the
         requisite knowledge."


29.   The  context  of  the  decision  in  SF  is  clearly  the  High  Court
    recognising the very particular circumstances of  its  jurisdiction  in
    respect of judicial review, and identifying that a  different  approach
    to the 'reasonableness' test - which must be taken to be a reference to
    Wednesbury (un)reasonableness - may be appropriate.  I  do  not  accept
    that this is an authority that makes any particular difference  to  the
    approach taken by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  is  essentially  a
    Tribunal of fact and not one evaluating error  of  law  on  public  law
    principles, and in any event is exercising, as the Judge in  this  case
    correctly identified, an anxious scrutiny in the context of  an  asylum
    claim.


30.  Further in this regard, I  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    expressly identified at paragraph 45 of his decision that the  standard
    of proof applicable in the protection appeal before him was a different
    standard of proof than that applied in the trafficking decision of July
    2014.


31.  Accordingly, I cannot find anything in  principle  that  suggests  that
    the level of scrutiny to be applied in an asylum claim (or appeal) that
    involves an element of trafficking, is materially  any  different  from
    the level of scrutiny that must be applied in all asylum claims.  I can
    find no error of principle in the  approach  taken  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in this regard.


32.  I return then to the acknowledgement made in the course of  submissions
    today that it could not be  maintained  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was, as a matter of law, duty-bound to accord no  weight  to  the
    facts and  circumstances  pertaining  to  the  2002  visa  application.
    Necessarily it follows from that that the Judge was entitled  -  if  he
    considered it appropriate - to accord some weight to that circumstance,
    and the question really then becomes a matter of what weight might have
    been attached to it.


32.  I have already identified that the Judge directed himself to  the  fact
    that he was undertaking an 'in the round' analysis, and set out over  a
    number of closely written paragraphs details as  to  why  he  concluded
    that the Appellant's account was not credible.  Those paragraphs do not
    all relate to the issue of identity, and even those paragraphs that  do
    relate to identity do not all relate  to  the  2002  application.   The
    first subparagraph at 39 relates to the delay, the  second  to  timing,
    the  third  to  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  reasons  of  delay;
    paragraphs (iv) to (ix) do indeed relate to identity  but,  as  I  have
    already stated (and as Ms Moffatt now acknowledges),  it  is  only  the
    latter three of those subparagraphs - (vii), (viii), and  (ix)  -  that
    relate to the 2002 application. Subparagraph (x) relates to elements of
    the Appellant's narrative account as to  her  circumstances  after  her
    entry into the UK and her claim to have been coerced into prostitution.
      Paragraphs  (xi)  and  (xii)  make  reference  to   the   Appellant's
    observations during the interviewing process and in  her  statement  to
    how she identified herself.  Paragraph (xiii) draws on the  absence  of
    supporting witnesses, and then paragraph (xiv) sets  out  in  detail  a
    significant  number  of  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  narrative
    account.


33.  It may readily be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  paragraphs  that  have
    become the focus of the challenge are few in comparison to the  overall
    analysis of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This  does  not  in  itself
    inevitably determinatively undermine the challenge: it  does,  however,
    undermine the claims made in the Grounds as to the central significance
    of the 2002 application to the Judge's reasoning.


34.  In my judgment, at paragraphs  39(vii)-(ix)  the  Judge  is  in  effect
    finding on his evaluation that he did not accept that  it  was  a  mere
    coincidence that an application had been made in the identity of SM  in
    2002, and was therefore rejecting the Appellant's  claim  not  to  have
    been in any way associated with that application.


35.  I remind myself that those paragraphs are not to be read in  isolation.
     The Judge is setting out an 'in the round' approach,  and  necessarily
    that means that each element of his analysis will both  inform  and  be
    informed by other elements of his analysis. These three, amongst  many,
    subparagraphs are not isolated but are part of an  overall  credibility
    evaluation  in  circumstances  where  the  Judge   has   identified   a
    substantial  number  of  reasons  for  not  believing  the  Appellant's
    account.  Those other reasons will inevitably  and  appropriately  have
    informed his evaluation of whether  he  believed  her  account  of  not
    having been associated with the 2002 application.


36.  In those circumstances I can identify no error of principle in the  way
    that the Judge has appropriately accorded the weight that he considered
    fit to the circumstances of the 2002 application as a factor in a wider
    overall consideration of credibility.


36.  It is to be  noted  in  this  regard  also  that  the  Judge  expressly
    identified  that  there  had  been  a  failure  to  produce  supporting
    documents. At 39(vi) the Judge concludes by stating: "For the avoidance
    of doubt, the absence of documentary  evidence  of  the  previous  visa
    application made in the name or identity of SM in 2002  is  regrettable
    but not determinative of the identity issue in this appeal I find."


37.  Accordingly, I detect no error  of  law  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision must stand.  Even if  the  matter  were  different  it
    seems to me that it would not have assisted the Appellant's case in the
    circumstances where there was such detailed rejection of other  aspects
    of her credibility.  If the passport or identity that had been used  in
    2010 had indeed been previously used by another  person  in  2002  this
    would suggest that the Appellant had then in 2010 used a false identity
    and therefore  was  not  SM.   However,  this  circumstance  would  not
    establish her true identity or nationality, and the burden of proof  in
    that regard would still rest  on  her.   Nor  would  this  circumstance
    establish her general credibility  or  go  to  establishing  any  other
    aspect of her narrative.


38.  Whilst on the one hand if authoritative  materials  had  been  produced
    establishing that she was not the person who had made an application in
    2002, the Appellant would have been able to say 'therefore I cannot  be
    SM as suggested by the Secretary of State', on the other hand she would
    have been stuck with the fact of the deceit of having adopted  a  false
    identity not only in the context of making the  application  for  entry
    clearance but repeatedly subsequently - and in this regard it is to  be
    noted that she entered the UK unaccompanied and  presented  herself  in
    the SM identity. She also would appear to have been unaccompanied  when
    she was arrested and presented herself in the SM  identity,  and  again
    presented herself in the SM identity of her own volition when appearing
    before the Magistrates' Court.  Accordingly it is difficult to see  why
    being  able  to  authoritatively  distance  herself   from   the   2002
    application and the 2010 identity would in any way have materially made
    her a more credible witness.


39.  In those circumstances, even if I am wrong in my  analysis  as  to  the
    Judge's appropriate approach,  as  I  find,  to  the  weighing  of  the
    evidence in respect of the 2002 application, in the overall context  of
    this case and in the overall context of the Judge's clear  and  closely
    reasoned findings in respect of other credibility issues, I would  have
    reached the conclusion that this decision should not be  set  aside  in
    any event because this aspect of the case would have made  no  material
    difference to what on the Judge's finding was an inevitable outcome.


40.  For all these reasons I reject the challenge brought by the  Appellant.




Notice of Decision

41.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contains  no  errors  of
law and stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 7 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

