
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13437/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 July 2017                            |On 30 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     W L
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McQuitty, instructed by Worthingtons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie promulgated on 19 January 2017.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China who entered the United  Kingdom  in
    Northern Ireland on 20 November 2014.  His case is that he is  at  risk
    on return to China because he was involved with the Christian Church in
    Shaoxing City in Zhejiang Province.  In May or June 2014  the  Minister
    of the Church, Father Guang and a Sister Yu  were  arrested  and  later
    sentenced to death.  He became afraid  as  a  result  of  his  previous
    activities with the church.

 3. Since he has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  has  been
    attending a Roman Catholic Church on a regular basis, attending weekday
    masses as well as attending mass on Sundays.  His fear is that he is at
    risk on return to China and would not be able to practice his  religion
    as a result of what had happened in the past  and  as  a  result  of  a
    recent crackdown  against  Christianity  both  in  its  registered  and
    unregistered forms in China.

 4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim to be Christian  or
    his claim to be undertaking military activity in China.  She considered
    that in any event there would  be  no  risk  to  him  on  carrying  out
    Christian beliefs in China on the basis of HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSE
    31 and QH (Christians - risk) China CG [2014] UKUT 0086.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the appellant as well as from his  foster
    carer. He also had before him a  letter  from  Father  Donnelly  of  St
    Michael's Parish Church, Enniskillen  and  a  letter  from  his  former
    social worker which relates to his attendance at church.

 6.  The  judge  rejected  the  core   of   the   appellant's   claim   and
    inconsistencies in [30] to [33].  The judge also found  [37]  that  the
    appellant may have some level of commitment  to  the  Christian  faith;
    that whilst there was some substance to his representatives,  and  that
    there had been a deterioration in the position of Christians  since  QH
    had been promulgated [45] he was not persuaded that the appellant would
    be at risk "essentially because his account is not to be  believed  for
    the reasons given".

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed:-

      i) properly to reach  findings  about  whether  the  applicant  was  a
         Christian and whether he would continue his practise on return;

     ii) to give proper weight to the evidence of  the  witnesses  who  gave
         testimony to the applicant's commitment to Christian faith; and,

    iii) to consider whether the practise of  his  religion  in  the  United
         Kingdom would have an impact when he returned to China.

 8.  On  14  February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell   granted
    permission observing that it was not possible to reconcile the  judge's
    observation at [37] that he may have some level of commitment with  the
    Christian faith with the  finding  that  his  account  was  not  to  be
    believed [45].  He noted "The parties cannot  tell  from  the  decision
    whether the appellant is likely to  practise  the  Christian  faith  in
    China, and, if so, what the risk to him might be."

 9. Having heard submissions from both parties I am satisfied that there is
    an inconsistency in the judge's findings.  He has failed to  take  into
    account properly the evidence of the social worker, the  foster  parent
    and Father Donnelly and say properly why he  rejected  the  applicant's
    claim to be a practising Christian.  There is no proper reasoning as to
    why he was prepared to  accept  that  the  applicant  might  have  some
    commitment to the faith yet to reject the entirety of the rest  of  the
    claim.

10. Further, the judge has failed to consider whether the  applicant  would
    continue his commitment to the Christian faith on return, if so and  in
    what manner, and whether this would be likely to come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities.  Whilst there appears to have  been  some
    consideration of apparent changes since QH was decided, no findings are
    made at [45]; all that the judge does is  to  say  that  the  applicant
    cannot be believed.  In the light of the observation that the  findings
    with respect to his Christianity are flawed, this cannot stand.

11. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

12. Given that, as both parties agreed, the error  relates  to  credibility
    findings and as to a significant area of the applicant's case, that  is
    his Christian faith, I am satisfied in all the  circumstances  of  this
    case it would be appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing  on  all  issues  and  that  none  of  the
    findings  of  fact  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   be
    preserved.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.    I  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   a   fresh
    determination on all issues.  For the avoidance of doubt, none  of  the
    findings of fact made by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Gillespie  are
    preserved.

3.   The appeal is to be heard by a fresh  constitution  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and not before First-tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie.


Signed                                  Date 18 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul









