

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13027/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 21 December 2016            |On 03 January 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   MR J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge P-J S White promulgated on 27 September 2016 ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 22 October 2015 refusing  his  protection  and  human
       rights claims.  The appeal against the Decision relates only to  the
       protection grounds.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  His  age  is  disputed.
       He claims to have been born on 1 January 2001.  The Respondent  says
       that his date of birth is 1 January 1996 for reasons  with  which  I
       deal below.  He claimed asylum on 1 April 2015 having arrived in the
       back of a lorry on 10 March 2015.  He had travelled via Hungary  and
       that too is an aspect with which I deal further below.


    3. The basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  his  elder  brother
       voluntarily joined the Taliban.  His brother was killed fighting for
       the Taliban.  He says that his  father  died  suddenly  some  months
       after his brother's death.  The Taliban then sought to  recruit  the
       Appellant to their ranks. His mother was unable to protect him  from
       their advances and therefore made arrangements for him to leave  the
       country with the assistance of an agent.


    4. The Appellant accepts that he travelled via Hungary and that he  was
       fingerprinted there.  The Respondent relies on information from  the
       Hungarian authorities who stated that the Appellant gave his date of
       birth as 1 January  1996.   The  Appellant  says  that  he  was  not
       interviewed by the authorities and  that  the  agent  spoke  on  his
       behalf (and on behalf of the others in the group with  whom  he  was
       travelling) and that it must have been the agent who gave the  wrong
       date of birth as well as a different identity.


    5. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant's  claim  was  internally
       consistent in relation to his brother's involvement with the Taliban
       and the claim of attempts at forced  recruitment.   She  also  noted
       though that the background evidence suggested that, in general,  the
       Taliban no longer used such methods to recruit.  In any  event,  she
       did not accept the credibility of the  Appellant's  account  due  to
       what was said to be a false account as to his  age  because  of  the
       inconsistency  between  the  information  given  to  the   Hungarian
       authorities and that given to the UK authorities.


    6. The Respondent accepted that the Taliban had made gains  in  control
       of the Appellant's home area.  She considered however that he  could
       relocate  to  Kabul  and  that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
       protection in that area.


    7. In relation to the Appellant's  age,  he  was  assessed  by  Enfield
       Social Services on arrival as being over eighteen.  That  assessment
       was challenged and withdrawn.  I was told by  Mr  Nicholson  that  a
       further assessment was carried out which also found the Appellant to
       be over eighteen.  That too had been challenged  and  withdrawn.   A
       further assessment was therefore still pending.


    8. One final factual aspect is raised by the Appellant  in  his  appeal
       against  the  Decision.   That  relates  to  the   timing   of   the
       promulgation of the Decision.  The hearing took  place  on  10  June
       2016.  The Decision was promulgated on 27 September 2016, over three
       months  later.   When  granting  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Parkes suggested that investigation needed to be made
       as to whether that delay stemmed from the submission of the Decision
       for promulgation or the promulgation following the submission of the
       Decision by the Judge.  The computer records show that the  Decision
       was received on 26 September 2016 and promulgated on the  same  day.
       What those records do not and cannot show is why there was  a  delay
       in the Decision being submitted.  I deal with that in the discussion
       below.


    9. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  23
       November 2016, mainly on the basis of  the  apparent  delay  in  the
       preparation of the Decision.  The permission grant was  not  however
       limited. The matter comes before me to decide whether  the  Decision
       contains a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision
       or remit the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

The grounds and submissions


   10. The Appellant appeals on four grounds.  Ground one  relates  to  the
       delay in promulgation of the Decision.  The Appellant relies in that
       regard on the case of SSHD v  RK  (Algeria)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  868,
       itself relying on the observations of  Potter  LJ  in  the  case  of
       Sambasivam v SSHD (2000)  Imm  AR  85.   Mr  Nicholson  accepted  in
       submissions that the Court of Appeal required there to  be  shown  a
       nexus between the delay and the  safety  of  the  Decision  (see  in
       particular [23] of RK (Algeria).)  He submitted however  that  where
       the Decision turned on credibility, there was no recitation  in  the
       Decision  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing  and   no
       substantial consideration of the documents and where  the  reasoning
       for rejecting credibility was  limited,  the  sufficient  nexus  was
       shown.


   11. Ground two concerns the Judge's approach to the Appellant's age.  In
       submissions, Mr Nicholson dealt with this ground  alongside  grounds
       three and four.  Ground three concerns the Judge's treatment of  the
       evidence  relating  to  what  occurred  in  Hungary.   Ground   four
       challenges the Judge's failure to make any findings on the  core  of
       the Appellant's claim.


   12. Dealing with the last point first, Mr Nicholson  pointed  out  that,
       although the Judge summarises the core of the claim at [10]  of  the
       Decision, there is no subsequent  finding  made  about  whether  the
       Appellant is to be believed as to what occurred  in  Afghanistan  or
       what impact that would  have  on  his  ability  to  return  save  by
       reliance on his credibility as to his age.  There is no  substantive
       consideration of the report of Dr Guistozzi which lends  support  to
       the Appellant's claim.   There  is  only  brief  reference  to  that
       report. The Judge at [29] of  the  Decision  finds  the  Appellant's
       credibility as to his age to be determinative of  the  core  of  his
       claim.  That in turn depends on what Mr Nicholson  submitted  was  a
       flawed approach to the assessment of the  Appellant's  age  and  the
       evidence emanating from the Hungarian authorities.


   13. In relation  to  the  evidence  of  what  occurred  in  Hungary,  Mr
       Nicholson drew my attention to the Eurodac Search Result (RB/E1  and
       E2).  He pointed out that, although the response of  23  April  2015
       referred to an application for asylum and an asylum interview having
       been carried out,  no  further  documents  were  produced  from  the
       Hungarian authorities.  The  caseworker's  name  is  given  on  that
       document.  However, the Respondent has not  made  enquiries  of  the
       Hungarian  authorities  for  further  documents   or   asked   those
       authorities to respond to the  Appellant's  case  that  he  was  not
       himself interviewed and that all information had  been  provided  by
       the agent.  Mr Nicholson also referred me to the case of Ibrahimi  v
       SSHD [2016] EWHC 2049 (Admin) and  the  failures  of  the  Hungarian
       authorities properly to deal with asylum claims.  He submitted  that
       what was said in that case undermined the Judge's finding  that  the
       Appellant's claim not to have been personally  interviewed  was  not
       plausible (although he accepted that the decision in Ibrahimi  post-
       dates the hearing before Judge White). He referred in particular  to
       what was said at [78] to [106] and [174] in Ibrahimi.


   14. In relation to the Judge's consideration of the Appellant's age,  Mr
       Nicholson referred me to  [26]  of  the  Decision  where  the  Judge
       referred  to  the  Appellant's  physical   appearance   and   mental
       demeanour.  He submitted that the Judge's assessment was  flawed  by
       reliance on those factors.  Mr Nicholson accepted that the Judge had
       little to go on when assessing age as reliance could not  be  placed
       on the Enfield age assessments.  He submitted though that, in  those
       circumstances, the reliance on what the Appellant is  said  to  have
       told the Hungarian authorities gained  more  significance  and,  for
       reasons already stated, he  submitted  that  reliance  on  that  was
       flawed.  He also pointed out that it was not  clear  why  the  Judge
       found that the Appellant was telling  the  truth  to  the  Hungarian
       authorities but lying to the UK authorities.  He pointed to what was
       said at [24] of the Decision which made little sense as a reason for
       that finding.


   15. Mr Tarlow submitted that the crucial point was the claim  which  the
       Appellant made in Hungary and what he told  the  authorities  there.
       He pointed to [22] to [24] of the Decision where the Judge  set  out
       the background to that claim and made findings which  were  open  to
       him on the evidence.  He accepted though that the  last  passage  of
       [24] of the Decision was difficult to interpret and that appeared to
       contain the foundation  for  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  was
       telling the truth to the Hungarian authorities but lying to  the  UK
       authorities about his age.


   16. Mr Tarlow submitted that it was not speculative  for  the  Judge  to
       expect that there would be a formal process for claiming  asylum  in
       Hungary and such  a  process  would  involve  an  interview  of  the
       individual concerned rather than an agent on his behalf.


   17. In relation to the core of the claim, Mr Tarlow submitted that there
       were  findings  albeit  brief.   He  pointed  to  the   paucity   of
       substantive information about the claim and said that the Judge  had
       done all he could on  the  evidence.  In  those  circumstances,  the
       findings made at [29] of the Decision were sufficient.


   18. Mr Tarlow also submitted that  a  delay  of  three  months  was  not
       sufficient reason for finding the Decision to be unsafe.


   19.  Following discussions, both parties agreed  that,  if  I  found  an
       error of law, it would be appropriate to remit the appeal as all  of
       the grounds turn,  in  essence,  on  insufficiency  of  findings  on
       credibility.


    Discussion and conclusions


   20. Dealing first with ground one, I made clear to Mr Nicholson  in  the
       course of his submissions that I would not find for reasons of delay
       alone that there is an error of law in the  Decision.   Quite  apart
       from there being no evidence of what occurred  between  the  hearing
       and the promulgation of the Decision, including  when  the  Decision
       was prepared or whether the Judge's notes were sufficient to  enable
       him to make findings even after a passage of some months, it is  not
       the case that a delay of three months is sufficient in and of itself
       to render a decision unsafe.  I refer in particular to what is  said
       by the Court of Appeal in RK (Algeria) at [23] as follows:-
           "Miss Chan's brief is in effect to submit  that,  of  itself,  a
           delay of about six months until  preparation  of  the  decision,
           with or without the gross further delay  thereafter,  represents
           such a lamentable failure on the part of  the  system  that  the
           only fair reaction of an  appellate  court  is  to  require  the
           exercise to be undertaken again.  When in the course of argument
           I suggested to her that, were her submission upheld, all  judges
           and tribunal chairmen should, in cases in which their  decisions
           were not fully prepared by the expiry of six months, cease  work
           on them, she, in a way  reasonably,  qualified  her  submission.
           For the length of delay which  would  trigger  the  need  for  a
           rehearing under her suggested principle would of  course  depend
           upon the complexity of the decision.  I  also  accept  that  the
           anxious scrutiny to be applied to immigration cases  might  make
           them more appropriate candidates for the sort of principle which
           she purports to enunciate.   But,  even  as  thus  qualified,  I
           cannot accept her principle.  For she has failed  to  show,  any
           nexus between the delay and the safety of the decision."
            [my emphasis]


   21. As a result, it is necessary to consider whether a sufficient  nexus
       has been shown.  I accept  that  this  is  a  case  which  turns  on
       credibility.  This is a factor which may tend towards  finding  that
       the delay is such as to render the Decision unsafe if the  Appellant
       could show that the Judge had failed to  consider  evidence  or  had
       misunderstood his case which might be explained by  the  passage  of
       time before the decision was written.  I also accept to some  degree
       Mr Nicholson's submission that the Decision in this  case  is  quite
       unusual for its lack of reference  in  a  separate  section  to  the
       evidence given at the hearing.   There  is,  I  accept,  a  lack  of
       reference to what was said by the Appellant in examination in  chief
       or under cross-examination.  There is however a brief  reference  at
       [15] to [17] of the  Decision  to  the  procedure  followed  at  the
       hearing.   Furthermore,  I  do  not  understand  the  Appellant   to
       criticise the summary of his claim at [10] of the Decision as  being
       an accurate reflection.  In essence,  the  other  three  grounds  of
       appeal turn on a challenge to the findings which are  made  and  the
       sufficiency of those findings.  I do not accept that  the  Appellant
       has shown a sufficient nexus between the time taken for the Decision
       to be promulgated (just over three months) and the  safety  of  that
       Decision.  This ground of appeal is not made out.


   22.  I turn then to consider the other grounds of appeal.   In  relation
       to the Judge's approach to the Appellant's  age,  I  note  that  the
       Judge had very little before  him  on  which  to  assess  age.   His
       finding that the Appellant is not the age he claims is based on  the
       following factors.  Firstly, the Appellant's own evidence of how  he
       knows  his  age.   Secondly,  the  evidence   from   the   Hungarian
       authorities that they were given a different date of birth  for  the
       Appellant.  Thirdly, the Judge's view of  the  Appellant's  physical
       appearance and demeanour.


   23. The  Judge  expressly  discounted  any  reliance  on  Enfield's  age
       assessment ([18] of the Decision).  He rejected the suggestion that,
       because Enfield was  treating  the  Appellant  as  a  child  pending
       reassessment, this meant that Enfield accepted that he was  a  child
       ([19]).  That finding was undoubtedly open to  the  Judge.   It  was
       similarly open to the Judge to find that  he  did  not  believe  the
       Appellant's own account of how he knew his age for reasons stated at
       [20] to [21] of the Decision (as also considered further at [25]).


   24. I do not accept that the Judge's approach to physical appearance and
       demeanour is flawed.  The Judge, when considering those factors says
       this:-
           "[27] I acknowledge that indications of this nature are very
           slight, and that physical appearance in particular may vary very
           widely, between persons of a given age, depending on both their
           heredity and their environment.  They are not safe indicators of
           age on their own, and must be treated with a good deal of
           caution.  In case such as the present, where I have almost
           nothing to go on, I do not think I can wholly ignore them."


       That approach shows a limited reliance on factors  which  cannot  be
       said to be irrelevant.   It  is  frequently  the  case  that  social
       workers will take into account physical appearance and demeanour  as
       part of a "Merton compliant" assessment.  Provided those factors are
       not treated as determinative or given a significant  weight,  it  is
       not an error of law for a Judge  to  take  them  into  account.   It
       cannot be suggested, based on the citation above, that the Judge has
       given those factors any  significant  weight.  The  Judge  has  also
       recognised the limitations in the evidence which those  factors  can
       provide.


   25. That leaves then the Judge's reliance on what the Appellant is  said
       to have told the Hungarian authorities about his age.  In  light  of
       the significance which the Judge attaches to this factor, I set  out
       in full the passage dealing with this:-
            "[22]      In saying that I bear in mind that  in  Hungary  the
           appellant was undoubtedly fingerprinted, and a name and age were
           given for him.  The name was Ahmad Nasir and the date  of  birth
           was 1st January 1996, which would have made him 18,  nearly  19,
           at the time.  The Eurodac report says that he claimed asylum  in
           Hungary, but then disappeared.  It also says that in his  asylum
           interview he said he had no family members in any Member State.
            [23] The appellant agrees that he was fingerprinted, but denies
           speaking to any Hungarian authorities.  He  said  in  his  first
           witness statement that he and about 150 others were  kept  in  a
           hall for about 15 days and then released,  that  the  agent  was
           with them and that the agent spoke to the authorities.   In  his
           asylum interview he gave a similar account, save  that  he  said
           that they were in prison.  He claimed to have told the agent his
           name  and  year  of  birth,  and  to  be  unaware  of,  and  not
           responsible for, what the agent said to the authorities.
            [24] I do not find this aspect of the  account  credible.   The
           Hungarian authorities have recorded him as claiming asylum,  and
           as having gone through at  least  a  preliminary  interview,  of
           which some details are given.  The appellant's account does  not
           cover the provision of information about other  family  members,
           noted in the Eurodac report, nor indeed the conduct of any  sort
           of formal interview, and I do not  believe  that  the  Hungarian
           authorities would simply have spoken to the agent in the absence
           of the person for whom he was  apparently  answering,  but  more
           importantly I do not accept that in recording an interview  with
           an asylum seeker, one of a large group arrested, the authorities
           would have allowed one of the group to have acted as interpreter
           for  the  others,  rather  than  engaging  their  own   official
           interpreter for the purpose.  The claiming of asylum,  certainly
           within the European Union, is a formal  and  important  process,
           governed by a number of minimum standards.  Moreover, I  do  not
           understand why the agent should give a false date of birth  -  a
           false name may be easier to understand - particularly  since  he
           had apparently gone to the trouble of asking the appellant  what
           his actual name and year of birth were, and since  the  date  of
           birth he chose to give was out by a full 5 years, and might,  as
           between a 13-year-old and an 18-year-old,  have  given  rise  to
           undesirable  suspicion.   I  find  that   the   only   realistic
           explanation  for  the  information  recorded  by  the  Hungarian
           authorities is that this was what the appellant told them,  when
           given a preliminary interview, no doubt with the  assistance  of
           an interpreter, after he was arrested and claimed asylum."


   26. As a result of what the Judge there finds, he relies on  the  "clear
       evidence that the Hungarian authorities were told in  November  2014
       that he was born in 1996 and  was  thus  an  adult".   If  the  only
       criticism which could be  made  of  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
       Appellant was personally interviewed was that this was not  open  to
       him based on Hungarian asylum procedures, I would find there  to  be
       no error of law.  The Judge was entitled to take into  account  that
       Hungary is bound by the European  directives  as  to  processing  of
       asylum claims.  The failures in the Hungarian system  noted  by  the
       High Court in Ibrahimi can have no bearing  in  circumstances  where
       that decision was not referred to before the Judge.  Nor can  I  see
       any other evidence in the bundle pointing to such deficiencies.


   27. However, I find an error of law in relation to the Judge's  approach
       to the evidence of  what  occurred  in  Hungary  for  the  following
       reasons.  The first  is,  as  Mr  Nicholson  points  out,  that  the
       evidence as to what happened in Hungary is extremely vague.   Whilst
       I do not go so far as to suggest that the  Respondent  is  bound  to
       obtain the asylum interview notes  from  the  Hungarian  authorities
       (who may not release  them),  a  request  could  be  made  of  those
       authorities to check whether, in this case  or  more  generally,  an
       initial interview (which appears to have been a screening interview)
       might be conducted via an agent being used as an interpreter  or  as
       the leader of a particular group.  At the very least,  the  evidence
       which the Respondent did provide as it stands could not be described
       as  "clear"  evidence,  particularly  when  balanced   against   the
       Appellant's account of what occurred.


   28.  Secondly,  there  is  the  problem  that,  even  if  the  Hungarian
       authorities were told that the Appellant was an adult at that  time,
       this might not be the truth and the  truth  might  be  the  evidence
       which the Appellant now gives that he is  a  child.   I  accept  the
       point that the Judge makes at [25] of  the  Decision,  that  if  the
       Appellant knew that he was  a  child  and  was  interviewed  by  the
       Hungarian authorities, there would be little reason for him  to  say
       that he was an adult when he was in fact a child, particularly since
       his age was a central factor in his claim.  What is  less  clear  is
       what the position is if the person who gave that information was the
       agent or if the agent told the Appellant to give that date of  birth
       or gave it as a translation whilst interpreting for  the  Appellant.
       That leads me on to one of the reasons given for not  accepting  the
       Appellant's account of the agent having provided the information  in
       the final two sentences of [24] of the Decision.  I am quite  unable
       to understand the reasoning there given.  What is there said is that
       the agent would have no reason for giving a different date of  birth
       as a difference of  five  years  might  give  rise  to  "undesirable
       suspicion".  If what is meant by that is that the agent may wish  to
       have avoided questioning about,  for  example,  trafficking,  if  he
       appeared to be in charge of a group of  minors,  that  would  surely
       provide a very good reason why the agent  might  wish  to  make  the
       Appellant appear older.  There is a further complication  about  the
       Judge's finding that the Appellant told  the  Hungarian  authorities
       the truth whilst lying to the UK authorities and that is the Judge's
       apparent finding that the Appellant does not actually know  how  old
       he is (see [28] of the Decision).  If the Appellant  does  not  know
       his age and the Judge does not accept that  he  knows  it  from  his
       mother as he claims, it is difficult to see why the Judge would then
       rely on what the Appellant told the Hungarian authorities  as  being
       the truth.


   29.  Finally, I come to ground four and the Judge's consideration of the
       core of the Appellant's claim.  Whilst I accept that the  Judge  was
       entitled to take into account when considering the  truthfulness  of
       what occurred in Afghanistan his findings as to the  credibility  of
       the Appellant's account of his age, the Judge was still required  to
       consider the claim on its face. As Mr Nicholson submitted, there are
       certain key aspects of the Appellant's case which go to the question
       whether he would be at risk on return  to  Afghanistan.   Those  are
       whether his brother did join the Taliban and was killed fighting for
       them, whether the Taliban did seek to forcibly recruit him and, to a
       lesser extent, whether his father is in fact dead and  is  therefore
       unable to protect  him.   The  Respondent  also  accepted  that  the
       Taliban were gaining control of the Appellant's home area.  On  that
       basis, the Judge was also bound to consider, even if  the  Appellant
       were not still a child, whether he could safely return to that area,
       whether he retains contact with family members  in  Afghanistan  and
       whether it would be unduly harsh to require him to return  to  Kabul
       if he would not be safe generally in his home area.


   30. I therefore find there to be an error of law on  grounds  three  and
       four.  Those in turn infect the findings in relation to  credibility
       concerning the Appellant's age and ground two is therefore also made
       out.  Since the appeal is based on the credibility findings,  it  is
       appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
       for rehearing before a different Judge.  No findings are  preserved.


   DECISION
   I am satisfied that the Decision contains material  errors  of  law.  The
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  P-J  S  White  promulgated  on  27
   September 2016 is set aside. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for re-hearing before a different Judge.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  3 January 2017


      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
