
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13552/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2016                 |On 10th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State, who was the Respondent in  the  initial  appeal
    before Judge Rowlands, is now the Appellant in this case but I think it
    is easier for the reader if I continue to refer to Mrs Sutharsan as the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  whose  appeal  that  she  be
    entitled to asylum was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands in
    a decision promulgated on 15th August 2016.   Put  briefly  the  judge
    found the Appellant to be a credible witness, namely that she had  been
    seriously ill-treated by the Sri Lankan authorities.  He referred to GJ
    and Others [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) and concluded that the  Appellant  did
    not fall into any of the risk categories there but nevertheless went on
    to allow the appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection  grounds
    and on human rights grounds.  Plainly the judge was wrong to allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds (see paragraph  339C  of  the
    Rules) where it states  that  a  person  may  be  granted  humanitarian
    protection but only if they are not already a refugee.

 3. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State took the obvious  point
    that if an Appellant did not come within the risk  factors  of  GJ  and
    Others the judge should not have allowed the appeal.

 4. A Rule  24  notice  was  lodged  submitting  that  the  judge  had  not
    materially erred as asserted.  The judge had found that  the  Appellant
    was at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka and it was  not  open
    to the Secretary of State to challenge that  because  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer effectively conceded the point at  the  appeal.  Any
    error that the judge did make did not affect the outcome of the appeal.



 5. Insofar as the judge may have erred  it  was  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant did not fall within the GJ categories because on the  judge's
    findings she had demonstrated that she was a person of interest to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities placing her at risk  within category  7  (a)  of
    the GJ risk categories.  The fact that she had been persecuted  in  the
    past was also indicative of future persecution.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. Before me Ms Isherwood relied on what was said in GJ and said that  the
    judge had made a material error by allowing the  appeal  "despite"  the
    risk categories in GJ.  Had the judge properly applied country guidance
    then the appeal would not have  succeeded.   Accordingly  the  decision
    should simply be set aside and reversed in favour of the  Secretary  of
    State, the appeal being dismissed.

 8. For the Appellant Ms Jones relied on the Rule 24 notice.  The  category
    which the Appellant fell into, and clearly did fall into, was  under  7
    (a) of GJ where it was said that individuals who were perceived to be a
    threat to the integrity of the Sri Lankan state did come into the  risk
    category.  This clearly applied to the Appellant.  The  civil  war  had
    ended in 2009 and the serious ill-treatment had occurred in  2012.   As
    such the judge's decision should stand.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusion

10. There does not appear to be any real dispute about the  facts  in  this
    case. The Appellant's account was that  she  was  very  seriously  ill-
    treated by the Sri Lankan authorities (including  being  raped),  being
    eventually released from custody  on  29th October  2012  and  shortly
    thereafter leaving Sri Lanka.

11. As noted in paragraph 20  of  the  judge's  decision  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer said that  she  had  difficulties  in  opposing  the
    appeal  "because  she  found  the  Appellant  to  be  credible".    The
    concession by the Home Office Presenting Officer went slightly further,
    in that in paragraph 24 it is said  by  the  judge  that  they  "indeed
    confirmed" that the Appellant's  evidence  was  truthful.   Given  that
    background the obvious and indeed only conclusion for the judge to draw
    was that the Appellant fell within  the  category  of  those  who  were
    "perceived" (my italics) to be a threat to the  integrity  of  the  Sri
    Lankan state as set out in GJ.

12. For whatever reason  the  judge  overlooked  what  is  said  at  GJ  in
    paragraph 7(a).  Accordingly he came,  by  rather  odd  means,  to  the
    correct conclusion that the Appellant  was  in  need  of  international
    protection on asylum and  human  rights  grounds.   There  is  thus  no
    material error of law and the essence of the decision must stand.

13. It is necessary to set aside a part of the decision,  namely  that  the
    appeal cannot be allowed on humanitarian protection grounds for reasons
    explained above.



Notice of Decision

14. There is no material error of law in the judge's  decision  which  must
    stand subject to the correction that  the  appeal  is  not  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

15. For the sake of clarity the appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

