
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13323/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 23rd January 2017                          |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               H K (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhani, Counsel instructed by AH Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity
I make an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  claimant  or  his  spouse,  whether
directly  or  indirectly.   This  order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties.  Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against her decision to refuse  him  international  protection,  either
    asylum or humanitarian protection, for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on human rights grounds  on  the  basis  of  his  status  as  a
    homosexual from Pakistan.

 2. The undisputed facts are that the claimant is indeed gay,  that  he  is
    married to his partner, Mr Shah, whom he married on 27th February 2015,
    and that this  is  durable  relationship  and  the  parties  both  live
    together.  However, the First-tier Judge fell into error by failing  to
    consider the last two questions at [35] in the opinion of  Lord  Rodger
    in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  UKSC
    31, with whom Lord Hope, Lord Walker, Lord Collins and Sir  John  Dyson
    SCJ agreed, that is to say, how the parties would behave on  return  to
    Pakistan and why, and then to follow the steps which are set out before
    completing the analysis of the risk on return.

 3. For that reason, this decision does contain an error of law and will be
    set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal with the findings  that
    the claimant is gay and is in a durable, married relationship with  his
    gay partner, also a Pakistani citizen, being expressly preserved.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction,  but  this
    is an asylum appeal and I consider that it is appropriate for the Upper
    Tribunal to direct anonymity.  I make an anonymity direction.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  set  aside  the  decision.   The
decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a  date
to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         7 February 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

