






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 8 November 2016                  |On: 6 December 2016                  |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K K
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss K Reid, counsel, instructed by Jacobs and Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is  to  remain
    in place unless and until this Tribunal or any other appropriate court,
    directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  member  of  his
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of Court.

 2. We shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 3. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou who allowed the  claimant's  appeal
    for asylum, in a decision promulgated on 24 August 2016.

 4. It was common ground that the claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, born
    on 10 June  1986.  His  application  for  asylum  was  refused  by  the
    secretary of state on 20 October 2015.  He claimed that  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka he would face mistreatment on account of  political  opinion,
    having actively assisted the LTTE. His claimed activities are  set  out
    in detail at paragraphs [3-5] of the decision.

 5. Judge Onoufriou heard evidence from the claimant's brother,  Thangaraaj
    Gopalakrishnan,  who  produced  his  French  passport   and   ID.   The
    registration number on his ID was the same as that set out in the  list
    of proscribed groups and wanted persons in Sri  Lanka.   This  evidence
    was  produced  in  the  claimant's  bundle  of  documents,  which  also
    confirmed that  he  was  living  in  France.  When  cross-examined,  Mr
    Thangaraaj was unable to produce evidence as  to  why  he  was  granted
    refugee status in France. He confirmed that he did not know  what   his
    brother's political activities were in Sri Lanka [19].

 6. Judge Onoufriou concluded that the claimant's alleged involvement  with
    the LTTE had been fabricated for the reasons set out at [43-44].   This
    included the timing of his asylum  claim,  made  when  his  immigration
    status in the UK had become precarious. He found at [46] that in  those
    circumstances, he did not fall within any of the categories of risk set
    out in headnote 7 of GJ and Others  (Post  Civil  War;  Returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319.

 7. He considered at [42] whether ".....the fact that he is the brother  of
    Thangaraaj who is on the wanted list, in itself puts him at risk".   He
    had regard to paragraph 2.2.2 of the 2014 COI, which  referred  to  the
    report of the Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales, that the
    focus of the investigations by the Sri Lankan  authorities  is  on  the
    identities of former cadres, their  roles  and  place  in  the  command
    structure, and hierarchy of the LTTE as well as their family connection
    (the Judge's emphasis).

 8. He recorded that the Home Office Presenting Officer 'conceded' that the
    claimant and Thangaraaj are indeed brothers.  He found  that  he  wound
    therefore clearly be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities  as  the
    brother of a very high profile LTTE member who is on  the  wanted  list
    and who is identified as a  member  of  the  diaspora  working  towards
    destabilising  the  Sri  Lankan  state.  The  wanted  list  refers   to
    Thangaraaj's  registration number on his French ID card  and  therefore
    he is clearly one and the same person [42].

 9. After taking into account GJ and Others and the  two  COI  reports,  he
    found that the claimant is likely to be at risk on return to Sri  Lanka
    on account of his connection with Thangaraaj [42-46].

10. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  found
    it to be arguable that the Judge did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal as he found that the claimant did not  come  within
    any of the risk categories identified in GJ and Others (Post Civil War;
    Returnees) Sri Lanka CG, supra. She also noted that that the  basis  of
    the concession recorded at [43] was arguably unclear.

    Submissions

11. Mr Avery contended that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  GJ  and  Others
    properly.  He erred in considering the claimant to be at risk purely on
    the basis of his claimed relationship with his  brother.  That  was  an
    unwarranted extension  of  the  risk  categories  set  out  in  GJ  and
    clarified by MP and Other v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829,  where  Lord
    Justice Underhill stated at [50] that the clear message  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's guidance in GJ is that a record of past LTTE  activism  does
    not as such constitute a risk factor for Tamils returning to Sri  Lanka
    because the government's concern is now with current or future  threats
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a unitary state.

12. However, Lord Justice Underhill also went on to state that he  did  not
    read paragraph 356(7)(a) of the  Tribunal's  determination  in  GJ  and
    Others as prescribing that diaspora activism is  the  only  basis  upon
    which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing such a  threat  and
    thus of being at risk on return. Even apart from  cases  falling  under
    heads (b)-(d) of paragraph 356(7) there  may,  though  untypically,  be
    other cases (of which MP may be an example) where  the  evidence  shows
    particular grounds for concluding that the government might regard  the
    applicant as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a
    single state, even in the absence of evidence that he or she  has  been
    involved in diaspora activism.

13. Mr Avery submitted that  the  suggestion  that  the  claimant  will  be
    perceived to be a threat on account of his association with his brother
    was inadequately reasoned and irrational, having regard to the  Judge's
    adverse credibility finding of   the  claimant's  claim  to  have  been
    involved the LTTE, and in view of the Sri Lankan authorities'  approach
    to sophisticated intelligence.

14. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Reid submitted  that  there  has  been  a
    reasoned finding regarding the risk that the  claimant  would  face  on
    account of his association with his brother.

15. She referred to the 2014 COI report which noted that the focus  of  the
    investigations by the authorities includes  the  identities  of  former
    cadres, their roles and place in the command structure,  and  hierarchy
    of the LTTE, as well as their family connections.

16. She accordingly submitted that there would be a risk having  regard  to
    the family connection. His brother is on the wanted  list  of  the  Sri
    Lankan government  for  being  involved  with  the  TCC,  a  proscribed
    organisation in Sri Lanka. His family connection therefore relates to a
    brother who has a high profile.

17. Ms. Reid also referred to paragraph 396 of GJ, where the  Tribunal  set
    out its conclusions regarding first appellant's appeal.   The  Tribunal
    stated that:

         "Given the  close  connections  the  appellant's  family  had  with
         Prabhakaran,  and  his  irregular  exit  from  Sri  Lanka,  we  are
         satisfied that he is  a  person  with  what  the  UNHCR  Guidelines
         describe as "more elaborate links with the  LTTE"  and  that  there
         remains a real risk that he would be of  interest  on  return.   In
         order to obtain a TTD he will  be  required  to  complete  a  form,
         provide full details of his previous addresses and  family  members
         in Sri Lanka, and attend an interview.   When  he  arrives  in  Sri
         Lanka the authorities will know everything they need to know  about
         him."

18. Ms Reid noted that in order to obtain a temporary travel  document  the
    claimant would be required to complete a form, provide full details  of
    his previous addresses and family members in Sri Lanka, and  attend  an
    interview. When he arrives in  Sri  Lanka  the  authorities  will  know
    everything they need to know about him.

19. Accordingly, the authorities will require him to attend  an  interview.
    They will be aware of his family members and that his brother is  on  a
    list.  He thus fell within the current categories of  persons  at  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in
    detention or otherwise.  This includes  individuals  who  are,  or  are
    perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state because they are, or are perceived to have, a significant role in
    relation to post conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
    renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka - (Ms Reid's emphasis).

    Assessment

20. The finding by the Judge that the claimant's brother, Thangaraaj is  on
    a wanted list, has not been disputed.

21. It was also conceded at [42]  that  the  claimant  and  Thangaraaj  are
    indeed brothers and therefore he clearly would be of  interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities as the brother  of  a  very  high  profile  LTTE
    member who is on the wanted list and who is identified as a  member  of
    the diaspora working towards destabilising the Sri Lankan state.

22. There has been no challenge to the concession recorded at [42] made  by
    the home office presenting officer to the Judge that  the  claimant  is
    related to Thangaraaj. In that respect we  have  had  regard  to  Judge
    Onoufriou's record of  proceedings  where  he  has  recorded  that  the
    presenting officer stated when  making  her  closing  submissions  that
    '....given the documents produced today it  is  difficult  to  maintain
    that they are no related'.

23. Nor is it disputed  that  the  wanted  list  refers  to  his  brother's
    registration number on his French ID card and that he is  one  and  the
    same person [42]. As already npoted he had regard to the report of  the
    Bar Human Rights Committee of England and Wales referred to at 2.2.2 of
    COI report (2014) including their family  connections.   He  also  took
    account of GJ Sri Lanka  [42],  which  included  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    findings at paragraph [396] of GJ.

24. In MP, supra, Lord Justice Underhill stated that even apart from  cases
    falling under heads (b)-(d) in  paragraph  356(7)  of  GJ,  there  may,
    though untypically, be other cases where the evidence shows  particular
    grounds for concluding that the government might regard  the  applicant
    as posing a current threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single
    state even in the absence of evidence that  he  has  been  involved  in
    diaspora activism.

25. In the circumstances we find that there was a proper  basis  for  Judge
    Onoufriou's conclusions that the  claimant  is  an  individual  who  is
    likely to be asked about family members being involved with  the  LTTE.
    He found that it was clear  from  the  documentary  evidence  that  his
    brother is on the wanted list for  being  involved  with  a  proscribed
    organisation in Sri Lanka, namely, the Tamil Co-ordinating Committee  -
    the TCC in France.  He had been a fund raiser for, and is still active,
    in the LTTE [30].

26. Having regard to the available evidence, we find that  Judge  Onoufriou
    has has properly directed himself and has made sustainable findings  of
    fact.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.

    Anonymity direction continued.





    Signed   Date 5 December 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

