
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13222/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th August 2017                          |On 26th October 2017          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     MHH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. G Hodgetts of Counsel, instructed by South West
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.   MHH  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.    This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. The appellant is a Somalian national.  He has claimed asylum in  the
       UK.  The date upon which  he  entered  the  UK  is  unclear.   In  a
       screening interview completed on 2nd September 2014, he  claimed  to
       have arrived in the UK on 20th August 2014, having left  Somalia  on
       7th August 2014.  In a subsequent interview completed on 6th October
       2015, the appellant claimed that he had arrived in the  UK  on  28th
       December 2013.  In any event, on 16th October 2015, the  appellant's
       claim for asylum was  refused  by  the  respondent.   The  appellant
       appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") and his appeal was heard
       on 8th September 2016 by FtT Judge Thomas. The appeal was  dismissed
       for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 23rd  September
       2016.  It is that decision that is the subject of the appeal  before
       me.


    3. It was common ground between the parties that  the  appellant  is  a
       Somalian national and that he is from the Ashraf minority clan.


    4. The appellant was represented at the hearing of  his  appeal  before
       the FtT.  The Judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his
       sister.  The appellant's claim is summarised at paragraphs  [20]  to
       [26] of the decision of the FtT.  The Judge notes at paragraph  [27]
       of her decision that the issue in the appeal is essentially  one  of
       credibility.  The Judge noted that the appellant  fears  persecution
       because he originates from a minority clan and/or he is at risk from
       recruitment by the Al-Shabaab.  The Judge states:


             "...There is an overlap in the refugee  Convention  claim  and
             the  humanitarian  protection  claim  in  that  the  Appellant
             asserts he is specifically targeted by the Al Shabaab for also
             being  of  a  minority  clan.  Therefore,  in  assessing   the
             Appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection  claim  I  have
             considered  both  of  these  at  this  part  of  my   decision
             together..."


    5.  The Judge did  not  find  the  appellant's  account  of  events  in
       relation to his exit from Somalia to be credible for the reasons set
       out at paragraphs [29]  to  [34].   At  paragraph  [35],  the  Judge
       states:


             "In summary I  do  not  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  in
             relation to either his attempted recruitment to the Al Shabaab
             or in relation to his asserted fear of them.  The  Appellant's
             version  of  events  is  flawed   with   inconsistencies   and
             contradictions."


    6. The Judge accepted, at paragraph [39], that the  appellant's  father
       and sister were killed  in  1991.   At  paragraph  [40],  the  Judge
       states:


             "Nevertheless despite the  claimed  past  persecution  of  the
             Appellant's family as a result of being from a minority  clan,
             an event which happened nearly 25 years ago, I do  not  accept
             that it is sufficiently indicative of the claimed  current  or
             future risk to the Appellant upon return to Somalia. There  is
             no factual evidence from the Appellant's  account  to  support
             this assertion. The Appellant returned to Somalia  from  Kenya
             in 2005. He states that  since  that  time  he  has  lived  in
             Bu'aale. Nowhere within his evidence does he suggest  that  he
             has at any time between 2005 until 2012  suffered  what  would
             amount to persecution for being a member of the  Ashraf  clan.
             My understanding is, is that the death of  his  sister  Shukri
             was because she was caught in cross fire not because  she  was
             from a minority clan."


    7. At paragraph [42], the Judge states;


             "I do not find the Appellant's  evidence  credible.    I  have
             found in general his evidence contradictory, inconsistent  and
             implausible. In summary I do  not  accept  the  truth  of  the
             Appellant's version of events  relating  to  his  reasons  for
             leaving  Somalia.  I  do  not  accept  his  claimed  fear   of
             persecution by the  Al  Shabaab  either  in  relation  to  his
             evasion from recruitment  or  his  claimed  fear  of  forcible
             recruitment. Further, I do not  accept  the  claimed  fear  of
             persecution on grounds of race/ethnicity. Albeit I accept that
             the background evidence which I have been directed  to  by  Mr
             Paxton ('UK Home Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance')
             supports that there is discrimination of members  of  minority
             clans the factual evidence in this case is not consistent with
             the Appellant having ever been subjected to what would  amount
             to persecution for the purposes of Regulation 5. On that basis
             I cannot identify any future risk to the Appellant upon return
             nevertheless I deal with this point more  substantively  later
             within this decision.".


    8. At paragraphs [46] to [61] of her decision, the  Judge  went  on  to
       address the  humanitarian  protection  and  Article  3  claims.   At
       paragraph [47], the Judge notes the submission made on behalf of the
       appellant that there is a serious and individual risk by  reason  of
       indiscriminate violence which meets the threshold to engage  Article
       15(c) of the Qualification Directive and  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.
       Having considered the evidence relied upon  by  the  appellant,  the
       Judge states at paragraphs [60] to [62]:


             "60. In summary, whilst I  accept  the  Appellant  has  mental
             health problems which according to  Dr  Briffa's  report  have
             been triggered as a result of 'lifelong  dramatic  events  and
             losses as a member of a minority clan persecuted  in  Somalia'
             and albeit this is a factor that I should  take  into  account
             when considering the return of the Appellant to Somalia, I  do
             not accept, relying upon KH ,that those problems either  alone
             or in  conjunction  with  any  other  factor  or  factors  are
             sufficient to engage Article  15(c)  or  as  asserted  in  KH,
             Article 3.


             61.  In summary  on  the  basis  that  I  do  not  accept  the
             Appellant's version of events as to why he left Bu'aale, I can
             identify no reason as to why he  cannot  therefore  return  to
             there in accordance with the guidance in AMM. No evidence  has
             been adduced  by  the  Appellant  to  suggest  that  there  is
             fighting in Bu'aale. Further there is no evidence  to  support
             his assertion that he was  at  any  time  persecuted  for  the
             purposes of Regulation  5  of  the  Qualification  Regulations
             whilst he lived there because of being a member of a  minority
             clan. The Appellant asserts that his mother was killed,  again
             I did not find this credible. The Appellant contends that they
             returned to  Bu'aale  having  lived  in  Kenya  yet  gives  no
             explanation as to why they chose to live in  Bu'aale.  It  can
             only be inferred it was because they  had  support  there  and
             that was  an  area  in  which  their  clan  was  settled.  The
             Appellant  in?his  substantive  asylum   interview   portrayed
             himself as a well-known person   within Bu'aale.  I  therefore
             do not accept that he would have no connections if returned to
             Bu'aale.


             62.  In conclusion  having  considered  all  the  evidence  in
             relation to the risk of indiscriminate violence upon return to
             Somalia I find that neither Article 15(c) nor Article 3 of the
             ECHR is engaged.


    9. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal.  First, the Judge of
       the FtT failed to reach a decision on a material matter.  It is said
       that the appellant's claim  was  based  on  four  separate  grounds.
       Whilst three of these have been considered by  the  FtT  Judge,  the
       Judge gave no consideration to the appellant's claim that  he  would
       be at risk of Article 3 harm by virtue of destitution upon return to
       Somalia.  Second, even if the Judge's conclusions  relating  to  the
       Article 15(c) claim apply to the Article 3 claim, the  Judge  failed
       to give sufficient reasons for her  decision.   Finally,  the  Judge
       failed to apply the country guidance decision of MOJ -v- SSHD [2014]
       UKUT 00442 (IAC) when determining whether the appellant  would  upon
       return, face living conditions so poor as to engage Article 3.


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on
       15th December 2016. The matter comes before me to  consider  whether
       or not the decision of the FtT involved the  making  of  a  material
       error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


   11. Before me, Mr Hodgetts submits that the issue  in  this  appeal  was
       whether the appellant can return to  Mogadishu  as  a  member  of  a
       minority clan. He submits that the Judge of the FtT failed  to  have
       any proper regard to the guidance set out in MOJ  -v-  SSHD  and  in
       particular, whether the appellant would end up in an IDP  camp,  and
       If so, how he would fare in the IDP camp.  Mr Hodgetts submits  that
       applying the guidance in MOJ, it is clear that the  appellant  would
       have to stay in an IDP camp and the evidence  demonstrates  that  he
       would suffer discrimination.  Mr Hodgetts submits that the Judge was
       wrong to state at paragraph [27] of  her  decision  that  "the  sole
       issue in this case is credibility".  He submits that in addition  to
       the issue of  credibility,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
       consider the guidance set out in MOJ in deciding whether  the  claim
       is capable of succeeding  on  Article  3  grounds.   Furthermore  in
       concluding at paragraph [61] of her decision that the appellant  can
       return to Bu'aale, the Judge did  not  consider  how  the  appellant
       could get from Mogadishu to Bu'aale.


   12. Mr Hodgetts submits that the Court of Appeal in SSHD -v- Said [2016]
       EWCA Civ  442  was  concerned  with  an  appellant  who  was  wholly
       disbelieved and the Court of Appeal did not consider evidence  about
       minority clan members. The Court of Appeal did not  consider  how  a
       minority clan member would be treated in an  IDP  camp.  He  submits
       that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Said does not  undermine
       the guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal in  MOJ,  and  that  the
       impact upon return to someone who is vulnerable because they  are  a
       member of  a  minority  group,  must  still  be  considered  by  the
       Tribunal.


   13. Mr Richards submits that  the  appellant  now  seeks  to  widen  the
       grounds of appeal to encompass issues such as the  arrangements  for
       the appellant's travel between Mogadishu and  Bu'aale.   He  submits
       that the submissions of  Mr  Hodgetts  stray  beyond  the  grant  of
       permission that was limited to the Judge's arguable failure to  deal
       with the Article 3 claim advanced  by  the  appellant.  Mr  Richards
       submits that it was open to the judge to  find  that  the  appellant
       could return to Bu'aale and  that  it  did  not  form  part  of  the
       appellants case  that  he  would  face  difficulties  on  return  to
       Mogadishu, before returning to Bu'aale.


   14. Mr Richards submits that in any event,  any  error  in  the  Judge's
       approach to the Article 3 claim is immaterial in light  of  what  is
       said by the Court of Appeal at paragraph [31] in SSHD -v- Said.   He
       submits that there is no material error of law capable of  affecting
       the outcome of the appeal.


 DISCUSSION


   15. At paragraphs [13] to [15] of the appellant's skeleton argument that
       was  before  the  FtT  Judge,  the  appellant  submitted  that   the
       circumstances of the appellant upon return to Somalia  would  be  so
       poor so as to engage Article 3 ECHR.  The  appellant  pointed  to  a
       number of factors including his absence from Mogadishu for around 21
       years, the fact that the appellant is from a minority clan  and  the
       widespread discrimination against members of a  minority  clan,  and
       his claim that he would not have any family in Somalia to assist him
       financially.  The appellant also submitted that he does not have any
       family members who are in a position to assist financially, and that
       his journey to the west was funded by a third party, with  whom  the
       appellant has had no further contact.  It was submitted that if  the
       appellant were returned to Somalia, he would face destitution and be
       forced to live in an IDP camp. Applying the approach in MOJ, it  was
       submitted that the  appellant's  Article  3  ECHR  rights  would  be
       breached.


   16. It is now well established that  it  is  generally  unnecessary  and
       unhelpful for FtT decisions to rehearse every detail or issue raised
       in a case but it is necessary for Judges to identify and resolve key
       conflicts in the evidence, and explain  in  clear  and  brief  terms
       their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they have  won
       or lost.


   17. In MOJ the Tribunal concluded that an ordinary civilian  would  face
       no real risk of persecution on return and that any ordinary  citizen
       of Mogadishu would be able to reduce personal exposure to risk.   At
       (i) of the headnote, the Tribunal states:


               (i)  The  country  guidance   issues   addressed   in   this
             determination are not identical to those engaged with  by  the
             Tribunal in AMM and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
             returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445  (IAC).  Therefore,
             where country guidance has been given by the Tribunal  in  AMM
             in respect of issues not addressed in this determination  then
             the guidance provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.


   18. The scope of the country guidance in MOJ is identified in  paragraph
       [1] of the decision in the following way:


             "... the Upper Tribunal addresses  the  current  situation  in
             Mogadishu in order to determine the individual appeals and  to
             give guidance limited to the following issues:


                       Whether the current situation in Mogadishu is such as
                  to  entitle  nationals  of  Somalia  whose  home  area  is
                  Mogadishu  or  whose  proposed  area  of   relocation   is
                  Mogadishu to succeed in their claims for  refugee  status,
                  humanitarian protection  status  under  Article  15(c)  or
                  protection against refoulment under Articles 3 or 2 of the
                  ECHR solely on the basis that they are  civilians  and  do
                  not have powerful actors in  a  position  to  afford  them
                  adequate protection.


   19. Importantly  in  my  judgement,  in  MOJ,  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
       concerned with  whether the current situation in Mogadishu  is  such
       as to entitle nationals of Somalia whose home area is  Mogadishu  or
       whose proposed area of relocation is Mogadishu, to succeed in  their
       claims.  The Tribunal made it clear that the country guidance issues
       addressed in that determination are not identical to  those  engaged
       with by the Tribunal  in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
       crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC). Therefore,
       where country guidance has been given by  the  Tribunal  in  AMM  in
       respect of issues  not  addressed  in  the  MOJ  determination,  the
       guidance provided by AMM shall continue to have effect.


   20. In AMM, the Tribunal provided the following guidance in  respect  of
       those from Southern and central Somalia, outside Mogadishu:


         "597.    Outside  Mogadishu,   the  fighting   in   southern   and
             central Somalia is both sporadic and localised and is not such
             as to place every civilian in that part of the country at real
             risk of Article 15(c) harm. In individual cases,  it  will  be
             necessary to establish where a person comes from and what  the
             background information says is the present  position  in  that
             place. If fighting is going on, that will  have  to  be  taken
             into account in deciding whether Article 15(c) is  applicable.
             There is, likewise, no generalised current risk of  Article  3
             harm as a result of armed conflict.


         598. In general, a returnee with no recent experience of living in
             Somalia will be at real risk of being subjected  to  treatment
             proscribed by Article 3 in an Al-Shabab controlled  area.  "No
             recent  experience"  means  that  the  person  concerned  left
             Somalia before the rise of Al-Shabab in 2008. Even if a person
             has  such  experience,  however,  he  or  she  will  still  be
             returning from the United Kingdom, with all that is likely  to
             entail, so far as Al-Shabab perceptions are concerned, but  he
             or she will be less likely to be  readily  identifiable  as  a
             returnee. Even if he or she were  to  be  so  identified,  the
             evidence may point to the person having struck up some form of
             accommodation with Al-Shabab, whilst living under their  rule.
             On the other hand, although having  family  in  the  Al-Shabab
             area of return may alleviate the risk, the rotating nature  of
             Al-Shabab leadership and the fact that punishments  are  meted
             out in apparent disregard of local sensibilities mean that, in
             general, it cannot be said that  the  presence  of  family  is
             likely to mean the risk ceases to be a real one.


   21. In SSHD -v- Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442, the Court of Appeal considered
       whether  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  right  to  conclude   that   the
       deportation  of  Mr  Said,  to  Somalia  would  violate  his  rights
       guaranteed by Article 3.  All of Mr Said's family live  in  the  UK.
       His appeal against deportation was dismissed by the FtT.  On appeal,
       the Upper Tribunal Judge concluded that the FtT had made an error of
       law in connection with its conclusion on Article 3.   Following  the
       decision in MOJ, the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  Mr  Said's
       deportation would violate Article 3 because he would be at  risk  of
       finding himself destitute, and thus likely to end up in an IDP camp,
       where the conditions would  be  very  poor.   The  Court  of  Appeal
       considered the law relating to the reach of Article 3 in  preventing
       removal of foreign nationals from  the  UK  and  concluded  that  Mr
       Said's circumstances fell far short of being  able  to  satisfy  the
       Article  3  threshold.  As  to  the  country  guidance  in  MOJ,  at
       paragraphs [28] and [31] of his judgment Lord Justice Burnett  (with
       whom Lady Justice Sharp and Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  agreed)
       stated


             "28 In view of the  reference  in  the  paragraph  immediately
             preceding para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras
             407(h)  and  408  are  likely  to  have  been  introduced   in
             connection  with  internal  flight  or   internal   relocation
             arguments, which was a factor identified in para 1 setting out
             the scope of the issues before UTIAC.  Whilst  they  may  have
             some relevance in a search for whether a  removal  to  Somalia
             would give rise to a violation of article 3 of the Convention,
             they cannot be understood as a surrogate for an examination of
             the circumstances to determine whether  such  a  breach  would
             occur. I am unable to accept that if a  Somali  national  were
             able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he  would
             have established that his  removal  to  Somalia  would  breach
             article 3  of  the  Convention.  Such  an  approach  would  be
             inconsistent with the domestic  and  Convention  jurisprudence
             which at para 34  UTIAC  expressly  understood  itself  to  be
             following.


             ...


             31.  I entirely accept that some of the observations  made  in
             the course of the discussion of IDP  camps  may  be  taken  to
             suggest that if a returning Somali national can show  that  he
             is likely to end up having to  establish  himself  in  an  IDP
             camp, that would be sufficient to  engage  the  protection  of
             article 3. Yet such a stark proposition of  cause  and  effect
             would be inconsistent with the article 3 jurisprudence of  the
             Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic courts.
             In my judgment the position is accurately stated in para  422.
             That  draws  a   proper   distinction   between   humanitarian
             protection and article 3 and recognises  that  the  individual
             circumstances of the person concerned must be  considered.  An
             appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
             would face impoverished conditions of  living  on  removal  to
             Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and
             Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N
             case. Impoverished conditions which were the direct result  of
             violent activities may be viewed differently  as  would  cases
             where the risk suggested is of direct violence itself.


   22. Plainly, each case is fact specific and the various  and  particular
       circumstances of the appellant need to be taken into account.  Here,
       the Judge notes at paragraph [21] of her decision that the appellant
       was born in Mogadishu.  In 1995, the  appellant  and  his  remaining
       family fled from Somalia to Kenya.  In 2005, the appellant  and  his
       family were deported from Kenya back  to  Somalia.   They  lived  in
       Bu'aale "which the appellant  describes  as  a  small  town  in  the
       countryside some distance from Kismayo". The appellant's account was
       that he fled Bu'aale in March 2012.  On the appellant's own account,
       he had lived in Bu'aale during the seven years between 2005 and 2012
       with his mother.  The Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  version  of
       events in relation to  his  exit  from  Somalia.    The  Judge  also
       rejected the appellant's account that following his  departure  from
       Bu'aale, his mother was killed by Al Shabaab.


   23. The Judge proceeds upon the basis that the appellant's  home  is  in
       Bu'aale. Although the appellant was born in Mogadishu, that does not
       mean that that area falls to be treated as the 'home area'  for  the
       purposes of determining entitlement to international protection.  At
       paragraph [61] of her decision, the Judge states:


         "In summary on the basis that I  do  not  accept  the  Appellant's
             version of events as to why he left Bu'aale, I can identify no
             reason as to why  he  cannot  therefore  return  to  there  in
             accordance with the guidance in  AMM.  No  evidence  has  been
             adduced by the Appellant to suggest that there is fighting  in
             Bu'aale. Further there is no evidence to support his assertion
             that he was  at  any  time  persecuted  for  the  purposes  of
             Regulation 5 of the Qualification Regulations whilst he  lived
             there because of being  a  member  of  a  minority  clan.  The
             Appellant asserts that his mother was killed, again I did  not
             find this credible. The Appellant contends that they  returned
             to Bu'aale having lived in Kenya yet gives no  explanation  as
             to why they chose to live in Bu'aale. It can only be  inferred
             it was because they had support there and that was an area  in
             which their clan was settled. The Appellant in?his substantive
             asylum interview portrayed  himself  as  a  well-known  person
             within Bu'aale. I therefore do not accept that he  would  have
             no connections if returned to Bu'aale."


   24. In MOJ, the Upper Tribunal was concerned with the situation of those
       whose home area is Mogadishu, or whose proposed area  of  relocation
       is Mogadishu. Here, the Judge of the  FtT  was  not  concerned  with
       return or internal relocation to Mogadishu.  The Judge was concerned
       with whether there would be a breach of Article 3 if  the  appellant
       returns to Bu'aale.  In my judgement, it was open to  the  Judge  to
       find, as she did at paragraph [61], that there is no  reason  as  to
       why the appellant cannot return to Bu'aale in  accordance  with  the
       guidance in AMM. The Tribunal confirmed in  AMM  that  there  is  no
       generalised current risk of Article 3 harm  as  a  result  of  armed
       conflict.  On the facts as found, the FtT Judge noted that there  is
       no evidence to suggest that there is fighting in Bu'aale or that the
       appellant was targeted whilst he had lived there because  he  was  a
       member of a minority clan.  At paragraph [75] of her  decision,  the
       FtT Judge also states as follows:


             "I do not accept that the Appellant would be  without  support
             on return to Bu'aale. I do not  find  the  Appellant  credible
             about what would be his lack of support if returned and I make
             this finding  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  I  have  made
             concerning the Appellant's  credibility  in  relation  to  the
             other issues. Further, I do not accept that the  Appellant  is
             in the dire financial circumstances  which  he  suggests.  The
             Appellant has repeatedly referred to the uncle which  assisted
             him in financing his exit from Nairobi to Norway and then from
             Norway to the UK. This uncle he asserts he has had no  contact
             with  since  2013.  Nevertheless,  on  the  2  occasions   the
             Appellant needed money he was able to contact  him  to  obtain
             financial assistance sufficient to instruct an  agent  and  to
             arrange entry to both Norway and the UK by plane. Further  the
             Appellant  when  he  arrived  in  the  UK  had  the  financial
             resources to remain in the UK for 8 months  without  financial
             support from his sister."


   25. I accept the submission of  Mr  Hodgetts  that  the  Judge  did  not
       consider how the appellant could get from Mogadishu to Bu'aale.   In
       AMM the Tribunal states, at paragraph [605],  that  travel  by  land
       across southern and central Somalia to a home area or proposed place
       of relocation is an issue that falls to be addressed in  the  course
       of determining claims to international protection. Such  travel  may
       well, in general, pose real risks of serious harm, not only from Al-
       Shabab checkpoints but also  as  a  result  of  the  present  famine
       conditions. The Tribunal noted that women  travelling  without  male
       friends or relatives are in general likely to face a  real  risk  of
       sexual violence.


   26. I have carefully read the witness statements that were  relied  upon
       by the appellant.  As Mr Richards submits, it did not form any  part
       of the appellant's case that he would face difficulties on return to
       Mogadishu before returning to Bu'aale.  On the evidence  before  the
       FtT and the facts found by the Judge, it cannot  be  said  that  the
       Judge's decision is infected by a material error of law  capable  of
       affecting the outcome of the  appeal  in  not  considering  how  the
       appellant could get from Mogadishu to Bu'aale.   The  appellant  did
       not advance a case on the basis that he would face  difficulties  on
       return to Mogadishu before returning to Bu'aale.  The  Judge  cannot
       be criticised for failing to find  that  the  appellant  would  face
       difficulties travelling from Mogadishu to  Bu'aale  where  that  was
       simply not part of his case, and  neither  was  there  any  evidence
       before the Judge to support such a claim.


   27. In my judgement, if follows that  upon  a  careful  reading  of  the
       decision of the FtT Judge, who considered the whole of the  evidence
       in the round, it was open to the Judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
       Article 3 grounds for the reasons given.  The decision  of  the  FtT
       does not contain a material error of law capable  of  affecting  the
       outcome of the appeal and the appeal is therefore dismissed.


 NOTICE OF DECISION


   28. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          20th October 2017


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can in any event be no fee award
.

Signed                                  Date          20th October 2017


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




