
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                                  Appeal
Number:  AA/13339/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
|On 21 June 2017                            |On 22 June 2017                |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     SEA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Ms N. Braganza, Migrant Legal Action
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born in 1993.  On  the  3rd  August
    2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ransley) dismissed  his  protection
    appeal. The  Appellant  now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision, granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Ockelton on  the  13th  March
    2017[1].




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Basis of Claim and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Appellant claimed to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Iran for reasons of his religious belief. It was his claim that he  had
    abandoned  his  former  religion  of  Islam,  and  had   converted   to
    Christianity. In particular, he said that he had joined the  Church  of
    Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ('the Mormon  Church').  He  had  not
    only joined this church, but had been  in  regular  attendance  at  its
    services since 2013 and had been ordained as a priest.

 4. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  came  from  the  Appellant
    himself and two supporting witnesses. A Mr Frank James  Smith  attended
    the hearing to confirm  that  to  his  knowledge  the  Appellant  is  a
    practising Mormon. Mr Smith is Bishop of the Mormon Church in Rochdale.
    A Mr Mostafa Golbaksh gave oral evidence to the effect  that  he  knows
    the Appellant personally and that they are both Mormons.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found the following factors to be  relevant  to
    its assessment of the Appellant's credibility:

              i) In 2012 the Appellant, his mother and brother  had  claimed
                 asylum, advancing an  account  of  anti-regime  protest  in
                 Iran.  Their  appeals  had  been  dismissed  by  First-tier
                 Tribunal  Lever  who  had  found  the  claims   to   be   a
                 fabrication. He accepted that they may dislike  the  regime
                 in Iran, and want to live in the West,  but  this  did  not
                 make them refugees.  Applying the Devaseelan principle this
                 credibility assessment had to be  the  Tribunal's  starting
                 point;


             ii) The Appellant had given contradictory evidence  about  when
                 he had started to lose faith in Islam;

            iii) The claim that in May 2012 the  Appellant  had  started  to
                 attend church in  Bolton  appeared  inconsistent  with  the
                 evidence that he  had given to an  immigration  officer  in
                 March of that year.  At  interview  he  had  said  that  he
                 considered Islam the "most complete" religion, and that  he
                 was most certainly a devout Muslim. He had been  unable  to
                 satisfactorily explain how so much had changed in those two
                 months and gave  "convoluted  and  evasive"  evidence  when
                 asked about it;


             iv) The Appellant had given contradictory evidence  about  when
                 and how his interest in Christianity had been sparked;

              v) There was contradictory evidence given  about  whether  the
                 missionaries who first spoke with the  Appellant  had  been
                 Canadian or American;

             vi)   The   Appellant    had    attempted    to    blame    the
                 interpreter/interviewing officer for an answer recorded  at
                 interview that he wanted to distance  himself  from.  Asked
                 whether he read the Bible he had said that he had watched a
                 film about Jesus. He now denied having said that;

            vii) The Appellant had shown a lack of knowledge about  the  New
                 Testament when interviewed.

 6. In assessing the evidence of  Mr  Smith  the  Tribunal  expressed  some
    concerns. Mr Smith could confirm  the  Appellant's  attendance  at  the
    church in Rochdale, and state that he believed  his  conversion  to  be
    genuine. The Tribunal noted however  that  he  had  apparently  made  a
    conscious  decision  not  to  make  enquiries  into   the   Appellant's
    background or immigration history. He had not known that the  Appellant
    had been found to be an untruthful witness in his first asylum  appeal.
    He had agreed  with  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  that  most
    churches would be inclined to trust and welcome someone coming to their
    doors.  He was unable to speak to the procedure or instruction that the
    Appellant underwent when he first joined the Mormon Church  in  Bolton:
    he had arrived in Rochdale an already ordained minister.


 7. As for Mr Golbakhsh the determination notes that he was recognised as a
    refugee only after an 'administrative decision' by the  Respondent  and
    could not therefore be assessed from the starting  point  that  he  had
    been found to be a credible witness by another Tribunal:  AC  (Somalia)
    [2005] UKAIT 00124.   His evidence was found to be "general" in nature.
    All he could say is that he was a Mormon from the church in Bolton,  he
    knows the Appellant and they talk together.

 8. The Tribunal considers  all  of  this  evidence  in  the  round  before
    concluding, at paragraph 60, that the Appellant is  an  untruthful  and
    unreliable  witness.  His  own  evidence  was  found  so   lacking   in
    credibility that that of the supporting witnesses could not advance the
    case to any significant degree. The Tribunal was not satisfied that the
    Appellant was a genuine convert from Islam to Christianity, or that  he
    has the intention to practise the Christian faith in  the  future.  The
    Tribunal accepts,  unchallenged  as  it  was,  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant has in fact been attending this church on  a  regular  basis,
    and that he has taken up the position of secretary of the  youth  group
    of the church in Rochdale. This was, however,  due  to  his  desire  to
    fabricate a claim for asylum rather than because of his  actual  faith.
    The appeal was therefore dismissed.





    The Challenge

 9. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal first to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and then to the Upper Tribunal. When he was  unsuccessful  he
    pursued his case to the High Court, where he succeeded  in  having  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal quashed. Mr Justice Andrew Baker granted
    permission for judicial review in the following terms:


         "The decision of the First-tier Tribunal gives rise to an important
         point  of  principle,  namely  whether   regular   attendance   and
         participation at (Christian) church services, if giving rise  to  a
         risk of persecution in  the  country  of  origin  (here,  Iran)  is
         sufficient in law to constitute a person a refugee  as  defined  by
         Article 1A of the Geneva Convention, such that further inquiry into
         the genuineness of the  person's  professed  (Christian)  faith  is
         either (a) not required or (b) not permissible".


10. That is, in summary, the first ground. The Appellant contends that  the
    Tribunal misdirected its enquiry. The  question  was  not  whether  the
    Appellant actually believed the teachings of the Church of Jesus of the
    Latter Day Saints, it  was  whether  he  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Iran for  reasons  of  his  religious  belief,  or  that
    imputed to him. A real risk arose, it is contended, simply by virtue of
    the Appellant having attended  church  every  Sunday  for  four  years,
    having been baptised and having been ordained as a Christian  minister,
    all unchallenged matters  of  fact.  Reliance  is  placed  on  Dorodian
    (01/TH/01537) and SA (Iran) [EWHC 2575 (Admin).


11. The remaining grounds  are  concerned  with  the  negative  credibility
    findings reached by the Tribunal.   Although Andrew  Baker  J  did  not
    address any of these grounds in his grant of  permission,  Mr  Ockelton
    has not limited the grounds upon which the appeal can be advanced.



    Discussion and Findings


12. The case of Dorodian is now of some vintage, but it remains  good  law.
    The principles set out in that Iranian conversion case are  simple  and
    well-known. A person who has declared  themselves  to  be  a  Christian
    should be expected to  evidence  this  by  his  regular  attendance  at
    church, and that attendance should be evidenced before the Tribunal  by
    the attendance at court of one or more ordained ministers of  a  church
    of this country.  The reason that this is important is because  "it  is
    church membership, rather than mere belief, which may lead to risk".


13. In SA (Iran) the High Court visited the same territory, in the  context
    of a fresh claim with a dismissed Devaseelan appeal  in  the  past.  At
    paragraph 24 HHJ Gilbart QC  said this:

         "Thirdly, there is a matter closely related to the second point  of
         concern. What appears to have impressed the immigration judge,  and
         then the Home Secretary,  is  that  the  Claimant's  conversion  to
         Christianity was not regarded by  him  as  genuine,  and  had  been
         manufactured to assist her asylum claim. It is  a  dangerous  thing
         for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge, to peer into what  some
         call a man or woman's soul to assess whether a professed  faith  is
         genuinely held, and especially not when it was and is  agreed  that
         she was and is a frequent participant in church services. It  is  a
         type of judicial exercise very popular some centuries ago  in  some
         fora, but rather rarely exercised today. I am also  uneasy  when  a
         judge, even with the knowledge one gains judicially in  a  city  as
         diverse as Manchester,  is  bold  enough  to  seek  to  reach  firm
         conclusions about a professed conversion, made by a woman raised in
         another culture, from the version of Islam practised therein, to an
         evangelical church in Bolton within one strand of  Christianity.  I
         am at a loss to understand how that is to  be  tested  by  anything
         other than considering whether she is an active participant in  the
         new church. But I accept that such judicial boldness as this  judge
         showed does not necessarily undermine a decision in law if he  does
         so, and his decision was not successfully appealed. But that is not
         the only point. There must be a real risk that if she has professed
         herself to be a Christian,  and  conducted  herself  as  one,  that
         profession, whether true or not, may be taken in Iran  as  evidence
         of apostasy. On the  basis  of  the  Home  Secretary's  now  stated
         position, that amounts to a potentially different circumstance from
         that addressed by the Immigration Judge".


14. The grounds suggest that these authorities reveal  two  errors  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  First  they  emphasise  the  very
    significant weight  that  should  be  attached  to  evidence  given  by
    Dorodian witnesses as to the bona fides of  any  profession  of  faith.
    Secondly, they suggest that it is the attendance at church rather  than
    the underlying faith (or lack of it) that is, in the context  of  Iran,
    significant.


15. I need not make a finding on the  first  point,  since  the  Respondent
    concedes that the second is made out. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepts
    that the Appellant has been  attending  church  since  2013,  has  been
    baptised and ordained as a priest in the  Mormon  Church.     There  is
    however no assessment of whether those facts would in themselves expose
    the Appellant to a risk of harm in Iran if returned there  today.   The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department accepts  that  this  was  an
    omission amounting to an error of law.

16. In SSH and HR v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (illegal
    exit - failed asylum seeker)  Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)  the
    Tribunal found that failed asylum seekers returning to Iran are  likely
    to be questioned about what they have been doing in the UK.  Regardless
    of whether they have a passport or not, they are screened  on  arrival:
    see further BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC), AB and  Others  (internet  activity  -  state  of
    evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).   The  Appellant  would  at  that
    point have a choice about what to say.

17. He could tell the interviewing officer the  truth,  that  he  had  been
    attending church in the UK and had claimed asylum on the basis that  he
    was an  apostate  from  Islam.  This  was  certainly  a  scenario  that
    concerned the court in SA, and I have no difficulty in  accepting  that
    such a disclosure would lead to a real risk of serious harm.   In  both
    SSH and BA the Tribunal heard evidence to the effect that  the  Iranian
    authorities are aware that economic migrants make false  asylum  claims
    in Europe, and that in the case of  alleged  political  opponents  they
    will be discerning in their treatment of returnees; decision-makers are
    urged to consider whether the political activity in question would give
    the impression of real commitment to a cause, rather than  opportunism.
    It seems to me that four years of  regular  Christian  worship,  having
    been baptised and being ordained as a priest are the kind of facts that
    would give an Iranian border guard cause to transfer the Appellant  for
    'further  questioning',  where,  it  is  accepted  (see  for   instance
    paragraph 23 of SSH) there would be a real  risk  of  serious  harm.  I
    should add that in the particular context of Iran - an  oppressive  and
    paranoid theocracy - there is good reason to suppose that there will be
    a  particular  sensitivity  around  religion  (as  opposed  to  general
    antipathy towards the regime). I am doubtful whether protestations that
    it was  all  a  sham  would  carry  much  weight.  The  baptism  itself
    constitutes a formal denunciation of Islam. It would matter not to  the
    Appellant's  interrogators  whether  he  did  this  because  he  was  a
    Christian, or simply an atheist.

18. The alternative is that when questioned the Appellant lies,  and  makes
    up some other reason to explain why he has been in the UK for so  long,
    why he had overstayed his visa and why he had claimed asylum.  He would
    of course have to do so in the hope that none of the  Iranians  he  had
    come into contact with through  the  Church  in  the  North  West  were
    actually informants for the  government  (see  AB,  BA),  or  that  the
    authorities had otherwise discovered his history. He would have  to  do
    so in the knowledge that he had in fact publicly  denounced  Islam,  an
    offence punishable by death.  Setting  these  difficulties  aside,  the
    requirement that he lie in order to avoid persecution is now settled to
    be contrary to the Refugee Convention.  In  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and  Others
    [2012] UKSC 38 the Supreme Court made a significant  extension  to  the
    principles set out in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2011] UKSC  596.  In
    HJ the court held that claimants should  not  be  expected  to  conceal
    matters fundamental to their identity in order to avoid harm. In RT the
    court held that even absent any 'core' characteristic -  in  that  case
    political opinion - claimants should not be expected to  lie.  That  is
    because the 'core' right is the right not to be persecuted  -  in  this
    case for religious beliefs that the Appellant, on the findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, does not have.


19. It follows that on the facts as found by the Tribunal, the appeal  must
    be allowed.

20. As I note above,  Mr  Justice  Andrew  Baker  said  nothing  about  the
    remaining grounds. Ms Braganza asked me to consider them  nevertheless,
    on the basis that the grant of permission had not been limited.

21. Various criticisms are made about the way that the First-tier  Tribunal
    approached the question of the Appellant's credibility. It is said, for
    instance, that in focusing on matters such as whether the  missionaries
    were Canadian or American, the Tribunal has impermissibly placed weight
    on obviously irrelevant matters.  Central to Ms Braganza's  submissions
    on this point were however the Tribunal's findings that  the  Appellant
    had been "vague and evasive" in several places  in  his  evidence.   At
    paragraph 44 of the determination it states  that  the  Appellant  made
    "repeated attempts to evade legitimate  questions  put  to  him  during
    cross examination". At paragraphs 32, 37 and 43 similar judgements  are
    made. These comments  were,  Ms  Braganza  submits,  unhelpful  to  the
    Appellant as he tries to understand why he has been disbelieved. Unless
    they are particularised, the Appellant cannot know  why  he  has  lost.
    Reliance is placed on JB (torture and ill-treatment  -  Article  3)  DR
    Congo [2003] UKIAT 00012 in which the Tribunal said this:

         "[7]...The Adjudicator has given no indication about the  areas  in
         which he found the appellant to be vague. Given that the  appellant
         appeared before him, if he had thought that the appellant needed to
         give more detail than he had, he should have  sought  such  details
         and  if  the  appellant  had  not  provided  the  detail  then  the
         Adjudicator could properly have concluded that he had been  evasive
         in his evidence. To describe a person's evidence as vague  and  use
         that  as  a  ground  for  disbelief  is,   in   our   view,   quite
         unsatisfactory unless of course the areas of lack of detail,  which
         cause concern, are clearly spelt out".


22. This was a detailed determination which gives several reasons  why  the
    Judge was not persuaded that the Appellant was a genuine  Christian;  I
    note that neither Judge Kimnell nor Judge  Allen  were  satisfied  that
    there was any arguable error in approach. I accept,  in  light  of  the
    authority cited above, that describing evidence,  without  elaboration,
    as "vague" is unhelpful.  I accept that to expect a young Iranian to be
    able to differentiate  a  Canadian  accent  from  an  American  may  be
    splitting hairs.  Those findings are therefore set aside.    I  am  not
    persuaded however that the credibility findings overall should  be  set
    aside.  In  particular  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  draw  adverse
    inference from the fact that this was  a  very  swift  conversion.  The
    Appellant went from being a devout Muslim in March  2012  to  attending
    Mormon services in May: I do not accept that it was irrational for  the
    Tribunal to look for some explanation, a 'timeline', of  what  happened
    to the Appellant in those two months to make him leave the  faith  that
    he had been raised in.




    Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and the decision is set aside.

24. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on refugee grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

25. There is a direction for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              21st June 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kimnell) on
the 30th August 2016 and by the Upper Tribunal (Judge Allen) on the 28th
October 2016. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Allen was quashed by
order of the High Court (Master Gidden dated the 13th February 2017,
implementing the 'unless' order of Judge Andrew Baker dated 16th January
2017). Judge Ockelton granted permission in light of the High Court orders.


