
                                    [pic]
St
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13430/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At Field House                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|on 23rd December 2016                 |                                |
|                                      |on 4th January 2017             |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY





                                   Between


                                   MR. V.N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                          Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                          Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Dolan, Counsel, instructed by ADP Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in September 1983. He
      came to the United Kingdom on a student visa in 2008. He returned home
      the following year for one week. He then returned to the United
      Kingdom until March 2012 when he returned to Sri Lanka. Some months
      later he returned to the United Kingdom and two months later made a
      claim for protection. The basis of that claim is that he is at risk
      because of his association with the LTTE.


   2. He claimed that he had been detained by the Sri Lankan authorities
      before he came to the United Kingdom in 2008 because of suspected
      activity. He also claimed that he was abused and detained by the
      authorities when he returned in March 2012.

   3. The respondent refused the claim on 9 November 2015, principally on
      credibility issues. It was not considered credible that he would
      repeatedly return to his country if his claim were true. It was noted
      that he travelled backwards and forward using his own passport without
      difficulty. Reference was made to his delay in claiming asylum.

   4. The country guidance decision of GJ and others identified certain risk
      categories none of which applied to the appellant's situation.
      Reference was made to a positive change in attitude following the
      election of a new President in January 2015 and the subsequent
      formation of a new government.

The First tier Tribunal

   5.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the First tier Swaney. The judge
      found that he was a member of the LTTE from 2003, involved in
      relatively low-level activities which included delivering packages as
      he had claimed. The judge found his account to be internally
      consistent. The judge attached weight to the documentary evidence
      provided as to his claim of detention in 2008. The judge also heard
      from a friend of the appellant's about his detention. The judge
      accepted that he was detained as claimed in 2008 and was released by
      the court following an inability by the police to link him to any
      crime or involvement with the LTTE. The judge concluded that his
      involvement with the LTTE was relatively low-level and that when the
      appellant was released he was no longer of any interest to the
      authorities. The judge found his failure to claim asylum when he
      arrived in 2008 was consistent with this as was his ability to enter
      and return from Sri Lanka without hinder in 2009.

   6. The judge did not accept the truth of his claimed detention in 2012.
      The judge found his credibility was damaged by his failure to claim
      protection immediately when he returned in 2012.  Having concluded
      that the appellant was of no interest to the authorities when released
      in 2008 the judge said that the appellant had given no explanation as
      to why he would then be of interest to them in 2012.

   7. Medical evidence had been supplied to support the claim that the
      appellant had been abused whilst in custody in 2008 and 2012. The
      judge attached little weight to this evidence and referred to the
      possibility of alternative causes.

   8. The appellant claimed that his mother had been visited by the
      authorities who are enquiring about his whereabouts. The judge did not
      accept this and viewed it as an attempt to bolster his claim.

   9. The judge found no evidence that his activities in the United Kingdom
      in the intervening years were likely who have come to the attention of
      the authorities in Sri Lanka or if they had, that they would give them
      cause for concern .The appellant said he was a member of the British
      Tamils Forum (BTF) and a volunteer worker with the UK section of the
      Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam.(TGTE).He had produced
      photographs of his attendance at various events here. The judge
      accepted he was involved with both organisations but concluded there
      was no evidence that he had a high profile. Should the authorities in
      Sri Lanka be aware of his activities the judge concluded they would
      not consider him to have any significant role in post-conflict Tamil
      separatism.

The Upper Tribunal

  10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that in 2014 the TGTE
      was prescribed and it was arguable the effect of prescription meant
      that the level of involvement with the party was less relevant. First
      tier Judge Swaney had accepted the appellant was involved with the
      TGTE in the United Kingdom but may not have appreciated the effect of
      proscription on the risk on return. It was also arguable the judge may
      have misconstrued the appellant's claim of his detention in 2012 and
      there was a possibility his activities in the United Kingdom may have
      become known to the authorities.


  11. At hearing, Mr Dolan referred me to the respondent's Country
      Information and Guidance on Sri Lanka dated August 2016 and an extract
      from a Gazette published in Sri Lanka dated 20 November 2015.It
      referred to the prescription of the TGTE in February 2014. Mr Dolan
      contended that the adverse findings made by the judge could have been
      different had there been an awareness of proscription. It had
      implications for the conclusion on the claim of detention in 2012; the
      explanation for the delay in claiming, namely, physical and mental
      health issues; whether in a risk category and on a watch list.

  12. In response, Mr Walker referred to the lack of evidence before the
      judge that the appellant was a high-profile member of the BTF or the
      TGTE. He pointed out that the letter submitted at the hearing from the
      BTS did not identify the activities the appellant was engaged in and
      the letter from the TGTE was non-specific as to his activities and
      referred to an individual of a different name albeit corrected by
      hand. The judge concluded that had the appellant a high profile in
      either of these organisations this should have been reflected in the
      letter submitted. Mr Walker submitted that the evidence was that the
      appellant did not have a significant role and would not have a
      profile. In reply, Mr Dolan said that the issue was one of perception.



Consideration

  13. When analysing the decision it is important to read it as a whole.
      Whilst individual passages are scrutinised they must be placed in the
      context of the overall judgement and the claim being made.


  14. The reasons for refusal rejected all of the key aspects of the claim
      and challenged the appellant's credibility. His identity was known
      from his student applications. His claim of fear from the Sri Lankan
      authorities was premised on an association with the LTTE which would
      place him in danger. He described being detained by the authorities
      and abused in 2008. He then came to the United Kingdom on a student
      visa. He made no claim to the United Kingdom authorities. In 2009 he
      returned to his home country for a short visit. His failure to claim
      and his willingness to return were important aspects of the assessment
      of how he perceived the risk. He returned again in 2012 and claimed he
      was again detained; abused and raped. He then returned to the United
      Kingdom. He did not claim protection immediately but waited several
      months. His return in 2012; his ability to pass through airport
      security to return to the United Kingdom; his delay in claiming all
      understandably gives rise to credibility issues.

  15. Central in the argument to the Upper Tribunal is the proscription of
      the TGTE. The LGTE has been prescribed subsequent to the country
      guidance case. The country information indicates that the situation in
      Sri Lanka has improved following the Presidential elections. I was
      provided with a publication from Sri Lanka dated 20 November 2015
      which amends the list of proscribed organisations. It refers to the
      LGTE being proscribed on 25 February 2014 and this is maintained.
      Significantly, the amendments are intended to reflect the improving
      situation. The first schedule relates to organisations rather than
      individuals. It is not apparent what the consequences are for
      individuals associated with a proscribed organisations or whether
      there is a hierarchy of associates and members. It does suggest a link
      to such an organisation could bring the individual into conflict with
      Sri Lankan authorities.

  16. Judge Swaney would not appear to have had the Country Information
      prepared by the respondent at the beginning of August 2016. The appeal
      was heard towards the end of August 2016 and the report should have
      been made available by then though the proximity of the hearing date
      with its publication may explain its omission. Nothing suggests its
      omission was deliberate as suggested in the leave application.

  17. Judge Swaney was aware of the proscription. Reference is made to it in
      the appellant's statement and at paragraph 12 of the decision.

  18. The judge accepted the appellant's account of events before he came to
      the United Kingdom in 2008. The judge had the benefit of court
      documents; evidence from a witness who had been found credible and
      correspondence from the Red Cross. Notably, the judge concluded that
      when released the Sri Lankan authorities had no further interest in
      him. The judge found that this explained his failure to make any claim
      on arrival in the United Kingdom and his willingness to subsequently
      return to his home country. The judge did accept the appellant's
      account of an involvement with the LTTE for a number of years earlier,
      albeit at a low level. These findings suggest an even handed approach
      by the judge who did not simply dismiss the claim outright.

  19. The judge did not accept the appellant's claim of events in 2012. A
      number of reasons were given for this. Firstly, there was a delay in
      claiming. Had the appellant been abused and raped as described then
      the need for sanctuary would have been foremost in his mind. The judge
      rejected the appellant's claim he was unaware of the concept of
      asylum, referring to the fact he had lived in the United Kingdom and
      had been involved with Sri Lankans in relation to their rights. The
      appellant had also advanced by way of explanation for not claiming
      earlier his mental state. The judge adequately addresses this at
      paragraph 47.

  20. The appellant had submitted a medical report in relation to scarring
      in support of his claim. Four scars to his back he attributed to the
      2012 claim. The judge pointed out that whilst the doctor indicated the
      position of the scarring meant it was unlikely to have been self-
      inflicted consideration was not given to the possibility of infliction
      by proxy. Furthermore, the doctor did not comment on the age of the
      scars or their consistency with the claim made. I find the judge dealt
      with this evidence adequately.

  21. It was suggested that the judge erred at paragraph 49 in stating the
      appellant had failed to explain why he would be of interest to the Sri
      Lankan authorities in 2012 when he was not in 2009. In support of this
      it was submitted the appellant had explained at screening and in
      interview that the renewed interest was associated with his activities
      in the United Kingdom. However, if the previous paragraph is
      considered it is apparent that the judge was mindful of his activities
      here. The point the judge was making was that when the appellant
      returned to Sri Lanka in 2009 he was someone who had been suspected of
      previous involvement with the LTTE in his home country. He had been
      involved with the BTF and Sri Lankan groups in the United Kingdom. At
      paragraph 49 the judge said there was no evidence that his activities
      in the United Kingdom between 2009 and 2012 would have given the Sri
      Lankan authorities cause for concern.

  22. The judge set out at paragraphs 51 to 54 an assessment of his
      involvement in the United Kingdom. The conclusions are summarised at
      paragraphs 56 and 57. I find no fault with these conclusions. At
      paragraph 60 the judge concluded that his low-level activities would
      not place him at risk on return even if those activities were known.

Error of law

  23. I do not find any material error of law established. The decision
      indicates a fair and balanced approach with a careful analysis of the
      evidence. The judge was aware of proscription and evaluated the risk
      on return for the appellant. The conclusion reached was open to the
      judge.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Swaney dismissing the appellant's appeal
shall stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.



Fee Order

No fee order is applicable

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

