
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13165/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 24th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     sm
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D. Birrell promulgated on 4th August 2016, following a hearing at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 1st August 2016.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe and was born  on  14th  November
    1970.  She is a female.  She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent refusing her claim for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395, in a decision  letter  dated  4th
    November 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  she  worked  for  a
    solicitors' firm called [MLC], in  Zimbabwe,  for  one  of  the  senior
    partners by the name of [RM].   In  her  role  she  carried  out  usual
    secretarial duties of a secretary to a senior partner.   The  firm  was
    instructed by Zanu PF in some criminal cases and the senior partner, Mr
    [RM], was an adviser to  them.   He  attended  meetings  with  Zanu  PF
    officials and attended workshops in Harare.  In 2014 there was in-house
    fighting between factions of Zanu PF before the annual congress.

 4. Mr [RM] gave evidence to those Zanu PF members who received suspensions
    and letters of dismissal as supported someone by the name of [JN],  who
    allegedly intended to topple Mugabe.  The Appellant helped to type  the
    responses to these allegations on behalf of those  affected.   She  was
    told that the information was strictly confidential.  She believed that
    there was a conflict of interest but she is now aware that Mr [RM]  was
    part of [JN]'s national executive and therefore may have  had  his  own
    political motivation.

 5. On 19th December 2014, the Appellant applied for a  family  visit  visa
    and on 22nd December 2015 she was issued with a six  month  valid  visa
    until 22nd June 2015.  She arrived in  the  UK  on  1st  January  2015.
    However, in March 2015 she received a phone call from her mother to say
    that she had been served with a summons to attend court on  allegations
    that she was leaking sensitive information to  the  independent  press.
    When she failed to attend a warrant for her  arrest  was  issued.   She
    does not know why she was summonsed to Harare which was  250  kms  away
    from where she lived and worked.  She now believes  herself  to  be  at
    risk if she returned.  The Appellant was accused of leaking information
    to the press and insulting the President's family.

The Judge's Findings

 6.  The  judge  approached  his  findings  by   stating   that   "I   have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below", but that "I must
    emphasise the findings have only been made having taken account of  the
    evidence as a whole" (paragraph 32).  The judge then  took  account  of
    the fact that the Appellant was a 45 year old citizen of  Zimbabwe  and
    had worked as a legal secretary for a prominent Zimbabwean solicitor in
    Masvingo and had been  accused  of  treason  for  leaking  confidential
    information and had now been subject to a summons to appear  in  court.
    The judge observed that, "I accept that she  is  a  secretary  and  has
    worked for a lawyer who appears to be a supporter  of  an  opponent  of
    Robert Mugabe" (paragraph 33).  The judge then went on to say that:-

         "Her account however is underpinned by a number of  documents  that
         she has produced.  I take into account the section in the July 2012
         COIS about Zimbabwe at paragraph 31.01 that suggests it is possible
         to obtain forged documents or genuine documents that can be altered
         ..." (paragraph 34).


 7. The judge then went on to deal with various aspects of the  documentary
    evidence which were held by the Tribunal to be lacking in  credibility.
    These included a "top secret memo" (see paragraph 36); a "summons" (see
    paragraph 37); a "warrant of arrest" (paragraph 38), before  the  judge
    eventually concluded that:-

         "Taking the Appellant's evidence in the round and in particular the
         many concerns I have raised about the documentary evidence  I  find
         that even on allowing for the lower standard of proof required, the
         Appellant has failed to prove the truth of the facts upon which she
         relies and thus in consequence has failed  to  prove  that  she  is
         entitled to be treated as a credible witness" (paragraph 39).


 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge had failed to make  any
    adequate findings with respect to the Appellant's oral evidence in this
    case.  However following the case of AK (Failure to  assess  witnesses'
    evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230, this was a case  where  the  judge
    has "failed to make any assessment as to credibility  or  otherwise  of
    that evidence or to get any reasons  for  arriving  at  her  assessment
    ...".

10. Second, that making findings on the documentary evidence alone was  not
    sufficient.  This had been made clear by Forbes J in Virjon B v Special
    Adjudicator [2002] EWHC 1469, where the court has  said  that  such  an
    approach amounts to "putting the cart before the horse"  (at  paragraph
    21).

11. On 28th October 2016, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to  appeal.



12. On 18th April 2019 the Respondent Secretary of State furnished  a  Rule
    24 response to the effect that the judge was entitled to conclude as he
    did because  the  appeal  turned  on  the  reliability  of  documentary
    evidence that the Appellant sought to rely upon  at  paragraph  36  and
    that the Appellant had failed to  provide  a  credible  explanation  in
    relation to such evidence.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 10th June 2019,  Mr  Holmes,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant relied upon the  grounds  of  application.   In
    particular, he submitted that, given that the judge  had  accepted  the
    basic facts, namely, that the Appellant worked as a legal secretary for
    a prominent Zimbabwean solicitor in Masvingo, and had been  accused  of
    treason, because she was working "for a lawyer  who  appears  to  be  a
    supporter of an opponent of  Robert  Mugabe"  (paragraph  33),  it  was
    incumbent on the judge to consider the risk factors that appertained to
    the Appellant's situation.  These risk factors  arose  particularly  in
    relation to the question of whether the law firm had  got  itself  into
    difficulties with the powers that be and whether there had been a  link
    between them and  the  MDC.   Simply  to  focus  upon  the  documentary
    evidence  was  to  develop  a  blind  spot   in   relation   to   these
    considerations.

14. Mr Holmes also helpfully directed my attention to two decisions.  There
    was the case  of  Gomez-Salinas  [2001]  EWHC  287,  where  Mr  Justice
    Sullivan had stated that in circumstances where  a  judge  has  cast  a
    burden on the claimant to demonstrate that a document is  genuine,  and
    then reached adverse credibility findings  because  the  Appellant  has
    failed to discharge that burden, would be a situation where the  courts
    will intervene.

15. The other decision was MT (credibility assessment  flawed  -  Virjon  B
    applied) Syria [2004] UKIAT 00307,  where  the  Vice-President  of  the
    Tribunal had expressed concerns  about  making  findings  on  the  oral
    evidence, but  failing  to  do  so  on  the  documentary  evidence  (at
    paragraph 7), which  Mr  Holmes  submitted,  was  the  obverse  of  the
    situation where, as in  this  case,  findings  had  been  made  on  the
    documentary evidence, but not on the oral evidence.

16. For her part, Miss  Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that it was the Appellant herself who  had  put  forward  the
    documentary evidence that she wished to rely upon.  That being so,  the
    judge had dealt with the documentary evidence at paragraph  36  and  at
    paragraph  37  and  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any  oral
    explanation that  would  have  satisfied  the  judge  as  to  why  such
    documentary evidence should be believed.

No Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

18. First, this is a case where the judge is plainly aware of the  entirety
    of the evidence that is before the Tribunal.  Indeed,  the  judge  sets
    out extensively the reference to  the  Appellant's  "written  and  oral
    evidence", at paragraph 12 in ten sub-paragraphs, and nothing that  has
    been said before me today indicates that such an analysis is  incorrect
    as a factual matter as far as the Appellant is concerned.

19. Second, in making the findings of fact, the judge at the outset  states
    that, "I am required to look at all the evidence in  the  round  before
    reaching my findings" (paragraph 32).  Third, and in this  regard,  the
    judge then has regard to the very evidence that  the  Appellant  places
    her greatest reliance upon, namely, the top secret memo,  the  summons,
    and the arrest warrant.  These are very extensively considered  by  the
    judge.  It is not the case that the judge avoids a consideration of the
    oral evidence in this regard.  Two examples will suffice.

20. First, when considering the "top secret memo", the judge makes it clear
    that:-

         "The Appellant has been unable to provide any credible  explanation
         as to why a work colleague who she has only worked with since  2013
         at best would be prepared to risk her own safety by stealing a  top
         secret memo that suggests that the Appellant has committed treason"
         (paragraph 36(a)).


21. What the judge is stating here is not that she  rejects  anything  that
    the Appellant said or did not say.  What the judge is making clear here
    is that  the  Appellant  has  not  provided  any  credible  explanation
    whatsoever.

22. Second, in relation to the summons, the  judge  observes  how  the  top
    secret memo was dated 30th April 2015, and that if this was  the  case,
    then "This is inconsistent with the summons which is dated  merely  two
    months before ..." (see paragraph 37(a)).   Once  again,  there  is  no
    indication  whatsoever  from  the  Appellant's  side,  that   an   oral
    explanation had actually been preferred to deal with this matter  which
    obviously troubled the judge  in  considering  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant herself had put forward.

23. In short, it was for the Appellant to explain in court why the  summons
    predated the top secret memo by two months.  It was for  the  Appellant
    to explain why other aspects of her evidence sat uneasily with the fact
    that the Appellant lived in Masvingo but  was  summoned  to  appear  in
    Harare over 250 kms away (see paragraph 37(c)).  Moreover, there were a
    number of spelling mistakes (see paragraph 37(e)) in the  documentation
    provided which troubled the judge.  The fact that the judge had made it
    clear that, "for convenience, I have compartmentalised my  findings  in
    some respects below" (paragraph 32) indicates that the judge was taking
    a structured approach to the evidence before  her.   There  can  be  no
    criticism of the decision.  It is clear and it is comprehensive.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

25. An anonymity direction is made.

26. The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019
