
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 July 2016                               |On 17 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     mM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms O Mustapha, instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


ANONYMITY
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  orders
otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof
shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.   This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties and their representatives.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born in 1997.  She left Albania
    with her husband in 2014  on  honeymoon,  having  had  no  problems  in
    Albania before doing so.  She and her husband met some  Albanian  males
    in  Paris,  were  kidnapped  and  the   appellant   was   forced   into
    prostitution.  She escaped with the assistance of a benefactor and came
    to the United Kingdom, claiming  asylum  here  on  27  May  2014.   The
    appellant gave birth to her daughter on [ ] 2015. She is unsure  as  to
    whether the father of the child is her husband or whether the child was
    born through circumstances appertaining during her captivity in France.

 2. The appellant was referred to the National  Referral  Mechanism.  On  1
    October  2015  it  was  concluded  that  she  was  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking or slavery,  servitude  or  forced/compulsory  labour.   In
    light of this decision the Secretary  of  State  broadly  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence given as  to  the  circumstances  set  out  above.
    Nevertheless, by way of a decision of 16 November 2015 the Secretary of
    State refused to grant the appellant asylum, this being  on  the  basis
    that there would be a sufficiency of protection available to  her  upon
    return to Albania or, alternatively, that she could internally relocate
    therein.

 3. The appellant appealed the SSHD's decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT"), that appeal being heard by FtT Judge M. A. Khan  on  25  April
    2016 and dismissed on all grounds in a decision issued on 17 May  2016.
    The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal with the permission  of
    FtT Judge Page, granted on 15 June 2016. Thus the matter  comes  before
    me.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant maintained before both the Secretary  of  State  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal that she had contacted her parents in Albania after
    her arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  they  had  effectively
    disowned her because of the shame that she had brought onto the family.
     She further confirmed that she had not contacted her husband, her  in-
    laws or her sister living in Tirana.

 5. Under the heading "Findings of Credibility" the FtT said as follows

         "38. The appellant's evidence before the tribunal with regards  her
             contacts with her family, in particular  her  sister,  husband
             and her in laws was  extremely  vague  and  evasive.   In  her
             asylum interview, the appellant clearly stated that she wished
             to contact her parents, husband and rest of the  family.   She
             stated that she did not have any fear from her family and  her
             husband.  In her written statement at paragraph 38, 39 and 40,
             she states that she did not want to contact her family because
             she feared that they would kill her because of the  shame  she
             has brought upon the family as a victim of human  trafficking.
             In her oral evidence, the appellant stated that  she  did  not
             want to contact her in laws to find out what had  happened  to
             her husband.  She did not do so because she did not have their
             telephone   number.    I   find   the   appellant's   evidence
             contradictory and inconsistent.

         39.  The appellant states she telephoned her parents on  29/07/2014
             and told them what had  happened  to  her  and  that  she  was
             pregnant.  She states that they told her  that  they  did  not
             want to have anything to do with her.  She states that because
             of this, she had not contacted any other member of her family.
              The appellant has not done anything  or  taken  any  step  to
             trace or make contact with her  sister,  husband  and  her  in
             laws.  The appellant's evidence is that her husband  could  be
             her daughter's father, the only way to find out  is  to  trace
             him and have a DNA test carried out, that is if  he  does  not
             accept to be the father of the child. The appellant  is  aware
             that her husband and his family live  in  the  same  block  of
             flats as her parents when they are in Albania  and  she  knows
             their place of residence on the Greek Island of Rhodes.  I  do
             not find it credible or consistent that she would not  try  to
             make a contact with her family, directly or  through  the  Red
             Cross.

         40.  The appellant was trafficked by three Albanians in France, her
             evidence is that she cannot return to Albania because of  fear
             that these three men may re-traffic her from there.  The basis
             upon which she makes this claim is that these men  knew  where
             she lived in Albania, they took her ID card.  The  question  I
             put to the appellant was how would these  three  men  come  to
             know that she has returned to Albania?  The appellant  gave  a
             vague answer which does not make sense.  I  do  not  find  the
             appellant's claim credible  that  these  three  men  will  re-
             traffic from Albania, whereas they were in France and for  all
             we know they may still be in France.

         41.  The appellant has a sister living in Tirana, her  evidence  is
             that if she  was  in  Tirana,  she  could  find  her  sister's
             residence and make her way there.  The appellant said that she
             had her sister's contact when she was in Tirana  but  has  not
             contacted her since her arrival in the UK.  I  find  that  the
             appellant can return to Tirana and seek help  from  sister  to
             settle there.

         42.  In her response to my questions, the appellant stated that she
             did not want to contact her family, her husband and wanted  to
             stay in the UK.  She said that she has  a  daughter  and  they
             expect her to have children with  her  husband,  however,  she
             does not know that her husband may well be the father  of  her
             child.   The  husband  is  fully  aware  of  the   appellant's
             circumstances from what happened to  them  in  Deppe,  France.
             The appellant has simply assumed that he would not accept  her
             without seeking him out and find out for sure that  his  views
             are about their future life."

 6. As to the conclusions relating to the risk to the  appellant  upon  her
    return to Albania the FtT continued:

         "43. Although, I find that the  appellant's  credibility  has  been
             totally discredited, I still have to assess the possibility of
             risk of persecution on the appellant's return to Albania. ...

         44.  On the evidence before me, on the lower standard of  proof,  I
             find that the appellant has failed to establish that she is at
             risk on her return to Albania.  She has failed  to  show  that
             she will be re-trafficked and the authorities there  will  not
             be able to protect her from any future harm.  In the  case  of
             AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG UKUT 80 it is stated;

                  'We find it is clear from the evidence that  a  victim  of
                  trafficking, especially if accompanied by a  small  child,
                  would find it  significantly  more  difficult  to  achieve
                  reintegration into Albanian society than would be the case
                  in many other countries.  But that does not mean that  all
                  such victims of  trafficking  will  fail  to  re-establish
                  themselves.  Each  case  will  turn  upon  its  particular
                  facts.  Among the features or characteristics that will be
                  relevant to such  an  assessment  are  these:  The  social
                  status and economic standing of  the  appellant's  family;
                  The level of education of the appellant  and  her  family;
                  The appellant's state of health, particularly  her  mental
                  health; The presence of an illegitimate child; The area of
                  origin of the appellant's family; The age...

                  We consider women from wealthier backgrounds or those  who
                  are better education would find it easier to  reintegrate.
                  Women from those groups would, however, be far less likely
                  to be trafficked in the first place'.

         45.  The appellant in this case stated in  her  evidence  that  her
             family are not strict, she has a sister living in  Tirana  who
             could help and assist her in reintegrating in Tirana.  On  the
             evidence, on the lower standard of proof,  I  find  that  this
             appellant can safely return and re-establish herself with  her
             child in Albania, particularly in Tirana."

Discussion and conclusion

 7. The grounds of appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal and excessive in length and lack clarity. With  some  difficulty
    the following submissions can be extracted therefrom:

      i) The First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  regarding  the  appellant's
         evidence as to the  contact  with  her  parents  and  her  parents'
         reaction to her situation is flawed because:

          a) The evidence given by the appellant was  not  inconsistent  as
             concluded;

          b) The First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account  the  fact
             that victims of trafficking are stigmatised and  discriminated
             against in Albania, as is clear from the background  evidence.
             The appellant's account is consistent with such evidence;

          c) The rejection of the appellant's evidence  was  irrational  in
             all the circumstances of the case.

     ii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to  properly   take
         cognisance  of  the  country  guidance  decision  of  AM   and   BM
         (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC);

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in paragraph 45 of its decision  when
         relying on the matters of fact identified therein.

 8. At the hearing Mrs Mustapha reiterated grounds previously  pleaded  and
    sought to pursue, without  initially  seeking  the  permission  of  the
    Tribunal, additional points not  previously  raised.  Insofar  as  such
    permission was belatedly sought, it was refused.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the  FtT  had  taken  full  account  of  the
    guidance given by the Tribunal in AM and BM, had  grappled  fully  with
    all of the  issues  before  it  and  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions it reached. He reminded the Tribunal that the Tribunal  had
    rejected much of the appellant's  evidence  and  submitted  that  as  a
    consequence there were no positive features which could  have  led  the
    tribunal to allow the appeal.

10. Having given careful consideration  to  the  FtT's  decision,  and  the
    evidence and information before it, I find such decision to  be  flawed
    by legal error in a number of respects.

11. First, I concur with Ms Mustapha's submission that  the  FtT's  finding
    that the appellant gave contradictory and inconsistent evidence on  the
    issue of contact with her family and her family's response,  lacks  the
    necessary adequacy of reasoning and, on the face of the  evidence  that
    is disclosed in the papers before me, is irrational.

12. Nowhere in its decision does the FtT particularise the  inconsistencies
    relied upon and, in any event, in my view it cannot rationally be  said
    that there is an inconsistency in the appellant asserting in her asylum
    interview that she wished to have contact with her parents, husband and
    rest of the family but thereafter, in a written statement drawn up some
    two years after the interview on 11 April 2016,  stating  that  she  no
    longer wished to make contact with her family.  This is particularly so
    in light of the intervening event promptly disclosed by the  appellant;
    namely, that she had made contact with her  parents  after  her  asylum
    interview but that they said they no longer wished to have anything  to
    do with her because she had brought shame on the family.

13. Furthermore, as Ms Mustapha  identified  during  her  submissions,  the
    claimed behaviour/response  of  the  appellant's  parents  is  entirely
    consistent with the norm in Albania - as disclosed  by  the  background
    evidence that was before the FtT and the then extant  country  guidance
    decision.

14. Given aforementioned explanation, the consistency of the  account  with
    the background evidence and  the  acceptance  of  large  parts  of  the
    appellant's evidence by the SSHD, in my conclusion  the  FtT's  adverse
    conclusions lack the rigour of reasoning  that  was  required  in  this
    particular case.

15. This though is not where the difficulties with the FtT's decision  end.
    In paragraph 45 thereof the FtT relies upon  the  appellant's  evidence
    that her family are not strict Muslims and that she has a sister living
    in Tirana who could help  assist  her  in  reintegrating,  to  found  a
    conclusion that the appellant would be able to  safely  return  to  her
    country and re-establish herself there with her child, particularly  in
    Tirana.   However,  in  paragraph  43  of  its  decision  the  FtT  had
    previously found the appellant's evidence to be "totally  discredited".



16. It is plainly irrational for the Tribunal to found a conclusion on risk
    and internal relocation on evidence it has previously rejected.

17. Looking at the decision as a whole it  cannot,  in  my  conclusion,  be
    discounted that absent the making of the aforementioned errors the  FtT
    would have come to a different conclusion in  this  appeal.   For  this
    reason, I set aside the FtT's decision.

18. Both parties agreed at the hearing that if I  were  to  set  aside  the
    FtT's decision the appropriate course would be to remit the appeal back
    to the FtT for substantive reconsideration. That this  is  the  correct
    course is re-enforced by the  appellant's  disclosure  that  there  has
    recently been contact by independent persons in the UK with her  family
    members in Albania, and that evidence  of  such  contact,  said  to  be
    beneficial to the appellant, is to be adduced in this regard.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given above, I find that the decision of  the  FtT  contains
an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the  appeal  and  I  set
such decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to a judge of the FtT other than judge  MA  Khan,  to
be determined afresh.


Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

