
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13354/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th November 2016                          |On 7 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     m m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  born  on  26th  June  1974.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  16th  November
    2015 refusing her application for asylum, for  humanitarian  protection
    and on human rights grounds.  Her appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Trevaskis on 29th June  2016  and  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12th July 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  on  5th  September
    2016.  The permission states that the judge may have erred  in  law  in
    drawing adverse inferences from the absence of corroborating  evidence,
    in particular a claimed arrest warrant  and  this  may  have  played  a
    material role in the negative credibility findings of the  judge.   The
    permission goes on to state that it is  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  failed  to  reach  any  clear  findings  on   the   risk   of
    interrogation/detention on return to Iran as  a  single  woman  with  a
    child.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response which  states  that  the  judge  found  the
    appellant's claim to be wholly incredible. The judge refers to the lack
    of evidence to support her claim and the inability of the Appellant  to
    explain discrepancies between her screening interview  and  her  asylum
    interview.  The response states that these matters clearly and properly
    went to the judge's overall credibility assessment and  the  judge  was
    entitled to his decision.  The judge considered  the  relevant  country
    guidance when deciding whether the Appellant would be at risk on return
    and took account of the Appellant's evidence, that  her  ex-husband  is
    the father of her son and since  the  child  was  conceived  after  her
    divorce, found it not  to  be  plausible  that  the  authorities  would
    suspect the child to be the result of an adulterous relationship.   The
    response goes on to state that the Appellant has  family  in  Iran  and
    states that it was open to the judge to conclude that  the  Appellant's
    son's best interests will be served  by  returning  to  Iran  with  the
    Appellant where she has family.

The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that he accepts that the judge  should
    have made a decision on whether  he  accepted  that  the  appellant  is
    divorced.  He submitted that the judge seems  not  to  have  considered
    properly the difficulty for the Appellant  returning  to  Iran  with  a
    child outside marriage, if she is divorced.  He submitted that the only
    mention in the decision about the divorce is at paragraph 53  when  the
    judge states that the Appellant has been  able  to  obtain  a  document
    which she claims is evidence of her divorce.   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that this could be an error on the part of the judge.

 5. The Appellant's representative made  his  submissions  relying  on  the
    grounds of application.  He referred  to  the  grounds,  in  particular
    number 4, which states there is a  significant  factual  inaccuracy  at
    paragraph 9 of the  decision  when  the  First-tier  Judge  incorrectly
    states that the Appellant's ex-father-in-law  threatened  to  have  the
    Appellant arrested for adultery after her  marriage  as  in  fact  this
    threat was made after the Appellant's divorce.  He submitted that  this
    is a core aspect of the decision and  this  error  indicates  that  the
    judge failed to properly understand the  sequence  of  events  in  this
    Appellant's life.

 6. The representative submitted that at paragraph 21 of the refusal letter
    the Respondent states that the fourth document refers to  a  khula  but
    there is no mention of the talaq.   He submitted that that is  not  the
    case.  The talaq is mentioned in the divorce  document.   He  submitted
    that this was a misunderstanding by the Respondent.

 7. The representative submitted that the judge makes no findings about the
    child of the Appellant and fails to consider the risk to the  appellant
    on return with the child.  He submitted that this Appellant  is  likely
    to be interrogated on return and at that point she will be at  risk  of
    being found guilty of anti-Islamic behaviour by having a child  out  of
    wedlock.  He submitted that this is the  particular  social  group  the
    Appellant is in - female adulteress returning to Iran with a child born
    out of wedlock.  I was referred to the case of ME Iran CG [2003]  UKIAT
    00166.

 8. The representative then referred to paragraph 51  of  the  decision  in
    which the judge states that it is unclear why  the  Appellant  has  not
    been able to provide evidence from her ex-husband  to  corroborate  her
    claims.  When the Appellant first made her claim her  husband  was  her
    dependant.  The representative submitted that  her  ex-husband  is  now
    back in Iran after being accused of domestic abuse  by  the  Appellant.
    He submitted that it is not surprising that there is no  evidence  from
    him and I was referred to the Respondent's bundle  at  D1  which  is  a
    letter from Simone James  an  independent  domestic  violence  advocate
    dated 27th October 2015 which refers to the Appellant's statement  that
    she has been a victim of domestic violence.  I was also referred to the
    reference at G13 to 15 of the Respondent's bundle, about  the  injuries
    sustained by the Appellant.

 9. The representative submitted that the reason there is no arrest warrant
    is that normally in Iran, arrest warrants are not served in the absence
    of the accused.

10. The representative submitted that the Appellant's claim of apostasy  is
    not strong but there is a letter from the church which baptised her and
    she has given  a  reasonable  explanation  of  why  she  has  not  been
    attending church in Swindon.  Her reasons are the language barrier  and
    child care.  She was dispersed to Swindon and had been attending church
    where she was staying before that.  I was referred to paragraph  57  of
    the decision in which the case of SB (Iran)  [2009]  UK  AIT  00053  is
    quoted.  The judge states that she does not  accept  that  anti-Islamic
    conduct will be ascribed to the Appellant on return.

11. I was asked to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.

12. The Presenting Officer made his submissions stating  that  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 9 of the decision are not unlawful.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that  from  paragraph  46  on  in  the
    decision the judge has given detailed reasons for dismissing the appeal
    and for finding  a  lack  of  credibility  throughout  the  Appellant's
    evidence.  The judge  refers  to  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  and
    rejects the Appellant's explanations.  At paragraph 54 the  judge  does
    not find her claim to be credible.  She refers to the lack  of  medical
    evidence and at paragraph 50 suggests that the  surgery  the  Appellant
    had carried out may have been for cosmetic enhancement and not  because
    of abuse.  He submitted that the judge's findings at paragraph 9 do not
    have any bearing on the judge finding the claim to be unreliable.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant as a woman does not
    form part of a particular social group on return to Iran.  She will not
    be at risk as a woman.  He  submitted  that  as  the  judge  finds  the
    appellant to be lacking in credibility, her claim  as  a  member  of  a
    particular  social  group,  being  a  woman  guilty   of   anti-Islamic
    behaviour, also falls away.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  correctly
    finds that the appellant will not be at risk on return as a  woman  and
    will not be at risk on return as a failed asylum seeker in the UK.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that everything hinges on whether this
    Appellant is divorced or not.  What has to be decided  is  whether  the
    child is the result of a relationship outside marriage.   At  paragraph
    51 of  the  decision  the  judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's  husband
    originally being a dependant on her claim and the  fact  that  at  that
    point there was no statement and no evidence from him.  The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that the judge was entitled to make this finding.  He
    obviously felt that at that point her husband would have given evidence
    but there is none on the file.

16. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraph  52  of  the  decision  in
    which the judge disposes of the domestic  violence  accusation.   There
    was no evidence before the judge of a police investigation.  All  there
    is is a letter from a domestic violence advocate who simply repeats the
    Appellant's account.  The judge finds that this part of the Appellant's
    evidence lacks credibility.  The judge refers to the  letter  from  the
    domestic violence advocate and the Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    the judge has come to a lawful conclusion.

17. With regard to the arrest warrant the Presenting Officer submitted that
    there was no evidence before the judge that  arrest  warrants  are  not
    handed out if the accused is not present.  He accepted  that  this  may
    not be normal but the judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    absence of that document. At  paragraph  53  the  judge  refers  to  "a
    document which she claims is evidence of her divorce".  It is not clear
    whether the judge believed she is divorced.

18. With regard to the Appellant's evidence that she has become a Christian
    the Presenting Officer submitted that this was a new issue and due to a
    lack of evidence the judge was entitled to find that this did not  ring
    true.  When a Muslim becomes a Christian convert corroborative evidence
    is required from the church, in person, if possible.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that the only error there  can  be  in
    this decision is that the judge did not make a finding on  whether  the
    Appellant is divorced or not, whether she  has  a  child  born  out  of
    wedlock and if  she  has,  what  the  consequences  of  this  are.   He
    suggested that this claim could be returned to the judge in question to
    make a decision on these matters but that the  judge's  other  findings
    should stand.

20. I asked the Presenting  Officer  if  he  accepts  that  on  return  the
    Appellant is likely to be interrogated and he stated that she  probably
    will be and she will be asked questions about her background  and  what
    she did in the United Kingdom.  He stated that  there  needs  to  be  a
    resolution on the position of the child in this case.

21. The Appellant's representative submitted that the  divorce  certificate
    makes mention of there being a talaq.  He submitted  that  the  judge's
    analyses at paragraphs 46 onwards have been infected by her failure  to
    understand the core of the account.  He submitted that paragraph  9  is
    significant in this connection. It is not being argued that women  form
    their own particular social group, this Appellant's circumstances  make
    her part of a particular social group.

22. With regard to the Appellant's ex-husband not  providing  any  evidence
    the representative submitted that it is  not  clear  what  evidence  he
    could  have  provided  that  would  help  the  Appellant's  claim.   He
    submitted that the domestic violence occurred before the Appellant  was
    interviewed and it is not normal for statements  etc.  to  be  provided
    before the interview.  He submitted that the judge  requiring  evidence
    from the Appellant's ex-husband is an unreasonable evidential burden on
    the  Appellant.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant's  husband  was  a
    dependant on her claim at the beginning.

23. With regard to the arrest warrant the representative submitted that  he
    cannot recall what was presented to the judge about this but  it  would
    be unusual, based on the objective evidence, for an arrest  warrant  to
    be served when the accused was absent.

24. He submitted that it would not be appropriate  for  this  claim  to  be
    returned to the original judge based on the errors in her decision  and
    that if I find there to be an error of law then the whole claim  should
    be reconsidered in all its terms.

Decision and Reasons

25. I do not find that paragraph 9 of the decision goes to the core of  the
    claim.  I find that the judge has understood the sequence of events and
    the relevant points in issue.  The wording of this paragraph is poor.

26. The issue in this case is whether the judge finds that the Appellant is
    divorced as stated by her.  The judge has made no decision on this  and
    no decision on risk on return as a result  of  this  or  the  situation
    relating to the child of the Appellant.

27. The judge has found there to be a lack of credibility  throughout  this
    Appellant's evidence.  He does not believe the Appellant's  account  of
    her being beaten and abducted and of her fleeing from Iran with her ex-
    husband and he does not believe the Appellant has renounced her  Muslim
    faith.  The judge refers to inconsistencies in the Appellant's  account
    in her two interviews and the judge does  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    explanation of why there are these discrepancies.  The judge refers  to
    there being a lack of medical evidence relating to the lashes given  to
    the Appellant and the facial surgery she undertook and the judge  notes
    that originally there was no mention of this surgery being anything  to
    do with an attack by her husband's family.   With  regard  to  her  ex-
    husband corroborating her evidence I do not find it to be  unreasonable
    for the judge to find it strange that there is  nothing  from  her  ex-
    husband when he was originally a dependant on her claim.  The judge was
    also not satisfied that the  Appellant  had  to  seek  protection  from
    domestic violence by her partner.   He  has  clearly  seen  the  letter
    produced but this letter merely repeats what  the  Appellant  told  the
    writer of the letter and again the judge finds that credibility has not
    been established about this.

28. I am not giving much weight to  the  judge's  comments  on  the  arrest
    warrant as  the  objective  evidence  indicates  that  normally  arrest
    warrants are not served in the absence of the accused.   I  find  there
    are no errors in the judge's findings about the appellant's  conversion
    to Christianity.

29. I find that the  judge's  credibility  findings  are  unarguable.   His
    findings on credibility must stand but I find that there is an error in
    this judge's decision in that he has made  no  finding  on  whether  he
    believes the Appellant is divorced and if  she  is  what  her  risk  on
    return to Iran will be with a child born out of wedlock, and  what  the
    child's position will be if returned.

30. In these circumstances I am referring this appeal  back  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Trevaskis for findings to be made upon these matters and
    based on these findings he may  leave  the  decision  as  it  presently
    stands or overturn the decision based on these new findings.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier decision has to be  returned  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Trevaskis for him to make findings on whether  he  finds  the  Appellant  is
divorced and whether, if she is divorced and if the child has been born  out
of wedlock, she will be at risk on return to Iran  and  what  the  situation
will be relating to her child if she has to return to Iran.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray         7 December 2016

