
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/13036/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th May 2016                          |On 1st June 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [J N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Sherman (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Lal, promulgated on 15th March 2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 8th  March  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of [JN], whereupon the latter applied for, and was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Albania, who  was  born  on  [  ]
    1999.  He is, accordingly, a minor.  He appealed against  the  decision
    of the Respondent Secretary of State rejecting his asylum claim on  the
    basis that he  was  involved  in  a  gay  relationship  in  Albania  in
    consequence of which he had suffered persecution.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was that he had left  Albania  in  January  2015,
    travelled to Montenegro, and then to France.  He  entered  the  UK  and
    claimed asylum on 11th March 2015.  Given his age, he was given limited
    leave to remain until April 2017, and that leave is still extant today.
     He had a screening interview on 20th March 2015.  He  was  interviewed
    on 3rd July 2015.  His application was then  refused  on  3rd November
    2015.  The Appellant claims that  he  started  a  relationship  with  a
    fellow boy at school in Albania and he would meet this boy for  sex  in
    empty classrooms and that one day he was caught by his father  who  had
    attended school.  He was then beaten up by  his  uncles  and  one  aunt
    while his parents were present.  He managed to escape  Albania  through
    the help of a friend who helped him board a bus to Montenegro.  In  the
    asylum interview he had also stated that his parents also beat  him  up
    and that the last beating was the  night  before  he  fled.   This  was
    recounted at paragraph 12 of the determination.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Lal on 8th March 2016, a surprising turn of
    events took  place.   Mr  Grennan,  who  appeared  for  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, as a Presenting Officer, sought to adduce the RALON
    check document from the British Embassy in  Tirana  dated  17th  August
    2015, and this purported to show that the Appellant had  actually  left
    on his own passport to travel to Italy on 29th January 2015, and he was
    actually accompanied by his father, [AN].  This meant that, rather than
    to be fleeing from his father, and alleging persecution in his  country
    of origin, he had actually been accompanied by his father, and  he  had
    actually travelled on his own passport, in coming to the  UK.   As  the
    judge recalled in his determination, "Mr  Grennan  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal should have this document  as  it  in  effect  demolished  the
    Appellant's story, namely that he left Albania because  he  feared  his
    family" (see paragraph 10).

 5. At the hearing, Ms Sherman, who also appeared  before  Judge  Lal,  had
    then proceeded to ask for an adjournment "so she could further  explore
    the above matters", but Judge Lal refused to do  so,  granting  only  a
    brief adjournment to allow her  to  take  instructions,  "because  'the
    Tribunal was satisfied that adjourning the case to another  date  would
    serve little purpose as the Appellant could deal in oral evidence  with
    the matters now raised'" (paragraph 11).

 6. The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 7. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  Appellant  was  caused
    prejudice by the production of evidence at the eleventh hour during the
    hearing, on which the Appellant's  representatives  themselves  had  no
    notification so as to be able to prepare for a change of evidence  that
    was  being  relied  upon  to  support  the  refusal  decision  by   the
    Respondent, Secretary of State.

 8. On 19th April 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that,
    "it is just about arguable that it may have been unfair to  refuse  the
    adjournment application" (see paragraph 3).

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 20th May  2016,  the  Appellant  was  again
    represented by Ms J Sherman, and the Respondent was represented by Mr E
    Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  Ms  Sherman  submitted
    that the refusal letter of 21st October 2015 relied heavily on negative
    findings with respect to the Appellant's  alleged  sexuality.   At  the
    hearing on 8th March 2016, despite the RALON check document being dated
    17th  August  2015,  the  Appellant  was  faced  with  new  documentary
    evidence, which could have been disclosed to the Appellant's solicitors
    much earlier than 8th March 2016.  All that  Ms  Sherman  had  was  ten
    minutes to take instructions, and this was with respect to a child  who
    was potentially vulnerable at his age, before being required to proceed
    further in the hearing.  That was the matter that caused the  Appellant
    prejudice.  Ms Sherman submitted that it was quite  possible  that  the
    Appellant's travel documents had been used by somebody else,  and  what
    they would have required was an  adjournment  for  the  opportunity  to
    inquire  into  this  possibility.   The  failure  to  give  them   that
    adjournment caused a prejudice to the Appellant's side.

10. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the production of the RALON check
    document on 8th March 2016 caused no prejudice whatsoever  because  the
    refusal letter itself was based upon the rejection of the very evidence
    that was being adduced by the Appellant.  For example, paragraph  6  of
    the refusal letter states that the Appellant had claimed that "...  you
    left Albania and travelled to Montenegro by lorry, without  using  your
    passport ... However, evidence obtained from  the  British  Embassy  in
    Tirana shows that you left Albania on 29th January 2015  by  ferry  and
    travelled to Italy using your national passport" (paragraph 6).   There
    was no evidence produced today that  this  contention  in  the  refusal
    letter by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had  in  any  way  been
    successfully challenged.  Indeed, no effort was made to challenge  this
    decision by producing evidence that the Appellant had indeed  travelled
    to Montenegro by lorry, as he  had  claimed.   Second,  the  solicitors
    could have made inquiries in relation to all these  matters  themselves
    without the RALON check document being  produced  on  8th  March  2016.
    Third, the refusal letter at paragraph 6 makes it quite clear that  the
    Appellant left Albania "using your own  national  passport".   That  is
    exactly what the RALON check document now  confirmed.   If  it  was  Ms
    Sherman's case that this was not  true,  because  the  travel  document
    could have been used by  somebody  else,  then  there  had  been  ample
    opportunity since 21st October 2015  to  make  inquiries  and  produce
    evidence to the contrary.  This had not been done.  Finally, the  judge
    was entitled to give the RALON  check  document  the  weight  that  she
    thought fit in the circumstances.  This she did do.  The Appellant  had
    suffered no prejudice.  In fact, the Appellant had been in  receipt  of
    discretionary leave to remain until 2017.

11. In reply Ms Sherman submitted that all that paragraph 6 stated was that
    the Appellant had travelled to Italy first, rather than to  Montenegro.
    Second, in  any  event,  none  of  this  made  any  difference  to  the
    Appellant's central claim, namely, that  he  had  been  the  victim  of
    persecution on account of his sexual orientation.  Where the  Appellant
    travelled, whom with, and using which passport, was  entirely  relevant
    to this central claim.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.  First, the judge had  to  bear  in  mind  the  "overriding
    principle" and to dispose of hearings in a timeous and efficient manner
    with due regard to the interests of justice.  The information now being
    provided by the RALON check was already implicit in the refusal  letter
    at paragraph 6, which had maintained that the Appellant had,  in  fact,
    travelled on his own passport, and had done so to Italy, rather than to
    Montenegro, and that this was  ("evidence  obtained  from  the  British
    Embassy in Tirana").  This allegation would  have  been  known  to  the
    Appellant's side.  It would have been mentioned to  the  Appellant  and
    his advisors.  Instructions would have been taken on this.  If  it  had
    been the case that no such travel arrangement had  been  made  in  this
    manner, and certainly not using the Appellant's own passport, it  is  a
    matter that could have been raised earlier, and it could not have  been
    dependent upon the RALON check document being  produced  on  8th  March
    2016.  Second, Judge Lal did grant the Appellant a  "brief  adjournment
    to allow her to take instructions" (paragraph 11).  At no point did  Ms
    Sherman submit that it had always been the Appellant's case that he had
    never travelled on  his  own  document  and  had  always  travelled  to
    Montenegro first, rather than to Italy.  Third, the judge  did  examine
    the sexual orientation claim quite independently of  the  document  now
    produced, and oral evidence was given by the Appellant  (see  paragraph
    13) and there was cross-examination that took place (paragraph 14).  It
    was only after that that the judge made findings of fact.

13. With respect to the judge's findings of fact, the judge  observed  that
    the photograph on the  document  is  that  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    passport number is the same as that on the Appellant's  passport.   The
    judge concluded that

         "The claimed account that he was beaten up by his father the  night
         before  and  he  fled  the  next  day  via  an  overland  route  is
         discredited by the fact that the Appellant has been shown  to  have
         crossed into Italy with his father via  the  ferry  to  Bari.   The
         Tribunal finds that this would not have  been  the  action  of  the
         alleged persecutor and in fact completely detracts  from  the  very
         core of the Appellant's story" (paragraph 16).

14. This was a conclusion that the judge was entitled to come to,  and  did
    do so on the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st May 2016
