
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13073/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2016                 |On 21 July 2016                 |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    E. Y.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Constable, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant claimed asylum in the UK on 27  March  2015,  and  said
       that he had entered the UK illegally earlier that day. His claim  was
       based upon his assertion that he was a citizen  of  Eritrea,  and  as
       such faced a real risk of harm upon  removal  from  the  UK  to  that
       country.

    2. The asylum application was refused on 27 October 2015, and a decision
       was made to remove him from the UK in consequence. The Appellant duly
       appealed that immigration decision and his appeal was in  due  course
       heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge Kainth. The appeal  was  dismissed
       in a decision promulgated on 17 March 2016 in the course of which his
       claim to be a citizen of Eritrea was rejected as untrue.

    3. The Appellant lodged an application with the First Tier Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal. The application asserted firstly that the Judge
       should not have placed any weight upon the  languages  the  Appellant
       claimed to speak, or not to speak. Secondly it was asserted that  the
       Judge should not have  given  reduced  weight  to  a  publication  by
       Professor Riggan, simply because Counsel  who  had  appeared  on  the
       Appellant's behalf had not placed any reliance upon it.

    4. The application was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Ford  on  19
       April 2016, but only on the second ground. The first ground was  said
       to disclose no arguable error of law.

    5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 28 April 2016. She pointed
       out that the second ground  did  not  identify  how  the  content  of
       Professor Riggan's publication was said to have been relevant to  the
       issue the Judge had to decide, and, that Counsel must have  concluded
       it was not relevant. Since the Judge did not overlook  its  existence
       the second ground disclosed no arguable error of law.

    6. The Appellant made no application pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
       Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

    7. Thus the matter came before me.




  Error of law?

    8. The first ground was not renewed before me. I need say no more  about
       it.

    9. The publication in question appears at B5 of the  Appellant's  second
       bundle of documents filed for  the  appeal.  It  bears  no  date,  or
       signature, and it is not at all clear in  what  medium  it  has  been
       published, or copied from. Professor Riggan is an Associate Professor
       at Arcadia University in  Pennsylvania,  and  after  an  introductory
       paragraph describing her work as a political anthropologist, there is
       a title "In between nations; Ethiopian  born  Eritreans,  Liminality,
       and War", with the text following.

   10. There is nothing in the bundle of papers  filed  for  the  appeal  to
       suggest that  Professor  Riggan  has  given  her  permission  to  the
       publication being used  in  evidence  in  the  appeal.  Moreover  the
       publication in question does not suggest that the author has ever met
       the Appellant, or, that she has ever been  instructed  to  offer  any
       opinion as expert evidence to be relied upon in  his  appeal.  It  is
       clear that this is not an expert's report analysing his claim to be a
       citizen of Eritrea, either by his language, or his knowledge of  that
       country.

   11. Before me, Mr Constable (who did not appear below) accepted  that  he
       had no  instructions  to  challenge  as  inaccurate  the  content  of
       paragraph 37 of the Judge's decision. Thus I accept as  accurate  the
       Judge's record that  the  Appellant's  former  Counsel  had  made  no
       reference to this publication in the course of his submissions.

   12. Mr Constable accepted, correctly,  that  he  could  not  advance  the
       proposition that the Judge was unaware of this  publication.  He  had
       made specific  reference  to  it  within  his  decision  and  he  had
       concluded that its existence and content did not assist him.

   13. Accordingly I asked Mr Constable to identify the passages within  the
       publication that he wished to argue would shed light upon whether the
       Appellant was telling the truth. He was unable to do so.

   14.  In  the  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
       permission to appeal was granted, the grounds  disclose  no  arguable
       error of law in the Judge's approach to the evidence. The content  of
       the publication in question was not considered sufficiently  relevant
       to the central issue in dispute in the  appeal  for  the  Appellant's
       former Counsel to have made any reference to it in the course of  his
       representation of the Appellant. Mr Constable is unable  to  identify
       to me why that professional assessment was mistaken. The  Judge,  did
       not overlook the existence of the publication, and  Mr  Constable  is
       unable to identify to me any passage within it that was  relevant  to
       the central issue in dispute, and which if it had been  used  by  the
       Judge  as  the  lens  through  which  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
       considered, could have led to a different result. The  Appellant  has
       therefore failed to establish that there was any error  of  law  that
       requires the decision to be set aside and  remade.  The  decision  to
       dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

   15. Accordingly the finding that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  citizen  of
       Eritrea must stand. That being the case there is no prospect  of  his
       being removed from the UK to Eritrea. No positive finding of fact was
       made by the Judge as to the Appellant's true nationality.




  DECISION

  The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 17 March
  2016 did not involve the making of an error of law  in  the  decision  to
  dismiss the appeal that requires  that  decision  to  be  set  aside  and
  remade. The decision to dismiss the appeal is accordingly confirmed.




  Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
  Tribunal) Rules 2008

  Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant is  granted
  anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly
  identify him. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the
  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead   to
  proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 21 July 2016
