
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa 13736 2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2013                               |On 9 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               monica makitha
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney solicitor from Duncan Moghal Solicitors
                    & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Burundi.  She was born on 8 March 1984 and
    so is now 29 years old.  She appealed the decision of the respondent  on
    22 September 2010 to remove her from the United  Kingdom.   It  was  her
    case that she is  a  refugee  or  otherwise  entitled  to  international
    protection.  Her appeal was dismissed  by  an  Immigration  Judge  in  a
    determination  promulgated  on  6  November  2010.   That  decision  was
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal ruled  that  there
    was no  material  error  in  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge.
    Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was given by Hooper LJ on  5
    April 2012. On 5 July 2012 Sullivan LJ  approved  a  consent  order  and
    allowed the appeal "to the extent that  it  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal (IAC) for a further reconsideration,  without  determining  the
    merits of the appeal for reasons set out in the  attached  Statement  of
    Reasons".

 2. At paragraph 7 of the Statement of Reasons it was noted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had determined that:

     (a) the appellant is a Burundi national;

     (b) the appellant probably spent ten years in Tanzania rather  than  in
Kenya;

     (c) the appellant suffered sexual abuse and

     (d) Burundi was listed by the US Department of  State  as  a  "Tier  2"
         country in respect of its compliance with the  Trafficking  Victims
         Protection Acts (TVPA) minimum standards (i.e. one whose government
         does "not fully comply with the TVPA's minimum standards,  but  are
         making significant efforts to bring themselves into compliance with
         those standards;".

 3. By the time  the  matter  reached  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  respondent
    unequivocally accepted that the appellant had  been  trafficked  to  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of sexual exploitation.

 4. According to paragraph 13 of the Statement of Reasons:

         "The parties have agreed that this matter should be  remitted  back
         to the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration on the basis of following
         agreed facts:

         (i)  the appellant was trafficked into the United Kingdom  for  the
         purposes of sexual exploitation;

         (ii) Burundi has been downgraded by the US Department of  State  to
         the "Tier 2 Watch List" in respect of its compliance with the  TVPA
         minimum standards."

 5. There was some discussion before me about the way to  proceed.   In  the
    end the parties agreed that the effect of paragraph 13 is that I had  to
    decide in  the  light  of  the  most  recent  evidence  about  Burundi's
    compliance with TVPA minimum standards if this  appellant,  as  a  woman
    trafficked into the United Kingdom, is now a refugee.

 6. It is of course for the appellant to prove her case.  She  must  satisfy
    me that there is at least a real risk of  her  being  persecuted  for  a
    reason recognised by the Qualification Directive.

 7. Ms Fenney indicated that this  was  not  a  case  that  needed  separate
    consideration on human rights grounds.  If this appellant  was  at  risk
    then she was a refugee.  However she modified her definition  of  social
    group. She said that the appellant was "lone woman who was a  victim  or
    trafficking" rather that just a "victim of trafficking".  The  reference
    to "lone woman" might be better understood as a refinement of the  first
    point rather than a  new  departure  opening  up  entirely  new  issues.
    Certainly Mr Richards was given an express opportunity to respond to the
    possible change in tack and did not wish to say more than he had already
    said.

 8. I was told little about the appellant's child.  I know he is a boy  born
    in November 2012.  Ms Fenney explained that she did not have  the  birth
    certificate at the hearing room but understood it had been disclosed  to
    the Home Office.  Be that as it may, it had not  been  disclosed  to  Mr
    Richards or to me.  I do not know if the child is a British national.

 9. I decided to continue with the hearing before me and to decide it on the
    evidence that I had received.  If my decision  in  the  appeal  did  not
    entitle the appellant to some leave to remain in the United Kingdom then
    thought will be given to any further application that could be framed on
    behalf of the child rather than the appellant.  That is not a matter for
    me.  I draw attention to it to make clear that I have not overlooked the
    possibility of the child being a British national and having  particular
    rights of his own to remain but these things have not  been  established
    before me.

10. It is the appellant's case that she is of Hutu ethnicity  and  was  born
    in Burundi.  When she was aged about  5  her  mother  and  brother  were
    killed by a Tutsi group who entered the village.  Certainly it is wholly
    consistent with the background material that racially motivated killings
    were carried out by some Tutsis against some Hutus at around that time.

11. When the appellant was aged 10, and still to some extent under the  care
    of the grandmother, she was corrupted into prostitution.  When  she  was
    aged 15 she was attacked with a knife and taken to hospital.   When  she
    returned from hospital she was told that her grandmother  had  died  and
    she was on her own.  She was taken by two men who pimped her.

12. At some point she was taken to Tanzania and then made  her  way  to  the
    United Kingdom.

13. It will be appreciated from this that the appellant has  only  lived  in
    Burundi as a child.  She lived in Kenya or Tanzania for  a  little  over
    fifteen years and she has been in the United  Kingdom  for  almost  nine
    years.

14. I note from the papers  that  the  appellant's  conduct  in  the  United
    Kingdom has not always been  creditable.   She  entered  under  a  false
    identity, which might be excusable given  her  circumstances,  but  also
    claimed asylum in a false identity and having claimed asylum  failed  to
    attend appointments so that she was recorded as an absconder.  I  record
    these things to make clear  that  although  the  appellant  has  plainly
    suffered dreadful experiences which are not in any way made less serious
    by her own misconduct, it does not escape my notice  that  she  has  not
    been straightforward with the respondent's officers even when looking to
    them for help.

15. Ms Fenney did not wish to call additional oral evidence.  She based  her
    case before me on submissions supported by reports in a bundle served on
    the morning of the hearing.  This is  substantially  the  same  material
    served before but it included the US Department of State Trafficking  in
    Persons Report 2013: Burundi Polish Town 19 June 2013.  Mr Richards  had
    not seen this before the hearing but given the source  of  the  document
    sensibly took no objection to its late production.

16. Ms Fenney began by drawing  my  attention  to  the  Integrated  Regional
    Information Network's News (IRIN),  "Burundi:  State  still  accused  of
    killings, cover-ups, 10-10-2012".  This report is of limited value.  The
    point I draw from it is  that  there  are  still  credible  accounts  of
    extrajudicial killing and banditry emerging from  Burundi.   The  report
    includes an observation and rhetorical question from the chairman of the
    Forum for Strengthening of Civil Society who says: "The killings 'create
    a climate of control and fear'.  They send a message: 'if  you  want  to
    stand up against us you will end up like that'.  How can  we  make  this
    democracy work if we can kill someone for his ideas?"

17. There is no reason to think that this appellant is at  risk  because  of
    her ideas but the report does underline  the  generally  high  level  of
    lawlessness in Burundi and this must illuminate my findings.

18. The IRIN Report "Burundi Tanzania: a  troubled  homecoming,  15/10/2012"
    postulates the very considerable  difficulties  facing  people  who  are
    returned to Burundi because of the volumes involved.  The suggestion  is
    that community resources, such as schools, are completely inadequate for
    the increase in population created by the planned  return  of  refugees.
    The report acknowledges a plan that would involve  35,000  people  being
    returned in three months.  The report concluded with an observation that
    the Burundian government "needs to be better prepared".   Not  much  was
    being done for the 3,000 or so who had no land to  await  their  return.
    This is relevant because the main occupation in Burundi  is  subsistence
    farming.

19. This theme relating to the poverty in Burundi is picked up in a  further
    IRIN Report of 21/11/2012 that says:

         "The economy of Burundi, one of the poorest countries in the world,
         is based on subsistence agriculture,  in  which  some  90%  of  the
         population is engaged.  Few farmers grow enough to sell much of the
         surplus.  The private sector is minimal, and offers few  employment
         possibilities.

         Such opportunities are particularly important for  former  refugees
         who did not farm while out of the country;  for  them  regarding  a
         plot  without  agricultural  training  is  not  very  conducive  to
         economic self-sufficiency.

         Many refugees received some form of skills training in camps,  such
         as carpentry, or operated small businesses such as shops or bicycle
         tax corporations, but find themselves unable to apply  such  trades
         back home for lack of  materials,  capital,  access  to  credit,  a
         recognition of professional qualifications gained in exile, or  the
         social networks that facilitate economic activity."

20. It  is  right  to  emphasise  that  Burundi  is  not  presented  in  the
    background papers as an example of a failed state.  There is recognition
    by a United Nations official on 24 January 2013 that:

         "Burundi  continues  to  make  steady  progress  in   strengthening
         governance and recovering from  the  recurrent  strife,  but  given
         persistent  political  tensions  and  poverty,  support  from   the
         international communities is still required.

21. The United Nations Children's' Fund (UNICEF)  Report  of  17  June  2013
    refers to Burundi having a "high rate of chronic malnutrition" and  that
    58% of children under 5 are "chronically malnourished". This is  one  of
    the highest rates in the world.

22. The US  Department  of  State,  Trafficking  in  Persons  Report  20/11:
    Burundi, 27/06/2011" describes how Burundi is on a "tier 2  watch  list"
    which indicates that it is in risk of being degraded to a tier  3  state
    by the Department of State of the United States of  America  because  of
    its ability to resist trafficking.  Burundi is described  as  a  "source
    country for children and possible women subjected to forced begging  and
    sex trafficking".  The report notes how some families are  complicit  in
    the exploitation of disabled children or  adults  and  vulnerable  young
    girls are offered accommodation in the guise of benevolence which  turns
    out  to  be  a  preparatory  act  of  prostitution.   The  same   report
    acknowledges how "within its limited  capabilities"  the  government  is
    trying to identify trafficking victims and raise public awareness but it
    was not enjoying any great success in protecting people. The report also
    noticed how the government had failed to prosecute, still less  convict,
    any traffic offenders in the period considered.

23. A similar report dated 19 June 2013 explains that Burundi was granted  a
    waiver from an otherwise required downgrade to tier 3 because it  had  a
    written  plan  which  if  implemented  would  constitute  the  necessary
    significant efforts but the report had not been implemented.   Elsewhere
    the "tier" system is explained so that tier 3 is identified as a country
    whose governments do not fully comply with the minimum standards and are
    not making significant efforts so to do whereas a country on  a  tier  2
    watch list is not complying but is making significant efforts.

24. Mr Richards made two points of considerable  weight.   Firstly  he  said
    that the appellant is not typical of the people trafficked  in  Burundi.
    The report points towards the risk to children  although  it  recognises
    that there may be a problem for some women.

25. The paradigm example of victims of sex trafficking who are refugees  are
    people who are trafficked and then quickly returned to the country  from
    which they came only to be met again by those who had ill-used them  who
    take them for a second time.  This horrid set of  circumstances  is  not
    relevant to this case.  The appellant was not trafficked in  Burundi  at
    all.  She left Burundi as a child.   There  is  no  possibility  of  her
    coming across those who corrupted her previously.  Her circumstances are
    entirely different.

26. His next point was that the appellant would return to Burundi  with  the
    advantage of a capital sum available to  those  who  return  voluntarily
    which, by local standards, would have significant buying power. She also
    had the advantage of some education in the United Kingdom.  It is plain,
    for example, that the appellant has some grasp of conversational English
    which would surely be of advantage to her.

27. These points are undoubtedly well-founded but are not as  good  as  they
    might at first appear.  As indicated above the  opportunities  for  work
    outside subsistence agriculture are few.  It is  absolutely  right  that
    the appellant might be able to get secure employment amongst the 10%  or
    so who do not work on the land and might be able to use  her  apparently
    modest skills in the English language to advantage.  If  that  does  not
    happen even attractive sums of capital run out and  will  not  advantage
    her.  A woman who has been out of the country for most of her  life  and
    certainly has no adult experience  of  living  in  Burundi  and  has  no
    relevant skills in the predominant area of economic activity will be  in
    an extremely  difficult  position.  I  cannot  find  that  Mr  Richards'
    suggested scenario is at all probable.  It  is  no  more  than  a  happy
    possibility in a very difficult place.

28. Clearly I must contemplate the appellant returning with her child.   His
    best interests on what I have seen  (and  the  evidence  has  been  very
    skimpy) would be to remain in the United Kingdom with his mother but  as
    is usually the case with small children being with the  mother  is  more
    important than being in a particular country.  However  he  will  be  an
    added burden on her ability to secure  economic  activity.   She  has  a
    child to feed.  I find that a lone woman with her history must  be  more
    than ordinarily vulnerable to corruption and to  prostitution.   However
    appalling her experiences were she does know how to  make  a  living  in
    that degrading and horrid way.  I do not see that she has much  else  to
    offer the country of Burundi.  I remind myself that  I  am  not  dealing
    with certainties but with real risks.

29. I find that there is a real risk of the appellant coming  across  people
    who would coerce her into prostitution in the event of her return.  That
    is sufficient to show that she is a refugee and is entitled  to  refugee
    status.  As indicated above I am uncertain if this is  best  categorised
    as being a victim of trafficking or being a lone woman but for  a  woman
    in Burundi  in  her  circumstances  there  is  not  much  difference  in
    practical terms.

30. I wish to make it plain that this is  a  case  that  turns  on  its  own
    particular facts.  There are several pointers to the appellant being  in
    the vulnerable position that I find her to be. This decision that is not
    intended to suggest that no women can be returned to Burundi.  Each case
    must be looked at on its own.

31. I am satisfied to the low standard required that  this  appellant  risks
    serious ill-treatment in the event of her return and I allow her  appeal
    on Refugee Convention grounds.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 August 2013                  |










