
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/13632/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd October 2016                  |On 25th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   ms A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge B A Morris, promulgated on 27th June 2016, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on  1st  June  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Albania, who was born  on  22nd
    March 1987.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    9th December 2015, refusing her application for  asylum  on  the  basis
    that she had been a victim of human trafficking.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant' claim is that she met a man by the name of Besim in June
    2010.  When her father discovered this relationship  he  beat  her  and
    threatened her.  The Appellant was scared to return home.  So she  went
    to a house with Besim whereupon she was raped by two men and locked  in
    a room for two days and told that she would have to work for Besim as a
    prostitute.  She was later taken to Greece and handed over  to  another
    group of men in Athens.  She eventually asked  a  client,  an  Albanian
    man, to help her and he arranged fake identification and  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom via Germany.  When  she  was  unable  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on 25th February 2012, she returned back to  Greece  and
    then to Albania where she stayed thereafter  three  months  in  Tirana.
    She raised no problems at this time.  She did not contact her immediate
    family.  She did not go to the police.  Her aunt  then  helped  her  to
    travel from Albania to Greece by car and then from Greece to the United
    Kingdom by lorry.  She arrived in the UK on 25th May 2012  and  claimed
    asylum on 26th February 2013.

 4. It is a feature of this case that on 26th  November  2015,  a  National
    Referral mechanism decision concluded in her  favour  that  she  was  a
    victim of human  trafficking,  and  had  been  subject  to  slavery  or
    servitude and forced or compulsory labour.  It is  also  a  feature  of
    this case that the  Respondent  accepted  that  she  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking (as the judge noted at paragraph 8 of  the  determination).
    However, the Respondent took the view that the Appellant would  not  be
    at risk of re-trafficking upon return to Albania.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge observed that there was an NHS letter dated  31st  July  2015
    (at page 18 of the Appellant's bundle) where it was accepted  that  the
    Appellant appeared to be suffering from PTSD and  that  her  protective
    factors were her son and her boyfriend (paragraph  30).   However,  the
    judge concluded that there were no particular  vulnerabilities  to  the
    Appellant (paragraph 30).  The judge also held that on the  Appellant's
    own evidence she returned to Albania after she was refused admission to
    the United Kingdom in February 2012 and therefore  there  could  be  no
    risk in Albania for her (paragraph 34).  The  Appellant  also  did  not
    make a claim in Germany where she had been removed to from  the  United
    Kingdom (paragraph 36).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  treat  the
    Appellant's accepted story as a trafficked person as a  starting  point
    when considering the country  guidance  case.   The  judge  also  acted
    unreasonably in failing to accept that the Appellant had mental  health
    problems.  Furthermore the judge erred in taking the  view  that  there
    were no particular vulnerabilities to the Appellant.   There  was  also
    the risk of re-trafficking in line with the country guidance case.

 7. On 1st August 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge had  made  an  inadequate  assessment  of  the  risk  of  re-
    trafficking, and the judge failed also to make a finding in respect  of
    the Appellant's evidence that she lived with  her  aunt,  after  return
    from the United Kingdom, in hiding, and that her  aunt  was  unable  to
    accommodate her now.  There were  also  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration bearing in mind accepted facts.

 8. A Rule 24 response was entered on 9th September 2016 by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me on 3rd October 2016, Mr O'Callaghan, appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    apply the country guidance case of TD (Trafficked  woman)  [2006]  UKUT
    00092.  Furthermore, there was stark evidence in  this  case  that  the
    Appellant, when providing sexual services as a  prostitute  subject  to
    slavery and servitude as a trafficked person in Albania, was locked up,
    on the first floor of a  casino,  where  her  sexual  acts  were  video
    recorded (see question 80 of the asylum interview).  When the Appellant
    was asked during her interview how she knew that she  was  being  video
    recorded she had replied, "they used  to  tell  us  to  wear  different
    clothes and then we would pose in front of the camera and we were  told
    to do different movements and positions  and  things  like  that"  (see
    question 81 of the refusal of the interview).  Mr O'Callaghan submitted
    that these  facts  alone  demonstrated  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    identifiable by virtue of a film that would be in  existence  somewhere
    whereupon she could be identified as a person who had worked  providing
    sexual services.  She had also said in her interview that  amongst  the
    people who came to her for forced sex were policemen in the area  which
    meant that she could not turn to the state authorities for  protection.
    The failure of the judge to make a decision on this important piece  of
    evidence was an error of law.

10. Second, the uncontested  evidence  had  been  that  the  Appellant  was
    unmarried, so that when a child was born in those circumstances, it was
    wrong for the judge to have concluded that,  "there  is  no  sufficient
    evidence before me to show that this child was not born out of wedlock"
    (paragraph 26).  The judge's reasoning was that, "his father  is  named
    on the birth certificate and his  nationality  is  given  as  Albanian.
    Such information is confirmation by the Appellant  herself"  (paragraph
    26).  This did not follow at all in that  even  a  child  born  out  of
    wedlock could have the father's name put on the birth  certificate,  as
    had been the case here, particularly as there was no  evidence  at  all
    that the Appellant had married anyone, but the evidence had been  quite
    to the contrary.

11. Third, there was a risk of re-trafficking, because  the  Appellant  was
    just over 29 years of age, and although not in her early 20s, had  been
    video recorded, and this was an exacerbating factor that  exceptionally
    would draw attention to her and place her at very particular risk.

12.  Finally,  the  Appellant  could  not  seek  the  assistance  of  state
    authorities because the uncontested evidence before the judge was that,
    she knew that the police were clients in  Albania  because  they  would
    come in their uniforms.  She said that there were  other  high  profile
    people such as MPs.  She saw them on the TV but she is scared of naming
    them" (paragraph 18).   The  judge  did  not  make  a  finding  on  the
    implications of such a state of affairs with respect to the  risk  that
    the Appellant was being placed under as a result of these matters.

13. In short, Mr O'Callaghan submitted that if these facts were uncontested
    then all that needed to be done was to apply the country guidance  case
    of TD (Trafficked women) [2006] UKUT  00092  and  the  Appellant  would
    succeed on the lower level of proof.  This is because it was  accepted,
    and there was no dispute, that the Appellant had been  trafficked,  and
    indeed the Secretary of State had granted the  Appellant  discretionary
    leave to remain on that basis.  Mr  O'Callaghan  asked  me  to  make  a
    finding of an error of law and to proceed to allow the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the evidence was as it stood, and could not be bettered  any
    more than was presently the case.

14. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that he would rely upon his Rule 24
    response.  He also stated that in TD  the  medical  evidence  was  much
    stronger.  At this stage, Mr O'Callaghan interjected  politely  to  say
    that this was not true because what was unique about this case was that
    there was an NHS report confirming that  the  Appellant  suffered  from
    PTSD and had in all probability been a victim  of  trafficking  in  the
    report given on 17th May 2016.  The judge,  submitted  Mr  O'Callaghan,
    had  made  express  reference  to  this  at   paragraph   30   of   the
    determination. Therefore, if continued  Mr  O'Callaghan,  one  compares
    this with the case of TD itself (at paragraph 152), one  can  see  that
    there the facts were that whilst it was  accepted  that,  "having  been
    through the shelters once before" one would stand to benefit  from  the
    grant of asylum, then the facts here were  no  less  compelling,  given
    what the Appellant herself had been through.

15. Mr Whitwell resumed his submissions and continued  by  saying  that  he
    would have to accept that the Appellant was not  married,  as  she  had
    maintained consistently, there being no evidence to the  contrary,  and
    that the child was born out of wedlock.  However, Mr Whitwell  went  on
    to say that the judge was aware about the  Appellant's  vulnerabilities
    and properly took this into account, before applying the country  cases
    (at paragraph 27) and proceeding to dismiss the appeal.  The judge  was
    entitled to do this.

16. In reply, Mr O'Callaghan urged me to make a finding of an error of  law
    and to proceed to remake the decision.  He submitted that the case  law
    does not say that one has to be at the extreme end of  PTSD,  and  this
    being so, the report of 31st July 2015 (at page 18  of  the  bundle  of
    17th May 2016) is good enough, given that the NHS had accepted that the
    Appellant  suffered  from   PTSD.    The   Appellant   had   progressed
    considerably now, after being subject to treatment for well over a year
    and attending some thirteen sessions of expressed  therapy.   When  the
    Appellant had started she had severe PTSD and this alone would have led
    to her asylum claim being allowed on the basis of  the  application  of
    TD, so that although her condition was now moderate, it was  severe  at
    the time.  My attention was drawn to paragraphs 105 to 112 of  TD.   Mr
    O'Callaghan submitted that at paragraph 109 TD made it  clear  that  if
    one was less resilient one was more likely to  be  vulnerable  and  the
    Appellant's condition had been precisely this.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.  My
    decisions are as follows.  First, it is accepted that the Appellant had
    been a victim of human trafficking.

18. Second, there are exceptional circumstances to her condition, not least
    of which is the fact that when providing sexual services, she was video
    taped, in circumstances where prominent  people  like  MPs  and  police
    officers were known to be frequenting the premises  for  her  services.
    On the lower standard, the Appellant would be identifiable and at clear
    risk of re-trafficking.  Mr  O'Callaghan  submitted  that  before  this
    Tribunal the judge's approach below had been to "tiptoe around TD",  so
    as to do everything possible to avoid making a decision  in  favour  of
    the Appellant.

19. Third, it is certainly the case that the Appellant had a favourable NHS
    report dated 31st July 2015.  In this report, the Barnet,  Enfield  and
    Haringey NHS Trust records the circumstances of  the  Appellant  before
    undertaking a psychological assessment on 7th July 2015,  and  even  at
    this stage, it is record that, "you have  described  your  sleep  being
    disturbed, however, that this is much better now since the triage  team
    prescribed you mirtazapine".  The report goes  on  to  say  that,  "you
    confirmed experiencing disturbing images/memories from  past  traumatic
    experiences about two or three times a week", and refers to "disturbing
    dreams two or three times a week" before stating that, "you shared with
    the triage team that you have also experience hearing the voice of your
    ex-boyfriend at night, which you find distressing."   It  is  in  these
    circumstances that the report of 31st July 2015  then  concludes  that,
    "you appeared to  be  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    (PTSD)".  It is entirely wrong to conclude from this that the reference
    to "appear" is designed in some way to demonstrate a lack of  certainty
    on the part of the medical team that the Appellant was  suffering  from
    PTSD,  as  the  judge  appears  to  apply  at  paragraph  30   of   the
    determination, especially given  that  the  Appellant  was  already  on
    prescribed doses of mirtazapine.

20. In short, the NHS report of 31st July 2015  confirmed  the  Appellant's
    condition and prescribed for  her  a  "treatment  plan"  which  was  to
    consist of phased treatment over a period of time, which the  Appellant
    has availed herself.  Accordingly, the judge has fallen into error  for
    the reasons set out above.





Remaking the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the regional
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that  I  have  head
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.  Given the
    matters set out above the application of TD (Trafficked  women)  [2006]
    UKUT 00092 leads, in my conclusion, to the Appellant succeeding in  her
    asylum appeal.  That case makes  it  clear  that  Albanian  society  is
    governed by a  strict  code  of  honour,  which  not  only  means  that
    trafficked  women  would   have   very   considerable   difficulty   in
    reintegrating into their home areas on return,  but  also  will  affect
    their ability to relocate internally.  Those who have children  outside
    marriage are particularly vulnerable, as is made clear by this  country
    guidance case.  The Appellant has a child born out of wedlock, and  she
    has a father who strongly  disapproves  of  her  association  with  her
    former boyfriend, and who has rejected her, such that she is unable now
    to find any solace with her own family, and not even with the aunt with
    whom she had previously stayed.

22. Second, this country guidance case makes it clear that for a proportion
    of the victims of trafficking, their situations may mean that they  are
    especially  vulnerable  to  re-trafficking,  or  be  forced  to   other
    exploitative situations.  The reference to these situations include the
    presence of an illegitimate child, the area of origin  (which  in  this
    case is clearly relevant), the Appellant's age, which does not  exclude
    her from the risk of re-trafficking, the lack of  any  support  network
    that is available to her.  The Appellant's social status and  level  of
    education is also not one that places her in a positive situation.   On
    the lower standard, accordingly, this appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity direction is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2016


