


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/14405/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 September 2013                        |On : 10 October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     VS
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, instructed by Nag Freshlaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  4  January  1984.  She
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 August 2009, having  left  Sri  Lanka
   the previous day, and claimed  asylum  at  the  airport.  Her  claim  was
   refused on 4 November 2009 and she was refused leave to enter.

2. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 12 April 2010 and was dismissed by Judge Blandy on  28  April
   2010. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  17  May
   2010 and on 16 December 2010 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird set  aside
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  it  contained
   errors of law. She directed that the decision be re-made with no findings
   preserved and adjourned the matter for a resumed hearing on another day.

3. As a result of new issues arising by way of Article 8 of the ECHR on  the
   basis of the appellant's relationship with a Sri Lankan national and  the
   birth of their daughter on 21 August 2011, the appeal  was  adjourned  on
   several occasions for further evidence. Clarification was  sought  as  to
   the appellant's partner's immigration status and further evidence  sought
   in regard to his previous failed asylum claim and appeal and  application
   as a dependent relative under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations"). Following various  adjournments
   on that basis the appeal was transferred by  way  of  a  Transfer  Order,
   owing to Judge Baird's lack of availability and subsequently in order  to
   await a copy of the papers in the appellant's partner's asylum claim, the
   decision in  his  application  for  permanent  residence  under  the  EEA
   Regulations and a copy of further written  representations  made  on  his
   behalf on 17 March 2004.

4. The appeal then came before us on 24 September 2013.  Unfortunately,  due
   to the last minute cancellation by the (female)  Sri  Lankan  interpreter
   and the lack of availability of a replacement at short notice, the appeal
   had to be adjourned once again. All parties were in agreement  with  that
   course, given that the appellant did not feel comfortable proceeding with
   a  male  interpreter.  Furthermore,  all  parties  agreed  that  it   was
   appropriate, in view of the new issues arising and the  fact  that  there
   was to be a fresh hearing with no preserved findings, that the appeal  be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

5. With regard to the outstanding representations  made  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant's partner, Ms Everett accepted that there had been no  response
   by the UKBA, but assumed that that was because  he  had  been  granted  a
   residence permit in the meantime under the EEA Regulations  (albeit  that
   that had since  expired  and  his  application  for  permanent  residence
   refused). She considered, however, that that was not a reason to  prevent
   the appeal from proceeding. Ms Anzani was in agreement.

DECISION

6. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has  been  set  aside.
   The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
   afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
   Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), on the  grounds  that
   the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary  in
   order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such  that,  having
   regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to  remit
   the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However,
    in view of the issues involved in the appeal, we  make  such  an  order
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.



   Directions

   1. The appeal is to be listed for half a day before an all-female  court,
      with a female Tamil interpreter.


   2.  Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is to be
      filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other party no later  than
      five days before the hearing date.






















                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
