

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/15824/2009

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th March 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                           mr suren kumar krishnan
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Jegarajah (instructed by Andrew Jackson & Co)
For the Respondent:  Miss C Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. His appeal comes  before
         me via a lengthy route.


    2.   The history of this case is as follows. The Appellant  arrived  in
         the UK with a valid student visa on 19th September 2006. That  visa
         was due to expire on 31st October 2009. On 4th September  2009  the
         Appellant claimed asylum.  That application  was  refused  on  18th
         November of that year. He lodged an appeal which  a  Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal dismissed on  1st  March  2010.  Permission  to
         appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  but  a  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 25
         September 2012. Permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  was
         initially refused by the Upper Tribunal and by the Court of Appeal.
         However it was granted at an oral hearing on 4th June 2013. On 21st
         October 2013 the Court of Appeal sealed  a  Consent  Order  to  the
         effect that the original determination contained material errors of
         law  and  remitted  the  appeal   to   the   Upper   Tribunal   for
         reconsideration.


    3.   Because of its chequered history, the matter was listed for a  For
         Mention Hearing before me and Upper Tribunal Judge  McKee  on  29th
         November 2013. We directed  the  appeal  be  listed  before  me  at
         Manchester and  we  also  made  directions  as  to  the  filing  of
         evidence.  The appeal was listed for 13th February 2014.


    4.   For reasons unconnected with either party, the  matter  could  not
         proceed on 13th February and thus came before me on 5th March 2014.


    5.   On that occasion I had the Respondent's bundle and I  also  had  a
         small bundle provided by  the  Appellant's  representatives  and  a
         skeleton argument prepared by Miss Jegarajah.


    6.   During the course of the hearing I  also  admitted  into  evidence
         some earlier medical reports that, although  not  included  in  the
         bundle provided to me for the purposes of  the  hearing,  had  been
         previously in evidence before the earlier Tribunals and  were  thus
         on the Home Office file.


    7.   The Appellant in this case is of Tamil ethnicity and born  on  4th
         September 1988. His claim is that his older brother was  a  fighter
         with the LTTE working with Colonel Ramesh. At  the  instigation  of
         his brother he was taken from school in 2000 and forced to work  as
         a child soldier until he was released in 2004. He was then detained
         by the Karuna group in 2004 who were looking for  his  brother  and
         Colonel Ramesh. During his detention he was beaten  and  raped.  He
         escaped when the LTTE attacked in 2005 and then stayed with an aunt
         in Colombo. In Colombo he was stopped by the police in August  2005
         and detained by the Terrorist Investigation Department  until  July
         2006. They suspected that he had  been  a  bomber  in  Colombo  and
         during his detention he was beaten,  tortured  and  raped.  He  was
         released when his aunt paid a bribe and on 9th  September  2006  he
         left Sri Lanka for England. Once  in  the  UK  he  heard  that  his
         parents had been killed by the authorities looking for him  and  in
         August 2009 he saw a television  documentary  about  Sri  Lanka  in
         which he saw his brother shot by government forces.  He  fears  the
         Sri Lankan government and the  Karuna  group  if  returned  to  Sri
         Lanka.


    8.   It was established at the outset of the  hearing  that  the  first
         issue is the Appellant's credibility, which is  challenged  by  the
         Secretary of State. If incredible that is the end of the matter  so
         far as his asylum claim is concerned. If credible in terms  of  his
         asylum claim the question is then whether he will  be  at  risk  on
         return bearing in mind the country guidance case in relation to Sri
         Lanka, GJ and others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
         [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and the risk categories named therein. I am
         also aware that GJ is before the Court of  Appeal  and  accordingly
         the list of risk categories in GJ is not exhaustive and risk to the
         Appellant must be assessed separately and  outside  the  stated  GJ
         risk categories.


    9.   The Appellant did not give oral evidence before me because of  the
         fragile state of his mental health.  He  has  been  diagnosed  with
         Paranoid Schizophrenia as well as Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
         (PTSD) and has had a number of hospitalisations. There are  several
         reports in relation to his mental  health  the  most  complete  and
         recent being a report by Dr H Pears,  the  Consultant  Psychiatrist
         responsible for his care and dated 5th  February  2014.   There  is
         also a report from his social worker and care coordinator, Mr Simon
         Keat dated 5th February 2014. Both  reports  make  clear  that  the
         Appellant's mental state is of such fragility and susceptibility to
         relapse that he cannot give oral evidence about his claim. I accept
         those opinions as they come from  professionals  working  with  the
         Appellant.  Indeed, I also agree with Miss Jegarajah's view that it
         was also inappropriate for the Appellant to be in the hearing  room
         while his claim was discussed. The reason for my saying  this  will
         be apparent from what follows.


    Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State


    10.   Miss  Johnstone,  for  the  Secretary  of  State  challenged  the
         credibility  of  the   Appellant's   claims   on   the   basis   of
         inconsistencies in his claim. He has variously claimed to have been
         detained for two months in 2005 and at  his  SEF  interview  for  a
         period of 12 months. He has variously claimed to have been detained
         without being able to contact his family and to have been  able  to
         contact his family.


    11.  She relied on the fact that the Appellant obtained a student  visa
         which suggested he had no mental health issues when in  Sri  Lanka.
         She also noted that the Appellant claimed to have  been  threatened
         and told to leave Sri Lanka within a matter  of  days  and  yet  he
         waited for a student visa to be issued. He provided evidence to the
         Entry Clearance Officer in order to get that visa and attended  the
         Embassy for that purpose. If he had been in the peril he claimed he
         would have been unable to do so and would have left  at  the  first
         opportunity legally or illegally.


    12.  She noted that he left Sri  Lanka  using  his  own  passport  some
         months after the threats.


    13.  She noted the Appellant's claim to have  witnessed  his  brother's
         death on a TV documentary but despite that being a documentary by a
         major TV station in the UK (Channel  4)  it  has  never  been  made
         available or his brother identified.


    14.  She referred to, what she described as a major credibility  issue;
         the inconsistency in the Appellant's claim about his  parents.  She
         referred to the medical report of Dr Javiad in December  2009.   He
         it was who first diagnosed PTSD.  In his report he  said  that  the
         Appellant told him that he had seen his mother, father and siblings
         shot in Sri Lanka. However, in his interview at  question  143  and
         paragraph 24 of his asylum statement of 7th October 2009 he said he
         found out about his parents deaths when he  was  in  the  UK.  Miss
         Johnstone pointed out that the medical reports did  not  deal  with
         thatcontradiction.


    15.  She acknowledged that the Appellant had suffered several  relapses
         and noted that the reports indicated  various  stressors.  However,
         she submitted that those stressors were identified  as  being,  for
         example, cessation of his  benefits,  poor  accommodation  and  his
         appeals being dismissed. She indicated that just because he  had  a
         relapse when his appeal was dismissed did not mean that  his  claim
         was true. It could equally have been simply caused  by  the  appeal
         itself being dismissed or by matters such as accommodation and NASS
         support.


    16.  She pointed out that although the Appellant  has  a  diagnosis  of
         Schizophrenia the experts do not say whether he suffered from  this
         condition in Sri Lanka.


    17.  She referred to the most recent medical report and  the  prognosis
         contained therein indicating that there were a number of  stressors
         said to trigger a relapse and that these were  accommodation,  NASS
         support and uncertainty about  his  status.  These  stressors,  she
         argued would not be present in Sri Lanka.


    18.  So far as the availability of psychiatric treatment in  Sri  Lanka
         is concerned, Miss Johnstone relied upon the 2012 COIS  report  and
         the  attached   documents   from   non-governmental   organisations
         indicating that treatment was available in Sri Lanka.


    19.  With regard to the Country Guidance case of  GJ  she  argued  that
         even if the Appellant was credible he did not come  within  any  of
         the risk categories. It is a considerable time ago that that he was
         detained by the authorities who believed him to  be  a  bomber  and
         there is no evidence of any arrest warrants or convictions  in  his
         absence. She said that there is no evidence that he is on the  stop
         list. He is simply a Sri Lankan national returning from the UK.  He
         would only have a problem upon return if he was perceived to  be  a
         current risk and she pointed to the fact that he left legally  with
         a visa to come to the UK eight years ago as a student and there  is
         no evidence that he is  of any interest to the authorities now.


    Submissions on behalf of the Appellant


    20.  Miss Jegarajah provided me with what she described as  a  skeleton
         argument but what was in reality a written submission and  took  me
         through the asylum  interview  and  the  medical  evidence  in  her
         submissions.


    21.  A major issue argued by Miss Jegarajah with considerable merit  is
         that  at  no  time  in  the  history  of  this  case   has   proper
         consideration been given to the Vulnerable Witness Guidance and  it
         should have been. In short she submitted that if the  Tribunal  had
         given proper  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  situation  as  a
         vulnerable witness that would have had an impact on the credibility
         assessment and ought to have led the Tribunal  to  find  his  claim
         credible. She submitted that the Appellant in this case is  someone
         who suffers serious delusions and believes in ghosts.


    22.  Having submitted that the Appellant ought to be found credible she
         then went on to make submissions with regard to risk on return.


    23.  In terms of the Appellant's specific profile she referred  to  the
         fact that his parents had been killed  when  the  authorities  were
         looking for  him,  which  indicated  that  he  was  of  significant
         interest.  She  referred  to  the  fact  that  his  brother  had  a
         significant profile working as he did for Colonel Ramesh. The  fact
         that the Appellant was detained by the  TID  indicated  he  was  of
         significant interest.


    24.  She pointed out that it had been a condition of his  release  that
         he was to leave the country. He was not released because of a  lack
         of interest in him but because of a bribe and as a direct result of
         his release and a false allegation about his beating people  up  in
         order to escape, his parents were killed.


    25.  In terms of his having left Sri Lanka using his  own  passport  he
         explained at interview that an agent went with him to  the  airport
         and she referred me to paragraph 146 of GJ wherein the evidence  of
         Mr Punethanayagam to the Upper Tribunal is set out.  This included:-




              "The bribery is very common in the IDP camps as  well  as  the
             detention centres from which  even  known  LTTE  leaders  have
             managed to escape on payment of bribes.  Hence  it  cannot  be
             argued that only people of low interest to the authorities are
             able to secure their release through a bribe."


              "It is possible to leave the country using  bribery  with  the
             help of  an  agent.  The  security  officers  and  immigration
             officers at the international airport are no exception to  the
             widespread bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka. It  is  always
             possible for a person to  use  influence  or  bribery  to  get
             through the airport without being detained as an LTTE suspect.
             I have been contacted by approximately 30 clients who  managed
             to flee the country via the international  airport  whilst  in
             the adverse interest of the authorities."


    26.  She referred me to  question 63 is the asylum interview where  the
         Appellant made clear that his problems began in 1999  and  question
         65 where he had indicated that he spent a year and a  half  at  the
         LTTE  camp  and  that  it  was  his  brother  who  facilitated  his
         recruitment. She referred to the references  in  the  interview  to
         Colonel Ramesh and his  links  to  his  brother.  His  brother  was
         therefore working directly under Colonel Ramesh and would therefore
         have a significant profile. The fact that the  Appellant  had  been
         transferred to the TID meant that he was of significant interest to
         the authorities and  the  fact  that  they  had  suspected  him  of
         planting bombs.


    27.  Miss Jegarajah submitted that  the  Appellant's  brother's  actual
         situation and his perceived position  would  put  him  at  risk  on
         return. It would be on record that he had attacked officers  during
         his escape (although  untrue)  and  the  authorities  had  in  fact
         murdered his parents. He will continue to be  of  interest  to  the
         authorities due to his proximity to key figures. His was a targeted
         capture.


    28.  She submitted that the medical reports  repeatedly  refer  to  the
         Appellant's claims about torture and ill treatment as well  as  the
         murder of his family and do so throughout.


    29.  She referred me to the most recent  medical  report  of  Dr  Pears
         which incorporated a full review of his  previous  medical  history
         identifying all the evidence taken into account.  She  referred  to
         what had been said in his asylum claim and  reminded  me  that  the
         Appellant is  someone  who  has  varying  degrees  of  lucidity  as
         referenced by the number of relapses. He clearly responds  well  to
         medication so that he is discharged. He therefore  has  periods  of
         lucidity. He has been  diagnosed  with  PTSD  and  major  psychotic
         episodes which appear to be leading to  a  concluded  diagnosis  of
         Paranoid Schizophrenia.


    30.  She submitted that so far as the  Appellant's  mental  health  and
         Article 3 of the ECHR is concerned she relied on GJ, in  particular
         paragraphs 450 to 457 wherein the Upper Tribunal analysed the March
         2012 COIS and other materials and found  that  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant before them, whose situation Miss  Jegarajah  argued  was
         less serious than that of the current Appellant, removal would be a
         breach of the U.K.'s obligations under Article 3.


    Findings


    31.  The first hearing, to the First-tier Tribunal, took place in March
         2010. On that occasion the Appellant gave oral evidence. The  Judge
         noted at paragraph  12(i)  that  the  Appellant  "claimed"  he  had
         developed mental illness after learning of his parents' murders  by
         the Karuna in September 2006 and in the following paragraph that he
         "claimed" to have twice attempted to commit suicide  by  taking  an
         overdose of prescribed psychotic medication.


    22.  The Judge then referred at paragraph 17 of the determination to Dr
         Javiad's report of 29th December 2009. The Judge records  that  the
         Appellant told the Dr that  he  developed  mental  health  problems
         because he witnessed the killing of his parents in  Sri  Lanka.  At
         the hearing he told the Judge that he had not witnessed any killing
         but in his dreams he saw his parents being killed and that  the  Dr
         had made a mistake in the report. While  that  determination  makes
         clear that the Judge was aware of  the  Appellant's  mental  health
         problems it is not clear that she took those into  account  in  her
         assessment of credibility. It is clear that here was no mention  of
         the Vulnerable Witness Guidance. It is apparent that that  did  not
         feature either when the  matter  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
         previously.


    23.  The Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance is an
         important  document  that  is   all   too   often   overlooked   by
         representatives and Judges.


    24.  At  paragraph  1  the  Guidance  indicates  that  it  covers  both
         Appellants and witnesses and has been developed for the  First-tier
         Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal where oral evidence is  heard.   It
         follows the Practice Direction issued by the  Senior  President  of
         Tribunals regarding child, vulnerable adult and sensitive witnesses
         issued on 30th October 2008. The Practice Direction deals primarily
         with the way in which a child or vulnerable  or  sensitive  witness
         should be aided to give their evidence. The  Guidance  goes  beyond
         that. At paragraph 3 the Guidance states:-


              "The consequences of such vulnerability  differ  according  to
             the degree to which an individual is affected. It is a  matter
             for  you  to   determine   the   extent   of   an   identified
             vulnerability, the effect on the quality of the  evidence  and
             the weight to be placed on such vulnerability in assessing the
             evidence before you, take into account the evidence a whole."


    25.  At paragraph 14 the guidance states:-


               "Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  Appellant  compared
             to those who are not vulnerable, in the  context  of  evidence
             from others associated with the Appellant and  the  background
             evidence before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in
             the oral evidence, consider  the  extent  to  which  the  age,
             vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
             that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


    26.  At paragraph 15 the guidance indicates that:-


              "the decision should record whether the Tribunal has concluded
             the Appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable  or
             sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered  the  identified
             vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and thus
             whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the  Appellant  had
             established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
             In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given  to  objective
             indications of risk rather than  necessarily  to  a  state  of
             mind".


    27.  It is clear therefore that in a case such as this one wherein  the
         Appellant is severely afflicted by mental illness that rendered him
         unable too give evidence, he is vulnerable and that may  impact  on
         his evidence.


    28.  With regard to this Appellant Dr Pears  states  at  paragraph  2.1
         that:-


              "There is no history of mental illness within his  family.  At
             the age of 12 he reports  been  forcibly  recruited  by  Tamil
             Tigers and trained in guerrilla warfare. During this period he
             was subject to physical and emotional abuse. At the age of  16
             he was under  arrest  for  one  month  and  he  reports  being
             tortured and raped on multiple occasions. He described  having
             seen his family being murdered by Karuna forces  and  managing
             to escape as an aunt was able to pay a ransom. He fled the war
             zone and contacted family friends in the UK, arriving in 2006.
             Initially I believe he stayed in London with family friends. A
             year  later  he  began  having  symptoms  of  mental  illness,
             including  talking  to  himself,  responding  to  visual   and
             auditory hallucinations having flashbacks  to  scenes  of  his
             family's murder. He began behaving bizarrely  in  response  to
             his hallucinations and this alleged damage lead to damage  the
             property of his host's house. Feeling unable to cope with  his
             behaviour his host asked him to  leave  and  he  was  given  a
             ticket to Liverpool where he arrived in 2009"


    29.  The report goes on at paragraph 2.2 to state that:-


              "He was found on 7th December 2009 slumped against a pillar at
             Liverpool lime Street Station,  wearing  a  suicide  note.  At
             hospital he was assessed by a mental health  practitioner  and
             found to be experiencing auditory  and  visual  hallucinations
             telling him to join his family  in  heaven  and  delusions  of
             control and persecutory ideation that people  were  trying  to
             kill him. He was admitted for treatment that  day  and  during
             his   admission   given   antipsychotic   and   antidepressant
             medication. A provisional diagnosis of  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder with psychotic systems  was  given.  Due  to  a  good
             response to treatment he was discharged to the community  team
             who noted that he  expressed  florid  psychotic  symptoms  and
             auditory hallucinations of the voice of  his  deceased  mother
             and brother".


    30.  At 2.4 the Dr states:-


               "It was felt his psychosis had likely been triggered  by  the
             extreme trauma which he alleged."


    31.  At Paragraph 2.6 the Dr refers to the Appellant having input  from
        the Care Programme Approach  Framework  whereby  his  care  in  the
        community is overseen by  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  and  a  Care
        Coordinator which in his case was a Community Mental Health  Nurse.
        He also received input from a Clinical Psychologist  but  tellingly
        at paragraph 2.7 the Dr states:-


              "Unfortunately focus on his traumatic  experiences  led  to  a
             worsening  of  symptoms  and  work  was  focused   on   coping
             strategies rather than traumatic events therefore"


    32.  At paragraph 2.9 the Dr refers to an occasion  when  there  was  a
         further deterioration in March 2011  triggered  by  him  trying  to
         intervene  in  a  fight  between  two  other  men  and  then  being
         subsequently arrested. He was put in a  cell  and  stripped,  which
         heightened his memories of previous traumatic experiences,  leading
         to acute agitation requiring a further inpatient admission.


    33.  Dr Pears took over his treatment  in  January  2013  when  he  was
         transferred to her team. She had met with  him  three  times  since
         then but had also undertaken considerable discussion  of  his  case
         with his care coordinator, who is currently Simon  Keat,  a  social
         worker.


    34.   The  Dr  opines  that  his  symptoms  are   consistent   with   a
         Schizophreniform  of  psychosis,  likely   Paranoid   Schizophrenia
         alongside PTSD. The Dr indicates that he  displays  formal  thought
         disorder particularly at times of stress and also displays negative
         symptoms such as apathy,  incongruous  or  blunted  affect,  social
         withdrawal, difficulty in  independently  initiating  and  planning
         purposeful  action  alongside  some  disorganisation.  He  displays
         symptoms associated with PTSD which include high levels of anxiety,
         nightmares, flashbacks, hyper arousal and avoidance  of  situations
         which trigger memories of his trauma.


    35.  The Appellant's psychosis  is  being  treated  with  antipsychotic
         medication but remains prominent and he also has regular input from
         his Care Coordinator. The Dr indicated he will continue to  require
         medication and monitoring for  some  time;  likely  years.  The  Dr
         opined that his prognosis is  severely  curtailed  by  his  current
         position namely inadequate and  possibly  dangerous  accommodation,
         his financial position and the most severe of all, uncertainty with
         regard to his asylum status. The Dr opined that  he  is  a  suicide
         risk and return to Sri Lanka would have a detrimental effect on his
         mental  health  with  a  high  likelihood  of   deterioration   and
         associated high suicide risk.


    36.  The Dr also gave her opinion that he was not fit to give  evidence
         in court. That is unsurprising given the  effect  of  the  Clinical
         Psychologist's work on him when asked to recall  traumatic  events.
         The Care Coordinator shared the view of the Dr.


    37.  I was also provided with a report with regard to the  question  of
         the credibility and consistency of the  Appellant's  account.  That
         was a report dated 21st September 2010  by  Dr  Brigitta  Bende,  a
         Consultant Psychiatrist in early interventions  and  psychotherapy.
         That report discusses the findings of Dr Javiad in  his  report  of
         29th December 2009 and in particular the evidential contradictions.
         Dr Bende recites the Appellant's history as given to Dr  Javiad  by
         the Appellant including that when  he  saw  him  in  July  2010  he
         thought he was very unwell, very vulnerable and struggling  with  a
         depressive disorder which was long-standing. He told the Dr that he
         had last felt well and happy some 10 years before. With  regard  to
         contradictions Dr Bende says:-


               "For  psychiatric  purposes,  it  may  not  be   particularly
             important whether a patient has seen his whole  family  killed
             or only some members. What is important is that a  patient  is
             traumatised and mentally ill. From reading the notes, it seems
             to me that Mr Kumar has predominantly  told  people  that  his
             family were killed by government forces and that he has visual
             hallucinations, flashbacks and/or nightmares  regarding  these
             events.


              My sense from reading the notes  is  that  Mr  Kumar  has  not
             contradicted himself. Medical notes cannot be seen as evidence
             of facts, but are a record of a Psychiatric Consultant and are
             affected by Practitioner's memory  as  well  as  that  of  the
             patient. I hope this helps in understanding why our case notes
             may appear to lack accuracy of facts that a court  would  wish
             to establish."


    38.  That particular report seems to record only that the Appellant had
         seen his family killed and does not mention his being tortured.  In
         response to this I was referred by Miss Jegarajah to the report  of
         Dr Javiad of 29th December 2009 in which he recites  the  Appellant
         having told  him  about  being  detained,  tortured  and  raped  in
         addition to seeing his family murdered. He also opines on page 3 of
         the report on the basis of the history given that:-


              "It seems most of his symptoms stem from the alleged abuse  he
             suffered as a teenager in Sri Lanka. This includes seeing  his
             family allegedly being murdered by the Sri Lankan  government.
             Unfortunately owing to the nature and location of the  alleged
             incidents it is not possible to get any collateral information
             and Mr Kumar remains our only source of history."


    39.   I was provided with  an  extract  from  the  Appellant's  medical
         records. This had not been previously produced and  Miss  Johnstone
         objected to its inclusion. I nevertheless allowed it into  evidence
         in the interests of justice and to ensure as complete a picture  as
         possible regarding the Appellant's state of  mind.  The  notes  are
         from Merseycare NHS Trust, Broadoak Unit which is an inpatient unit
         where the Appellant was being treated  and  is  dated  1st  October
         2009. There is a record that the Appellant indicated that he was  a
         victim of war crimes, had been repeatedly  tortured  and  raped  in
         prison and that the government had killed all his family  and  that
         he is the only remaining member except his aunt who paid for him to
         escape to the UK.


    40.  It is also significant that the first of  the  Appellant's  asylum
         interviews was curtailed by the interviewer who was concerned about
         the Appellant's mental state. The substantive asylum interview that
         eventually took place seems, from the responses by  the  Appellant,
         to have taken place on a day when he was feeling well as he appears
         to have given detailed and coherent responses.


    41.  There is no doubt  in  this  case  that  the  Appellant  has  been
         contradictory in his claims. If the Appellant was  mentally  fit  I
         would find his claim lacking in credibility  because  of  the  very
         significant contradictions. His parents were either killed in front
         of him in Sri Lanka or he was told of their murder after he came to
         the UK. He either saw his brother being killed in Sri Lanka  or  he
         saw his brother being shot on  a  TV  documentary.  He  was  either
         detained for two months or  significantly  longer.  This  Appellant
         however is very far from being mentally fit. It is  clear  that  he
         suffers both auditory and visual hallucinations.  He  is  extremely
         fragile and it does not take a great deal to trigger a relapse.  He
         has taken overdoses of his medication on  more  than  one  occasion
         once when he was found slumped at Lime Street Station in Liverpool.
         He is clearly a very disturbed and vulnerable individual. While his
         accounts have been inconsistent in the  detail  he  has  throughout
         been consistent about being forced to fight  with  the  LTTE  as  a
         child by his brother who himself was a fighter, but a willing  one.
         He has been consistent that he has been abused, tortured and  raped
         and he has been consistent about his parents having  been  murdered
         and his brother also. I am prepared to accept that to  somebody  in
         the Appellant's state of mind  whether  he  himself  witnessed  the
         deaths or was told about them and they  appear  in  nightmares  and
         flashbacks does not affect the basic premise that they were  killed
         by the government.


    42.  I find particularly persuasive  in  this  case  in  terms  of  the
         Appellant's credibility, his reaction to probing  by  the  clinical
         psychologist and his reaction to being detained in a police cell. I
         find that they assist in persuading me that the Appellant's account
         of ill treatment and torture in Sri  Lanka  is  true.   I  am  also
         mindful of the low standard of proof.


    43.  In terms of the Vulnerable Guidance, I find that in this case  the
         Appellant is a vulnerable witness because he suffers  from  serious
         mental health problems. I have taken  those  matters  into  account
         when assessing credibility and thus do not find against him on  the
         basis of inconsistencies in his evidence.


    44.  I have not ignored the fact that he travelled to  the  UK  with  a
         student visa and one would assume therefore at that  time  was  not
         displaying signs of mental illness;  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
         seemingly had no concerns as to his ability to study.  However,  it
         is also clear that despite arriving with a student visa he has  not
         in fact studied which lends  credence  to  his  argument  that  the
         purpose of his coming to the UK was  fleeing  persecution,  not  to
         study.


    45.  I have not ignored either the Secretary of State's  argument  that
         if he was in danger as claimed he  would  not  have  waited  for  a
         student visa but would have left the country immediately by illegal
         means if necessary. I am not in a  position  to  say  how  easy  an
         illegal exit would be. I am not in a position  to  say  whether  an
         illegal exit using an agent would be more expensive  than  a  legal
         exit with a student visa. I am not in a position to  say  which  is
         more risky.  Without evidence of those matters I  cannot  find  his
         obtaining a student visa an adverse credibility point.


    46.  Bearing in mind the low standard of proof  therefore  I  find  the
         Appellant credible and accept his claims as to what happened to him
         in Sri Lanka.


    47.  Having found the Appellant credible I now need to  decide  whether
         his profile would put him at risk on return.


    48.  I have considered carefully Miss Jegarajah's submissions  that  he
         would be at risk because of his links to high  profile  people  and
         the gravity of their concerns about him when he was detained by the
         TID. I have also considered carefully her submission that  he  will
         be on a stop list and  the  reference  in  GJ  to  the  ability  of
         persons, even those  of  significant  interest,  to  exit  lawfully
         through the airport due to the level of corruption  in  Sri  Lanka.
         However, I am unable to agree that the Appellant would be  at  risk
         on return today.


    49.  The Appellant was an unwilling fighter for the LTTE  as  a  child.
         Due to his family' activities and his brother's  in  particular  he
         was suspected of more serious matters by the TID. However,  all  of
         those matters took place at least 8  years  ago.  They  took  place
         before matters settled to a large extent in Sri  Lanka  and  before
         the  authorities  adopted  their  present  view  that  only   those
         perceived to be working currently against the government  or  those
         with high profiles and with  outstanding  warrants  or  convictions
         would be of interest. It is clear that  the  current  situation  is
         that the authorities in Sri Lanka  are  interested  only  in  those
         persons and are no longer interested  in  people  who  simply  were
         members of or fighting for the LTTE. There is no evidence that  the
         Appellant  has  had  any  warrants  issued  against  him   or   any
         convictions in his absence. I appreciate that I am not entitled  to
         call for corroboration in such cases but the fact remains  that  he
         still has an aunt in Sri Lanka and if he was wanted in that regard,
         evidence could have been obtained. It  is  not  therefore  credible
         that the Appellant's name would appear on a stop list.


    50.  The Appellant left Sri Lanka as a very  young  adult  and  is  now
         considerably older. On return now he would be no more  than  a  Sri
         Lankan national who travelled to the UK as a  student  and  is  now
         returning. He is therefore,  I  find,  not  someone  who  would  be
         stopped  and  questioned  at  the  airport  or  thereafter  in  the
         community.


    51.  Accordingly, notwithstanding my positive  credibility  findings  I
         dismiss the Appellant's asylum appeal.


    52.  That however is not the end of the matter. It is abundantly  clear
         from what I have said above that this Appellant  has  very  serious
         mental health issues and has  attempted  suicide  more  than  once.
         Paranoid Schizophrenia and PTSD are major mental disorders.  It  is
         quite clear that the cause of and triggers for his illness are what
         happened previously in Sri Lanka. I have the expert evidence  of  a
         Consultant Psychiatrist that if returned to Sri Lanka he is  likely
         to be a high suicide risk. I refer to GJ and  the  sections  relied
         upon by Miss Jegarajah. This Appellant is as ill, if not  more  so,
         than the third Appellant in GJ. The Tribunal in  GJ  had  the  same
         country  information  as  I  had  and  nevertheless  came  to   the
         conclusion at paragraph 456:-


              "We note  that  the  third  Appellant  is  considered  by  his
             experienced Consultant Psychiatrist to  have  clear  plans  to
             commit suicide if returned and that he is mentally  very  ill,
             too ill to give reliable evidence. We approach  assessment  of
             his circumstances on the basis that it would be  possible  for
             the Respondent return the third Appellant to Sri Lanka without
             his coming to harm, but once there, he would be in  the  hands
             of the Sri Lankan mental health services. The resources in Sri
             Lanka are sparse and are limited to the cities. In  the  light
             of the Respondent's own evidence in her OGN  that  there  that
             there are facilities only in the cities and that they "do  not
             provide appropriate care for mentally ill people" and  of  the
             severity of  this  Appellant's  mental  illness,  we  are  not
             satisfied  on  the  particular  facts  of  this  appeal,  that
             returning him to Sri Lanka  today  complies  with  the  United
             Kingdom's international obligations under the ECHR".


    53.  I can do no better than adopt that reasoning of the Upper Tribunal
         in GJ. I agree with Miss Jegarajah  that  this  Appellant's  mental
         state is worse  and  the  risk  greater.  It  is  clear  that  this
         particular Appellant has been very needy over the years in terms of
         his  need  for  psychiatric  care  and  the  necessity  for  prompt
         reactions to his relapses. He has attempted suicide.  I  allow  the
         Appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds.








Signed                 Dated 7th March 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
