
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/15471/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th January 2014                             |On 14th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     R V
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico of Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the appellant has been granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings  and
after their conclusion, absent any  order  to  the  contrary  by  the  Upper
Tribunal or any other Court seised of relevant  proceedings.  No  report  of
these proceedings, in  whatever  form,  either  during  the  proceedings  or
thereafter, shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. Failure  to
comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    Designated Judge Digney on August 2011,  set  aside  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal on 30 January 2012 remitting the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    for the determination to be remade.  He is an asylum  seeker  from  Sri
    Lanka whose appeal is against the removal directions set to  Sri  Lanka
    after  the  respondent's  refusal  of  refugee   status,   humanitarian
    protection, or leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds in a refusal letter dated 27 October 2010.

 2. The Court of Appeal's reasons for remitting the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake were as follows:

         "3.  ... on the basis that ostensibly Immigration Judge Glossop had
             erred in relation to the application of the  country  guidance
             case of TK [2009] UKAIT  00049  and  had  failed  to  properly
             identify the reasoning for his assertion that there had been a
             change in the country situation in Sri Lanka.
          4.  The parties agree that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its
             consideration.
          5.  In the light of the above the parties agree  that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal erred in  the  manner  alleged  as  regards  the
             claimant's risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka.  Given  that  the
             appellant's appeal contains no important  issue  of  principle
             the parties considered that the most expedient course would be
             for the matter to be remitted to the  Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to   carry   out   a   full
             reconsideration of the question of risk on return on the basis
             of  the  undisturbed  positive  credibility  findings  of   IJ
             Glossop."

 3. It was agreed at the Upper Tribunal hearing on 7 January 2013 that  the
    undisturbed findings in the determination of  IJ  Glossop  should  also
    include  his  negative  findings  in  relation  to  the  part  of   the
    appellant's account which relates to what happened to him in 2000.

The accepted facts

 4. Immigration Judge Glossop accepted the following facts and matters:

      1) The appellant is a Sri Lankan Tamil.  He was  a  business  man  and
         entrepreneur and as such, likely to be  targeted  as  a  source  of
         funds, not only by criminals but by the political  protagonists  in
         Sri Lanka.  He lived in Jaffna, where he ran a photography  studio.
         The LTTE required him to take photos of them  and  their  meetings,
         and to pay them money.  In 1995, the  Sri  Lankan  army  took  over
         Jaffna and the appellant removed to Pallai, returning to Jaffna  in
         March 1996.  In 1998, he married, and had a son, who was born  with
         congenital heart disease.

      2) Because of his son's health, the Sri Lankan authorities allowed the
         appellant to travel to Colombo for treatment.  He  and  his  family
         settled  in  Colombo  and  developed  a  thriving  business  there,
         recruiting  more  staff.   The  LTTE  intruded,   harassing   Tamil
         businessmen for money.  He was forced to pay,  but  he  refused  to
         employ any LTTE  undercover  members.  Unfortunately,  one  of  his
         employees did become involved with the LTTE.

      3) In 2006, the appellant was abducted in a white van by  LTTE  Karuna
         faction men.  He had to pay  20  lakhs  Sri  Lankan  rupees  to  be
         released.

      4) In August 2007, the appellant travelled to India  for  his  son  to
         have a heart operation.  He returned in September, to discover that
         his employee had been arrested for involvement with the LTTE.   The
         appellant was also arrested.  He was ill-treated and tortured in  a
         particularly  severe  and  humiliating  manner,  resulting  in  his
         needing new front teeth and in intimate scarring  and  pain,  which
         persists today.

      5) On 28 May 2008, the appellant's son was kidnapped and the appellant
         had to pay a ransom of 10  lakhs  rupees.   The  appellant  was  in
         London at the time.  His wife and son had left Sri Lanka and  since
         June 2010 were in India, staying with friends.   They had been told
         not to mention paying the ransom.

Procedural matters

 5. On 7 January 2013 I heard the appeal and gave  an  oral  determination,
    which, due to an administrative error by the Tribunal  staff,  was  not
    typed or promulgated.  In my oral decision I  indicated  that  I  would
    allow the appeal.  I did so following the guidance in TK (Sri Lanka) CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00049 which  was  then  the  latest  country  guidance  on
    conditions in Sri Lanka.  The evidence in TK was substantially  out  of
    date, since it predated the end of the civil war in Sri Lanka.  I  also
    took account of new UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  promulgated  on  21
    December 2012.  I considered the appellant's appeal  in  the  light  of
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:

         "339K `  The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
             persecution or serious harm  or  to  direct  threats  of  such
             persecution or of such harm will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
             indication  of  the  person's  well-founded   fear   of   such
             persecution or real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  unless
             there are good reasons to consider that  such  persecution  or
             serious harm will not be repeated."

 6. This appellant had clearly suffered persecution and serious  harm.   In
    the light of the TK country  guidance  and  the  UNHCR  Guidelines,  in
    January 2013 I was not  satisfied  that  there  were  good  reasons  to
    consider that  the  harm  would  not  be  repeated.   I  gave  an  oral
    determination allowing the appeal, but it appears that the hearing  was
    recorded on  the  Upper  Tribunal's  computer  system  as  having  been
    adjourned to await the new country  guidance  decision  on  Sri  Lanka,
    promulgated on 5 July 2013 as GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

 7. On 26 April 2013, Theva solicitors, who represent the appellant,  wrote
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal  enquiring  about  the  typed   determination.
    Unfortunately, that letter was not brought to my  attention.   Instead,
    the appeal was listed for substantive hearing post-GJ.  The appellant's
    solicitors protested, arguing  that  the  appeal  had  been  determined
    already.

 8. Mr Chirico has sought to persuade me that pursuant to paragraph 40  and
    40A of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  the  oral
    determination of the appeal on 7 January 2013  was  the  binding  final
    determination of the appeal and should stand.  I am not persuaded  that
    he is right.  While it is right that paragraph  40(1)  of  those  Rules
    provides that the Upper Tribunal  may  give  a  decision  orally  at  a
    hearing, paragraph 40A(2) provides that the Upper Tribunal must provide
    the Secretary of  State  with  a  decision  notice  stating  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision and a statement of any right of appeal  thereunder.
    Paragraph 40A(3) requires the Secretary of State to serve  that  notice
    and statement and to notify the Upper Tribunal that she  has  done  so.
    It is clear from the Rules that the decision notice  is  what  triggers
    any onward right of appeal.   If it were to be promulgated now,

 9. Even if the oral determination is binding as Mr  Chirico  contends,  if
    promulgated now, that determination would be vulnerable to challenge as
    wrong in law because it takes no account  of  the  intervening  country
    guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others.   I  consider
    that it is in the interests of justice to set aside the  oral  decision
    of 7 January 2013 under paragraph 43 of the Rules  and  to  replace  it
    with a determination made in the light of the country  guidance  as  it
    presently stands.   I indicated that that was my view in my  order  and
    directions of 10th October 2013.   I  invited  further  submissions  to
    assist me in so doing.

Submissions

10. For the respondent, Mr Jarvis acknowledged that, following SG (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940,  in
    particular at [50] and [67], a country guidance  determination  remains
    authoritative 'unless and until it is set aside on appeal  or  replaced
    by a subsequent Country Guidance determination'.   That is not the case
    with GJ, which therefore remains in  force.   The  appellant  had  been
    placed in a position where he had to engage with the LTTE, who were  in
    effect the government of the north, running the police, the schools and
    the education.  The authorities knew that people who were  in  business
    were required to engage with the LTTE and their record keeping was both
    detailed and extensive.

11. Mr Jarvis accepted  that  the  appellant  had  suffered  detention  and
    torture at the end of the ceasefire which  leaves  him  with  permanent
    impairment.  However, a significant amount of time had passed since the
    appellant left Sri Lanka and despite the kidnap and ransom of  his  son
    in 2008, Mr Jarvis argued that the authorities would  have  no  further
    evidence of ongoing activity by him and there was no evidence that they
    continued to be interested in the  appellant's  family,  none  of  whom
    remained in Sri  Lanka.   As  regards  the  appellant's  mental  health
    issues,  those  would  militate  against  his  being  regarded   as   a
    functioning fundraiser within the diaspora and there were no activities
    which were likely to lead to intelligence interest in him now.

12. For the appellant, Mr Chirico pointed out that this appellant  was  not
    simply someone who had paid  protection  money  in  order  to  run  his
    business. He had employed an LTTE member in his business, which was the
    cause of the authorities' significant interest in him and that interest
    had continued, because the appellant's family had been  forced  out  of
    Sri Lanka altogether a year after  he  left.  The  appellant  had  been
    involved in funding the LTTE on a very large scale as well as employing
    an LTTE member, not just in Jaffna when he ran his business  there  but
    in Colombo.

13. The test was whether there was a real risk of recurrence  of  the  ill-
    treatment which the appellant had already suffered. On the facts  there
    must be a real risk that his name would at least  appear  on  a  warned
    list as a person in whom the authorities remained interested should  he
    return to Sri Lanka.  The effect of his mental illness would be that he
    would be unable to talk his way out of  any  difficulties:  Mr  Chirico
    relied upon paragraphs 271 and 447 and following of the decision in GJ.



Discussion

14. The Upper Tribunal in GJ identified the categories of persons  at  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka at subparagraph (7) of the guidance:

         "(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be,  a  threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are,
             or are perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-
             conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal
             of hostilities within Sri Lanka.
             (b) Journalists (whether in print  or  other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the  Sri
             Lankan government, in particular its human  rights  record,  or
             who are associated with publications critical of the Sri Lankan
             government.
             (c) Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons  Learned
             and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri   Lankan
             security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities  in
             alleged war crimes. Among those  who  may  have  witnessed  war
             crimes during the conflict, particularly in the  No-Fire  Zones
             in May 2009, only those who have already identified  themselves
             by giving such evidence  would  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of adverse
             attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual  war
             crimes witnesses.
             (d) A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of  those  against
             whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped
             at the airport and handed over to the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

15. The thrust of the guidance in GJ was that there has been a  significant
    change in the approach of the Sri Lankan  authorities  since  2007  and
    that the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities is focused  on  present
    diaspora activities  and  in  particular,  attempts  to  revive  and/or
    refinance the separatist conflict in Sri Lanka, together  with  persons
    in certain specific categories.  This appellant is a person who has  in
    the past had more elaborate links than the ordinary Tamil citizen:   he
    gave very significant amounts to the LTTE, and he employed a member  of
    the LTTE in his shop in Colombo.  That became known to the  authorities
    and he was badly tortured in consequence, leaving  him  with  permanent
    physical and mental injuries.  His family have left Sri  Lanka  because
    they remained a target at least for extortion by  the  Karuna  faction.
    The appellant is the type of person who, even in the  present  climate,
    might be considered a potential source of finance for those wishing  to
    revive the conflict, and therefore is likely to be of interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities if returned.

16. In considering his health issues, I have had regard to  paragraphs  447
    and following of the Tribunal's determination in GJ  which  related  to
    the appeal of the third appellant, a person with an  LTTE  history  and
    what the UNHCR Guidelines refer to a  "more  elaborate  links"  to  the
    LTTE.  That appellant also bore torture marks on his body but had  been
    of no particular interest to the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  after  his
    release from torture and detention, nor had he taken  any  part  in  UK
    diaspora  activities;  he  had  significant  mental   health   problems
    including severe post-traumatic stress disorder and  severe  depression
    typical of trauma victims. His mental health was  fragile  and  he  was
    considered to be a suicide risk even in the United Kingdom.  The  Upper
    Tribunal reminded themselves of the test in J v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and the  observations  of  Lord
    Justice Sedley in Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 at paragraph
    16.

17. The Upper Tribunal noted the lack of psychiatric support in Sri  Lanka,
    there being only 25 working psychiatrists in the whole of Sri Lanka and
    money spent on mental health going only really to large  mental  health
    institutions in capital cities which  were  inaccessible  and  did  not
    provide appropriate care for mentally ill  people.   The  treatment  of
    post-traumatic stress disorder was considered at paragraph  455  (based
    on the UKBA Country of Origin Report issued in March 2012 at  paragraph
    23.28 to 23.29) which indicated that many patients  often  relied  upon
    traditional non-medical treatments for post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    long before approaching public hospitals, which often resulted in their
    suffering from psychosis.  The appeal of the third appellant in GJ  was
    dismissed on asylum and humanitarian  protection  grounds  but  allowed
    under Article 3 ECHR on the basis that there was inappropriate care for
    the severely mentally ill in Sri Lanka.

18. There is no doubt that this appellant suffered past persecution  before
    leaving Sri Lanka and that he  continues  to  endure  very  significant
    consequences  from  the  torture  he  received,  from  which   he   has
    significant pain and physical  and  mental  difficulty  even  now.   He
    suffers from depression, anxiety, neck pain, back pain, chest pain  and
    severe  headaches  and  has  considered  suicide  in  the  past,  being
    restrained only by thoughts of his wife and son, who now live in India.
      I remind myself of the provisions of paragraph 339K:

         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

    I am not  satisfied  that  in  the  case  of  this  appellant,  on  the
    undisputed facts and in the light of his  physical  and  mental  health
    issues, there are good reasons to consider  that  the  persecution  and
    serious harm  to  which  he  was  previously  subjected  would  not  be
    repeated. I consider that to return this appellant to Sri Lanka,  where
    he has no family support, in the light of his past and of  his  present
    physical  and  mental  health,  would  breach  the   United   Kingdom's
    international obligations under both the Refugee Convention and Article
    3 ECHR.

19. For all of the above reasons I allow the  appeal  on  both  asylum  and
    human rights right grounds.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt  of  this  decision  the  respondent  shall  grant  the
appellant leave to remain for such period as is necessary to give effect  to
this determination.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
