
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/15499/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 January 2014                               |On 24 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 MANJU GURUNG


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Manju Gurung, claims to be a citizen of Bhutan and  was
    born on 2 July 1980.  The respondent claims to have entered the  United
    Kingdom on 25 July 2010 using a false  Indian  passport.   She  claimed
    asylum in Croydon on 15 September 2010.  On 25 October 2010, a decision
    was made to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and to remove her from
    the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration Act 1999.  I shall refer to the respondent,  Manju  Gurung,
    as "the appellant" (as she was before the First-tier Tribunal)  and  to
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department as "the respondent."

 2. The appellant had appealed against the decision to remove  her  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Baker) which, in a determination promulgated
    on 17 August 2011, allowed the appeal.    By  Decision  and  Directions
    dated 17 April 2012, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal  determination
    and directed that the decision be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant claims to be a Bhutanese national born in Lamidanda.  Her
    parents were both farmers born in Bhutan.  The appellant claims  to  be
    of Gurung ethnicity and she speaks the languages Gurung  and  Nepalese.
    The appellant claims that from around  October  1990,  her  father  was
    compelled to undertake manual work for the  Bhutanese  government.   He
    expressed opposition to that enforced labour and, as a consequence, the
    Bhutanese army came to the appellant's home village in  1990  and  took
    away her father and killed him.  Ten  days  later  the  army  returned,
    confiscated the appellant's documents and personal effects and  evicted
    her and her mother from their home.  The appellant left  Bhutan  making
    her way to India to  a  Nepalese  refugee  camp  in  East  Nepal.   The
    appellant has identified this camp  as  Timai  camp  near  Jhapa.   The
    appellant does not know who administered the camp  but  she  claims  to
    have remained living there for seven years.  She left the camp in  1997
    having married a Nepalese national who worked at the  camp.   She  then
    lived in the Parbat district of Nepal until 2001 when her husband  left
    her.  She then returned to the Timai camp to live with her  mother  and
    where she gave birth to a child.  The appellant left the camp  in  2005
    and travelled to India.  She left her daughter living with  her  mother
    in Nepal.  The appellant then was encouraged by her employer  to  leave
    Nepal to work in Saudi Arabia which she did in  2007.   She  was  never
    paid for her work (as the carer of a child with mental health problems)
    nor was she allowed out of  the  house  where  she  was  working.   The
    appellant remained in this work until brought to the United Kingdom  on
    25 July 2010 by her  employer  who  was  on  holiday  in  London.   She
    remained living at her employer's temporary address in London until  14
    September 2010 when she noticed that the door had  been  left  unlocked
    following  a  delivery  of  takeaway  food.   The  appellant  took  the
    opportunity to escape from the property and she  encountered  a  Hindi-
    speaking man in the street who agreed to help her.  Thereafter, she was
    taken to the Home Office  where  she  claimed  asylum.   The  appellant
    claims that she cannot return to  her  mother  and  daughter  whom  she
    assumes continue to live in Nepal because she does not have citizenship
    of that country.  She claims that she will not be  accepted  in  Bhutan
    where she will be persecuted on account of her race  (Gurung)  and  for
    her imputed political opinion.

 4. Allowing the appeal, Judge Baker found the appellant  to  be  credible.
    The findings, however, are marred by a number of errors.  First, at [24-
    25] of the refusal letter, the respondent  had  drawn  attention  to  a
    discrepancy between the  appellant's  claim  that  there  had  been  no
    education available in  the  refugee  camp  where  she  lived  and  the
    background  material  relating  to  such  camps  which  indicated   the
    contrary.  Judge Baker, on the other hand, described the "principal and
    apparently sole reason for  the  respondent  doubting  the  appellant's
    claim" to be that her geographical knowledge  of  Bhutan  was  somewhat
    limited; he makes no reference to the apparent  inconsistency  relating
    to education and has mis-characterised the respondent's  challenges  to
    the appellant's credibility.  Further, at [16], Judge Baker  noted  the
    problems which the appellant may have had  in  communicating  with  the
    Nepalese language and also her medical condition  which  he  considered
    may have placed her under a "considerable strain at the  material  time
    [of her asylum interview]."  Some of the errors  which  appear  in  the
    appellant's interview record were subsequently explained by  way  of  a
    written statement.  Judge Baker incorrectly describes this at  [16]  as
    "unchallenged camp information subsequently provided by the appellant."
     In fact, the information continued to be challenged by  the  Secretary
    of State at the hearing before Judge Baker.   In  addition,  the  judge
    found it "odd" that the appellant had made so little effort to  contact
    her mother and child since she had come to the United Kingdom.  It does
    not, however, indicate how, if at all, that  observation  has  impacted
    upon the appellant's credibility as a witness.

 5. The judge was also  aware  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  be  in  a
    relationship with a Mr Achargu, a Bhutanese national who is  a  refugee
    in the United Kingdom.  The judge expressed "some  doubts"  as  to  the
    genuineness of the claimed  relationship.   He  then  made  a  somewhat
    curious finding that,

         In factors apart from raising a few lurking doubts  on  credibility
         as a result but which I  have,  in  the  balance,  after  the  most
         anxious scrutiny in the round, overcome, such  is  not  my  overall
         balancing assessment of the totality of  the  evidence  before  me,
         seem to be crucial (sic).

 6. Bizarrely the judge then goes on to say, "accordingly, as having agreed
    the asylum claim shall succeed as above,  an  Article  3  human  rights
    appeal would also succeed, I find, in any event."  In the matter  of  a
    few sentences the judge appears to have moved  from  an  assessment  of
    Article 8 ECHR family/private life rights to an  appeal  on  Article  3
    ECHR grounds.  Frankly, the paragraph makes little sense.

 7. I find that the judge has failed properly  to  assess  the  appellant's
    credibility in the light of the objections raised by the  Secretary  of
    State.   I  find  that  the  Article  3/8  ECHR  analysis   is   barely
    comprehensible.  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal leaving none of  the  findings  of  fact  in  place.   I  have
    proceeded to re-make the decision.

 8. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether there is  a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  will
    suffer, respectively, persecution or treatment contrary to the ECHR (in
    particular, Articles 2/3) if she is returned to either Bhutan or Nepal;
    the decision to make removal directions which was dated 25 October 2010
    indicates that removal will be to "Bhutan and/or Nepal."   The  refusal
    letter of the respondent asserts that the appellant is not a  Bhutanese
    national as  she  claims  and  that  investigations  will  be  made  to
    determine her correct country of nationality ("you  will  therefore  be
    removed to Bhutan (the country of which you claim to be a national)  or
    Nepal, your last country of legal habitual residence)."

 9. Unfortunately, delay has occurred in this appeal  between  the  initial
    hearing (when I found there to be an error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination) and the  resumed  hearing  which  finally  took
    place on 7 January  2014.   The  appellant  wished  to  have  a  Gurung
    interpreter at the  hearing  to  enable  her  to  give  oral  evidence.
    Ultimately, that wish proved impossible to satisfy,  HMCTS  finding  it
    impossible, despite considerable efforts, to engage the services  of  a
    Gurung interpreter.  Consequently, I directed  that  the  Secretary  of
    State put questions in  writing  to  the  appellant  arising  from  her
    written evidence and that those questions be answered by the  appellant
    in a new consolidated witness statement.  After  those  directions  had
    been complied with, the appeal was listed for hearing at Bradford.

10. Although I did not hear any oral evidence from the appellant herself, I
    did hear from Mr Achargu.  He adopted  his  witness  statement  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  He is no longer in receipt  of  NASS  benefits  but
    earns �320 per week from his work.  The  witness  was  aware  that  the
    appellant has a child living in Nepal but neither he nor the  appellant
    have contact with the child.

11. The Tribunal reserved its determination.

12. I have anxiously considered the evidence in this  appeal  both  written
    and oral.  I have had regard to the fact that the appellant  claims  to
    prefer to give her evidence and be interviewed in the  Gurung  language
    rather than Nepalese although she does claim to be able to  speak  that
    latter  language.   I  have  considered  the  medical  evidence   which
    indicates the appellant has  some  physical  conditions  and  has  also
    suffered from depression.  There is a report  from  the  Poppy  Project
    (which assists trafficked women) which I have also considered.

13. The refusal letter records that the  appellant  was  able  to  identify
    rivers in Bhutan and towns which she claimed to be close  to  her  home
    village.  She was able to identify the national dress  of  Bhutan  (gho
    and kira).  The respondent did not,  however,  (and  contrary  to  what
    Judge Baker appears to have believed) criticise the appellant  for  her
    lack of knowledge of the geography of  Bhutan.   Rather,  at  [18]  the
    respondent acknowledged that, if the appellant had left Bhutan  at  the
    age of 10, her knowledge  of  the  country  might  be  limited.   As  a
    consequence, the respondent considered that the appellant's  "claim  to
    be a Bhutanese national remains unsubstantiated."

14. Quoting background material relating to the relationship between Bhutan
    and Nepal in  the  1990s,  the  respondent  accepted  that  "people  of
    Nepalese ethnicity were driven from Bhutan  from  1990  onwards."   The
    respondent also accepted [22] that the UNHCR  map  recorded  a  refugee
    camp in Nepal at a place called Timai.  A Human Rights Watch Report  of
    May 2007 indicated "schools in the camps only  provide  education  from
    first to tenth grade; students who want to continue to grades 11 and 12
    have to attend private Nepalese 'colleges' in the towns."   The  report
    also noted that "camp residents highly  appreciate  the  education  the
    camp schools are able to provide, despite very limited  resources  ..."
    The appellant claimed at interview that there was no education  in  the
    Timai camp where she had lived.  Indeed, the appellant had lived in the
    camp for eleven years from the age of 10 so, while she may have  passed
    beyond the extent of  education  provided  in  the  camp,  she  should,
    according to the background material, have enjoyed  some  education  in
    her early years at the camp and the respondent considered that it would
    be reasonable to expect that, even if she herself had ceased  education
    there, she would have been aware that other younger  children  continue
    to be educated.

15. In her interview (questions 61-62) the appellant had  stated  that  she
    had lived in Hut 35 at Timai camp.  An FCO enquiry  dated  16  December
    2009 indicates that "camp addresses are composed of camp  name,  sector
    number, sub-sector number, and hut number."  The respondent  considered
    that an individual who had lived in the same hut for eleven years would
    be able to remember more of the  address  than  the  hut  number.   The
    enquiry made by the FCO  also  records  that  most  Bhutanese  refugees
    should be able to remember camp name, sector number, sub-sector  number
    by heart.  The letter records that:

         The British Embassy in Kathmandu contacted the UN  High  Commission
         for refugees in Nepal who advised that they had been unable to find
         anyone in their database who matches the name and date of birth [of
         the appellant] provided.

16. The refusal letter at [26] also records that:

         Following this UKBA forwarded your photograph to  UNCHR  in  Nepal.
         UNHCR made further enquiries and as a result stated that  they  had
         visited the location you had given as your address in the camp  and
         showed your photographs to relevant sub-sector  and  sector  heads;
         UNHCR state 'all of them expressly mentioned they  had  never  seen
         the person in the photo in the camp.

17. The question arises  as  to  how  these  matters  may  impact  upon  my
    assessment of the evidence as a whole and the  appellant's  credibility
    in particular.  On the one hand, I find that the view expressed in  the
    FCO letter that Bhutanese refugees should know details of  camp  names,
    sector number, sub-sector number and hut number "by heart" is a  little
    more than opinion  evidence;  some  refugees  may  well  remember  more
    details than others.  Further, the appellant claims to  have  left  the
    camp for the first time while still a relatively young child.   On  the
    other hand, the fact that no trace of the appellant  in  the  camp  has
    been found either by searches of official records  or  by  speaking  to
    those present at the camp is much  more  troubling.   It  is  troubling
    because the appellant claims to have spent as many as eleven  years  in
    total living in the camp with her  mother;  she  was  not  a  transient
    refugee by any means.  I consider it reasonably likely that a residence
    of so many years in the camp would have generated some lasting  written
    record of the appellant's presence there.

18. The appellant's credibility is further damaged by her claim that  there
    was  no  education  available  to  the  children  in  the  camp.   That
    categorical assertion is plainly at odds  with  unequivocal  background
    material which describes the education system which is provided in some
    detail.  I find that, if the appellant had been telling the truth,  she
    would have been aware and that during a period as long as eleven years,
    that children were being educated in the camp even if she herself  had,
    for whatever reason, not received an education.

19. I also find that the appellant has failed satisfactorily to explain why
    she has found it so difficult to make contact with her mother and child
    allegedly living in Bhutan.  There is no suggestion  that  attempts  at
    establishing contact would place her mother  and  child  at  risk.   In
    addition, the appellant herself could have obtained evidence  from  the
    camp in order to establish that she had lived there as she claims.  Her
    failure  or  reluctance  to  do  so  casts  further  doubt   upon   her
    credibility.

20. For the avoidance of doubt, I certainly find that the appellant has not
    experienced difficulties  in  providing  evidence  through  a  Nepalese
    interpreter.  I am aware of what she has said  in  the  course  of  the
    Tribunal  proceedings  regarding  the  use  of  Nepalese   and   Gurung
    interpreters but she did  indicate  in  the  asylum  interview  record,
    having answered 145 questions, that she  had  understood  "all  of  the
    questions put to you today."

21. I have to consider the cumulative  effect  of  these  observations  and
    findings upon my assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  I do not find that the appellant  is  a  witness  of  truth.
    Significantly, I find that she has failed to discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that she will be at real risk if returned to either  Bhutan  or
    Nepal.  I find that her lack of candour leaves the Tribunal  unable  to
    make a finding as to her nationality or, indeed, statelessness.   I  am
    aware that  further  enquiries  will  be  made  by  the  respondent  to
    ascertain the appellant's true  nationality.   I  am  not  prepared  to
    accept that she is Bhutanese or stateless since I do not  consider  her
    evidence to be at all reliable.

22. I stress that I have considered all  the  evidence  in  reaching  these
    findings.  There  is  nothing  in  the  medical  evidence  which  might
    indicate that the appellant suffers from any cognitive or other  mental
    disorder which would have prevented  her  from  remembering  accurately
    what happened during her life throughout an eleven year period.  I note
    that those working for the Poppy Project found the appellant's evidence
    to be plausible and, whilst I found their report to be helpful,  it  is
    for the Tribunal to determine the appellant's credibility based on  all
    the evidence including those items of evidence which were not available
    to the Poppy Project.

23. I find that the appellant was probably born in Bhutan or Nepal  because
    I accept that she speaks the Nepalese and  Gurung  languages.   I  find
    that she has not been a refugee in a camp as alleged or at all.  I find
    that her father was not killed or her family seized as  claimed  or  at
    all.  Although it does not go to the core of the appellant's claim  for
    asylum, I have to say that I did not find  plausible  in  any  way  the
    appellant's claim to have escaped from her oppressive  employer  whilst
    on a holiday in London.  I find it likely that the appellant  has  come
    to the United Kingdom for reasons wholly unconnected  with  a  fear  of
    persecution or ill-treatment abroad.  I find it likely that she has not
    told the truth regarding past events or her  national  origins  because
    she is aware that the truth would not attract a grant of refugee status
    in the United Kingdom.

24. I have considered Article 8 ECHR.  There has been  no  submission  that
    the appellant qualifies for any form of immigration  status  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  I note that Mr Achargu came to the  United  Kingdom
    in January 2011.  I am aware that the appellant and Mr Achargu  entered
    a  relationship  fully  aware  of  the   appellant's   own   precarious
    immigration status.   The  couple  co-habit  (the  respondent  did  not
    challenge this) but they have no children.  The Article 8  ECHR  appeal
    turns on the question of proportionality.  I found the appellant to  be
    an individual who has made a false claim for asylum and whose  presence
    in the United Kingdom whilst within the law while  she  claimed  asylum
    and pursued the appeal process has never been  justified.   The  public
    interest concerned with her  removal  is,  in  those  circumstances,  a
    strong one.  Mr Achargu gave  some  evidence  regarding  his  financial
    circumstances now in the United Kingdom but I was not given  sufficient
    information for me to conclude that the couple could remain living here
    without  having  recourse  to  public  funds.   Having  regard  to  the
    clarification of the approach which would be adopted  by  the  Tribunal
    enunciated in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  and  having  carefully
    considered all the relevant evidence, I am not satisfied that it  would
    be disproportionate for this  appellant  to  be  removed  to  whichever
    country the respondent shall  determine  is  appropriate.   The  public
    interest concerned with  her  removal  does  not  simply  satisfy  some
    bureaucratic  procedure  (see  Chikwamba  [2008]  1WLR  1420)  but  has
    significant force in the case  of  an  individual  who  has  sought  to
    deceive the United Kingdom authorities in order to remain living  here.
    In the circumstances, the Article 8 ECHR appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    17 August 2011 is set aside.  I have re-made the decision.  This appeal
    is dismissed on asylum grounds.  This  appeal  is  dismissed  on  human
    rights        grounds        (Articles        2,         3,         8).








Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

