
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/16204/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2016                    |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     BP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Birnberg,
                    Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 9 January  1982.   The
    appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal for re-determination of the
    appellant's asylum appeal.

 2. In short, the history is as follows.  He arrived in the UK on 25  April
    2008, using a passport in a different name from his  own.   He  claimed
    asylum on 28 April 2008.  That claim  for  asylum  for  refused  and  a
    decision made to remove him under section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999, on 27 November 2009.

 3. His appeal initially  came  before  Immigration  Judge  Frances  on  21
    January 2010.  She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   An  error  of
    law in her decision having been found on appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    after a re-hearing on  11  August  2010  Designated  Immigration  Judge
    Manuell re-made the decision by dismissing the appeal on  all  grounds.
    Permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  against  Judge  Manuell's
    decision was granted and subsequently, on 6 July 2011, a consent  order
    resulted in the  appeal  being  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, limited to the issue of risk on return in the light  of  the
    then country guidance.  The appeal came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Waumsley.  He also dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. On further appeal to the Court of Appeal,  ultimately  by  consent  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Waumsley  was  allowed
    and the appeal was again remitted to the Upper Tribunal in  a  decision
    dated 19 May 2016.  Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. The terms of the remittal are to the effect that  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal was to be  limited  to  a  consideration  of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return on the basis of the previous Tribunal's findings of
    fact and in the light of the decisions in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP &  NT  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    829.

 6. The relevant findings of fact go back to the decision of Judge  Manuell
    in 2010.  Judge Waumsley's decision was based on  those  findings.   It
    was not submitted to me that there were any new pertinent  findings  of
    fact to be found in the decision of Judge Waumsley.

 7. Judge Manuell's findings, so far as relevant, are confined  to  [8]  of
    his decision, but adopted at  [13].   There  are  further  findings  in
    relation to scars at  [18]  but  it  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the findings in relation to scars are neither  here  nor
    there in terms of the assessment of risk now required.   At  [8]  Judge
    Manuell summarised the appellant's account as follows:

         "After leaving school the Appellant worked with his father  in  his
         farming and grocery business near  Killinochchi,  then  under  LTTE
         control. The  Appellant  was  compelled  to  undertake  LTTE  basic
         training between January and March 2007. In June 2007 the Appellant
         tried to avoid further LTTE training but was detained by  the  LTTE
         and after mistreatment was forced to serve in a support capacity in
         a conflict zone. On 31 December 2007 he managed to escape from  the
         LTTE. The Appellant fled to his mother in Colombo  with  help  from
         his father. On 4 February 2008 when he  sought  to  register  there
         with  the  police  he  was  accused  of  LTTE  activity.   He   was
         interrogated and  tortured.  His  mother  secured  his  release  on
         payment of a large bribe. The Appellant was not  charged  with  any
         offence but was required  to  report.  After  his  release  he  was
         approached separately by EPDP and Pillayan  group  members  seeking
         his assistance, which he declined. The  Appellant  left  Sri  Lanka
         with the help of an agent and claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom
         on 28 April 2008, 3 days after his arrival. His mother and  one  of
         his brothers were questioned by the police  in  Colombo  afterwards
         but were released without charge."

    At [13] he said that the summary of the appellant's evidence  as  above
    stands as the findings of fact.

    Submissions

 8. Mr Mackenzie referred me to  question  66  of  the  appellant's  asylum
    interview in  terms  of  the  detail  of  the  ill-treatment  that  the
    appellant  was  subjected  to.   In  particular,  he  referred  to  the
    appellant having said that  he  was  told  when  being  released  after
    payment of a bribe that he was on a list of "suspicious terrorists".

 9. He was  put  on  reporting  conditions.   And  after  his  release  was
    approached by the EPDP, a paramilitary group but he declined to  assist
    them.

10. I was referred to various paragraphs of the decision in GJ and  Others,
    and in particular to the expert evidence that was given in that appeal.
     The fact that the appellant  had  been  released  on  a  bribe  was  a
    significant matter it was submitted.

11. So far as concerns the risk categories set out in GJ and Others, and as
    reflected in the head note, it was said that the appellant came  within
    (7)(a), and more particularly (7)(d) (individuals who are, or perceived
    to be a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka;  a  person  whose  name
    appears on a computerised stop list).

12. In addition, it was found in GJ and Others that persons detained by the
    Sri Lankan security services are at real risk of ill-treatment or  harm
    requiring international protection.  If a person is on  a  'stop  list'
    there is no need to show involvement in diaspora activity.

13. Furthermore, a person is likely to be on a 'stop list' if  there  is  a
    court order or an arrest  warrant.   The  expert  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal was to the effect that those  who  had  escaped  or  absconded
    would be subject to an arrest warrant.  In that context I was  referred
    to the evidence of Dr Chris Smith at Appendix J of GJ  and  Others,  in
    particular at [13].

14. It was not credible, so Mr Mackenzie submitted, to  suggest  that  even
    after the passage of time the authorities would not be concerned  about
    a person such as the appellant.  Again, I was referred to the  evidence
    of Dr Smith, at [10] of the record of his evidence,  in  terms  of  the
    permanence of records kept by the authorities.  Likewise, in  terms  of
    the evidence of Professor Anthony Good at Appendix I.

15. The appellant was not released because he was not found to be a  member
    of the LTTE but was released on payment of  a  bribe,  and  subject  to
    reporting conditions.  He would therefore be of ongoing  interest.   He
    was told that he was to report because he was a terrorist suspect.  His
    mother and brother  were  questioned  after  his  departure.   He  then
    absconded.  It is likely therefore, according to the evidence given  in
    GJ and Others, that he would be subject to an arrest warrant because he
    had absconded.  Thus, he would also be on a 'stop  list',  which  would
    mean that he would be stopped at the airport, detained and be  at  real
    risk of torture.  It was submitted that the Court of Appeal in MP &  NT
    thought that it was at least  realistic  that  someone  about  whom  an
    investigation was cut short because of payment of a bribe  would  still
    be subject to a risk.

16. In his  submissions  Mr  Tufan  contended  that  the  question  of  the
    appellant having been told  that  he  was  on  a  list  of  'suspicious
    terrorists' was not the subject of any finding  of  fact  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It is a significant issue  and  if  it  had  been
    accepted, that is a matter that would have specifically  been  recorded
    as a finding of fact.

17. The appellant on his own account had been a  reluctant  member  of  the
    LTTE and the tasks he had undertaken were very menial.   There  was  no
    evidence of any sur place activities in the UK.

18. There is no basis for the conclusion that the  appellant  comes  within
    the first of the risk categories set out in GJ and  Others.   The  only
    potentially relevant risk category is in terms of the  appellant  being
    on a 'stop list', but the question arises as to whether he is likely to
    be  on  such  a  list.   The  Sri  Lankan  authorities  operate  on  an
    intelligence led basis and have a computerised system.  That  would  be
    able to establish that the appellant was not of any interest.

19. There was no evidence from any family members or, for example, from any
    lawyer in Sri Lanka, to the effect that the appellant is subject to  an
    arrest warrant.  Notwithstanding that the appellant was  released  from
    detention on payment of a bribe, that cannot  equate  to  a  conclusion
    that he is subject to an arrest warrant.

20. Dr Smith's evidence was subject to some concerns by the Tribunal in  GJ
    and Others, as can be seen from [267] and [272].  There  was  no  basis
    from which to conclude that the appellant would be on a 'stop list'.

21. So far as MP & NT is concerned, the Upper Tribunal was simply found  to
    have made a factual mistake, which was the main reason that the  matter
    was remitted.  It was true however, that at [50] the  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded that there may be cases where the evidence shows grounds  for
    concluding that a person might be regarded as posing a  threat  to  the
    integrity of the Sri Lankan state even in the absence  of  evidence  of
    involvement in diaspora activity.

22. In reply, Mr Mackenzie submitted that  MP  &  NT  shows  how  important
    bribery is in the circumstances of release.  In addition, if there  was
    an arrest warrant, one would not necessarily expect to see it.   It  is
    not reasonable to believe that  the  appellant  having  been  detained,
    released  on  payment  of  a  bribe,  required  to  report  and  having
    absconded, there would be no interest in him by the authorities.

23. Although the reference by the appellant to having been told that he was
    a terrorist suspect is not recorded by Judge Manuell as  a  finding  of
    fact, that was part of his case.

24. It was also true that not all of the evidence of Dr Smith was  accepted
    but the workings of the authorities was corroborated  by  other  expert
    evidence.

    Post-hearing

25. Before giving my conclusions it is necessary to refer to correspondence
    received after the hearing from new representatives acting on behalf of
    the appellant. By letter dated 5 October 2016, a  firm  of  solicitors,
    Amirthan & Suresh, wrote to the  Tribunal  stating  that  they  act  on
    behalf of the appellant  and  including  a  signed  authority  to  that
    effect. The letter states that they  understood  that  at  the  hearing
    before me the appellant's  then  representatives  did  not  submit  any
    further evidence in support of the appeal, and that that  is  a  matter
    about which the appellant is  extremely  concerned.  According  to  the
    letter, he had raised the question of further evidence  with  his  then
    solicitors but was informed that the new evidence would not be accepted
    and thus it had not been submitted.  Accordingly,  the  appellant  felt
    that he had no choice but to seek alternative representation.

26. The letter continues that all evidence material to  the  assessment  of
    risk should have been submitted, in particular given the history of the
    appeal. The letter states that  "We  therefore  make  the  unusual  and
    urgent application for  this  hearing  to  be  reconvened  to  consider
    further evidence and hear submissions thereon."  An  application  under
    rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  was
    made, in relation to prospective  medical  evidence  in  terms  of  his
    mental health, membership of a diaspora  organisation  which  has  been
    proscribed by the Sri Lankan government and an update  in  relation  to
    family members in Sri Lanka. There is also reference to an  appointment
    that the appellant is said to have had with a  consultant  psychiatrist
    on 26 September 2016, but that the report was not submitted.

27. There is reference to a further witness statement from  the  appellant,
    and a witness statement and other documentary evidence is included with
    that letter and which it was sought to adduce  with  reference  to  the
    rule 15(2A) application.

28. After a further letter from the appellant's solicitors I caused a reply
    to the applications to be sent, refusing the applications to  reconvene
    the hearing and to adduce further evidence. I  decided  to  refuse  the
    applications because at the hearing before me the appellant was legally
    represented by solicitors properly appointed by him. The new solicitors
    were not on record at the time, and I considered it  inappropriate  for
    the appellant to seek to have the appeal re-heard on the basis that  he
    was not satisfied with his representation at the hearing before me.

    Conclusions

29. The current country guidance is as set out in GJ and Others, subject to
    MP & NT.  The risk categories are however, as set out in GJ and Others.
    At [356] of GJ and Others it was said as follows:

         "356.    Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including
                the latest UNHCR guidance, we consider that  the  change  in
                the GOSL's approach is so significant that it is  preferable
                to reframe the  risk  analysis  for  the  present  political
                situation in  Sri  Lanka.  We  give  the  following  country
                guidance:

                (1)    This  determination  replaces  all  existing  country
                    guidance on Sri Lanka.

                (2)    The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has
                    changed since the civil war ended in May 2009. The  LTTE
                    in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there have been
                    no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

                (3)    The government's present  objective  is  to  identify
                    Tamil activists in the  diaspora  who  are  working  for
                    Tamil separatism and  to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
                    Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment  6(1)  to  the  Sri
                    Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which   prohibits   the
                    'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri  Lanka.  Its
                    focus is on preventing both (a) the  resurgence  of  the
                    LTTE or any similar Tamil  separatist  organisation  and
                    (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

                (4)    If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security
                    services there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or
                    harm requiring international protection.

                (5)    Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka
                    for  a  person  at  real  risk  from  the   Sri   Lankan
                    authorities, since the government now controls the whole
                    of Sri Lanka and Tamils are  required  to  return  to  a
                    named address after passing through the airport.

                (6)    There are no detention  facilities  at  the  airport.
                    Only those whose names appear on a "stop" list  will  be
                    detained from the airport. Any risk for  those  in  whom
                    the Sri Lankan  authorities  are  or  become  interested
                    exists not at the airport, but after  arrival  in  their
                    home area, where their arrival will be verified  by  the
                    CID or police within a few days.

                (7)    The current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of
                    persecution or serious harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                    whether in detention or otherwise, are:

                    (a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a
                        threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka  as  a  single
                        state because they are, or are perceived to have  a
                        significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
                        separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of
                        hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                    (b)    Journalists (whether in print or other media)  or
                        human rights activists, who, in either  case,  have
                        criticised the Sri Lankan government, in particular
                        its human rights record, or who are associated with
                        publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.



                    (c)     Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the
                        Lessons  Learned  and   Reconciliation   Commission
                        implicating the Sri Lankan security  forces,  armed
                        forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war
                        crimes. Among those  who  may  have  witnessed  war
                        crimes during the conflict, particularly in the No-
                        Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who have already
                        identified themselves by giving such evidence would
                        be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan   authorities   and
                        therefore only they are at  real  risk  of  adverse
                        attention or persecution on return as potential  or
                        actual war crimes witnesses.

                    (d)    A person whose name  appears  on  a  computerised
                        "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising a
                        list of those against whom there is an extant court
                        order or arrest  warrant.  Individuals  whose  name
                        appears on a "stop" list will  be  stopped  at  the
                        airport and handed  over  to  the  appropriate  Sri
                        Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such  order  or
                        warrant.

                (8)    The Sri Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based  on
                    sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within
                    Sri  Lanka  and  in  the  diaspora.   The   Sri   Lankan
                    authorities know that many Sri Lankan  Tamils  travelled
                    abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone  in
                    the Northern Province had some level of involvement with
                    the LTTE during the  civil  war.  In  post-conflict  Sri
                    Lanka, an individual's past  history  will  be  relevant
                    only to the extent that  it  is  perceived  by  the  Sri
                    Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk  to  the
                    unitary Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

                (9)    The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-
                    led "watch" list. A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a
                    "watch" list is not reasonably likely to be detained  at
                    the airport  but  will  be  monitored  by  the  security
                    services after his or her  return.  If  that  monitoring
                    does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
                    working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or
                    revive the internal armed conflict,  the  individual  in
                    question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
                    detained by the security forces. That will be a question
                    of  fact  in  each  case,  dependent  on  any   diaspora
                    activities carried out by such an individual.

                (10)   Consideration must always be given to whether, in the
                    light of an individual's activities and responsibilities
                    during the civil war, the exclusion clauses are  engaged
                    (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article  12(2)
                    of the Qualification Directive). Regard should be had to
                    the categories for exclusion set out in the "Eligibility
                    Guidelines For Assessing  the  International  Protection
                    Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by
                    UNHCR on 21 December 2012."

30. I have quoted all of the country guidance but in fact only  (7)(a)  and
    (d) are contended for on behalf of the appellant.  This is of course in
    addition  to  (4)  which  relates  to  the  risk  of  ill-treatment  on
    detention.

31. I have already set out the findings of fact upon which my  decision  is
    to be based.  However, I do consider it important to resolve the  issue
    of a finding that is not specifically made by Judge Manuell, and  is  a
    matter to which I was referred  in  terms  of  the  appellant's  asylum
    interview and relating to his answer to question  66.   There  he  said
    that he was being freed on only temporary release and that he  was  "in
    the list of suspicious terrorists".  He said that he was told  that  he
    would be called back after a month.  It is the issue of  the  appellant
    being said to be on such a list that is relevant.

32. Whilst Mr Tufan submitted that the importance of the appellant being on
    the list was so significant that it  would  have  been  recorded  as  a
    specific finding, I do  not  consider  that  the  absence  of  specific
    reference to that part of the appellant's interview means that it is  a
    matter that remains undetermined.   Apart  from  anything  else,  Judge
    Manuell specifically said at [13] that the  appellant's  account  as  a
    whole was plausible and reflected the historical evidence and that  his
    evidence met the required standard of "reasonable likelihood".  He also
    said in that paragraph that the "summary" of his evidence stands as the
    findings of fact.

33. It is clear therefore firstly, that [8] is a summary of  the  evidence,
    and  secondly  that  the  appellant's  account  in  factual  terms  was
    accepted.  Part of that account, as given  in  his  interview,  is  the
    contentious matter to which I have referred, namely about his being  on
    a list of suspicious terrorists.   Furthermore,  I  note  that  in  his
    witness statement dated 19 January 2010 he also  said,  at  [12],  that
    despite the payment of the bribe (the equivalent  he  stated  of  about
    �6,000 then) he was told that he was still on the list of suspects  and
    that whenever his presence was required he had to return.   A  slightly
    different version of that account appears in  the  statement  dated  20
    January 2010, but his account in  this  respect  was  not  called  into
    question in the appeal proceedings.  As I say, he has been accepted  as
    a credible witness.

34. If I had to decide the issue, I would resolve the matter in his favour,
    given the previous positive credibility findings.  However,  I  do  not
    consider that this is a matter which I need to resolve, it having  been
    resolved in his favour already as part of his accepted account.

35. In addition to the country  guidance,  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to
    salient aspects of the evidence and conclusions from GJ and  Others  to
    which I was referred. Professor Anthony Good's written evidence to  the
    Tribunal included the following, summarised at Appendix I at [4]:

      "(g)    Corruption and  bribery  are  widespread  in  Sri  Lanka,  and
          includes those at the top of the political system and the  police.
          Release through payment of a bribe is 'extremely common';

       (h)     The release of a detainee does not of  itself  indicate  that
          the authorities  have  no  continuing  interest  in  that  person.
          Release without charge or without the payment of a bribe does  not
          preclude subsequent detention. There is evidence of re-arrest  and
          abduction of former LTTE cadres on  the  East  Coast  and  in  the
          Northern Province in 2011 and 2012;

        (i)        It is easy to  obtain  a  false  passport  or  a  genuine
          passport in a false name in Sri Lanka;

         (j)     There has been a computerised  database  of  both  ordinary
          criminal and LTTE suspects available since at  least  1999.  There
          has, since then, been a cumulative  process  of  refining  the  IT
          systems and information sources. The  evidence  strongly  suggests
          that  the  backgrounds  of  returning  asylum  seekers  who   have
          previously been in detention or appear on wanted lists are  likely
          to be known to the authorities. It is reasonable to conclude  that
          where events that took place  long  ago  are  less  likely  to  be
          recorded on central  databases  and  events  that  took  place  in
          Colombo are more likely to have been recorded..."

36. At [262] the  Tribunal  said  this  in  relation  to  Professor  Good's
    evidence:

         "Professor Good's evidence  is  set  out  in  Appendix  I  to  this
         determination. He was last in Sri Lanka  in  2010.  His  subsequent
         information is derived from students  and  a  Professor  of  Social
         Anthropology at his former university and  we  do  not,  therefore,
         rely on his report for the details it gives of  airport  procedures
         nowadays. We accept his evidence as to the current high  levels  of
         bribery and corruption in  Sri  Lanka  and  matters  which  may  be
         ascertained from the press reports and  other  public  information.
         When pressed on areas of more difficulty, in many  cases  Professor
         Good was unable to assist as his information was not up to date."

37. At [275] the Tribunal said that:

         "Mr Anton Punethanayagam's evidence is that of a  practitioner  who
         has dealt with 3000 cases of detainees, in  Colombo  and  Vavuniya.
         His evidence on the process of bribery was particularly useful.  We
         did not have the opportunity of hearing him give oral evidence, and
         some of his evidence goes beyond what  he  can  be  taken  to  know
         himself but where his evidence concerns the criminal  processes  in
         Sri Lanka, we consider that it is  useful  and  reliable.  We  take
         particular account of his view that the seriousness of any  charges
         against an individual are not determinative of whether a bribe  can
         be paid, and that it is possible to leave through the airport  even
         when a person is being actively sought."

38. I was also referred to [170], where in submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State it  was  accepted  that  "given  the  prevalence  of
    bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka,  having  left  Sri  Lanka  without
    difficulty was not probative of  a  lack  of  adverse  interest  in  an
    individual."

39. Dr Chris Smith's evidence is summarised at  Appendix  J.  That  summary
    includes the following at [34]:

         "Bribery  is  sufficiently  prevalent  in  Sri  Lanka  to  overcome
         considerations of national security. There is  evidence  that  even
         senior, known, LTTE  officials  have  been  able  to  secure  their
         release from detention through payment of  a  bribe.  A  person  of
         interest can exit Sri  Lanka  though  the  airport  using  bribery.
         People trafficking agents are still very active at the airport  and
         at least  one  Member  of  Parliament  is  involved  in  organising
         irregular emigration. Dr Smith's understanding was that, for money,
         the MP would provide details of an appropriate immigration official
         to approach  at  the  airport.  There  is  a  practice  whereby  an
         emigration officer will close down his computer to avoid connecting
         an individual's passport to the system, alternatively the  passport
         is not swiped  but  is  stamped,  therefore  the  database  is  not
         alerted."

40. At [15] of the same Appendix is the following:

         "All returned failed  asylum  seekers  are  questioned  at  Colombo
         airport. The incidents of detention at the airport  have  increased
         since TK, despite the civil war having  ended.  Initially  officers
         from the DIE interview all returnees. Once satisfied that a  person
         is of Sri Lankan origin, returnees are referred to the CID and SIS.
         Each part  of  the  Sri  Lankan  security  apparatus  has  its  own
         intelligence section and the respective sections do not communicate
         with each other."

41. At [13] of the summary of his evidence is the following:

         "Anyone with even the  most  tenuous  links  to  the  LTTE  in  the
         Northern and Eastern Province at the end of the civil war  in  2009
         would have been screened extremely closely and  records  drawn  up.
         These records would eventually have  been  included  on  a  central
         database in Colombo. If a bribe  was  used  to  short  circuit  the
         screening process,  the  person  will  have  been  recorded  as  an
         unacquitted suspect. If someone of  adverse  interest  is  released
         upon payment of a bribe, those  who  accepted  the  bribe  will  be
         responsible for ensuring there is a record of why the  suspect  was
         released; a note indicating that a person was released because they
         were a person of no further interest,  being  one  option.  If  the
         person who accepted the bribe  could  not  acquire  access  to  the
         records, it is more likely that they would report the 'release'  as
         an escape which would lead  to  an  arrest  warrant  being  issued.
         Someone  who  is  recorded  as  escaped  or  missing  would  be  of
         significant adverse interest to the authorities."

42. In relation to record-keeping, at [10] his evidence is  to  the  effect
    that:

         "The electronic records held by the Sri Lankan authorities  include
         records of individuals who are of adverse  interest  to  them.  The
         centralised collection of records began  in  the  mid  1990s.  Once
         details of a detainee have been entered on the database they remain
         there for life. If an entry includes mention of an  arrest  warrant
         the individual will  be  put  on  a  Stop  list.  The  database  is
         available to the authorities at the  airport  and  in  some  police
         stations  including  CID  headquarters  in  Colombo.  Although  not
         currently the case, all police stations are shortly  to  be  linked
         electronically  into  one  network.  The  electronic  database  has
         recently been linked to the emigration system."

43. Mr Tufan referred me to [267] and [272] of GJ and Others  in  terms  of
    the Tribunal expressing "concerns" about other aspects  of  Dr  Smith's
    evidence.  Those  paragraphs  relate  to  Dr  Smith's  evidence   about
    tattoos/scarring and identity cards,  respectively,  and  the  Tribunal
    indicated that it was not satisfied that Dr Smith's evidence  supported
    what he said about risk on return in relation to those two issues.

44. Whilst it is true therefore, that the Tribunal  did  not  accept  every
    aspect of Dr Smith's evidence, the paragraphs to which I  was  referred
    in that respect concern issues unrelated to the arguments  advanced  in
    favour of this appellant. Indeed, in a sense the fact that it  was  not
    suggested that  the  Tribunal  expressed  any  reservations  about  the
    aspects  of  Dr  Smith's  evidence  that  were  relied  on  before  me,
    reinforces their significance.

45. There is some significance in the decision of the Court of Appeal in MP
    & NT in relation to the appeal before me, but I do not consider that it
    is of much assistance in resolving the issues that I have to determine.
    The paragraphs to which I was referred, [42] and  [43],  relate  to  an
    error of law on the part of the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and  Others  in  its
    assessment of the evidence. Whilst release on payment of a large  bribe
    is a feature common to  the  appeal  before  me  and  to  that  of  the
    appellant NT, and there is comment by the Court  of  Appeal  about  the
    interrelationship between two of the risk categories,  the  issue  that
    concerned the Court of  Appeal  was  a  fact-specific  one  within  the
    context of  the  country  guidance,  rather  than  being  an  issue  of
    principle.

46. Mr Mackenzie accepted that there was no basis for the assertion in  the
    grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal in the appeal  before  me,  to
    the effect that the appellant had lost  contact  with  his  mother  and
    brother.  I raised this with reference to the issue of apparent lack of
    contact and lack of interest in  the  appellant  as  expressed  to  his
    family by the authorities in Sri Lanka.  Nevertheless,  there  is  some
    merit in Mr Mackenzie's submission to the effect that there is no  real
    basis from which to conclude  that  the  authorities  would  repeatedly
    contact family members seeking a person who had absconded and  in  whom
    they were interested.  It was suggested that the authorities might know
    that the appellant was in the UK.  Whilst I consider this  last  to  be
    speculation, I do not consider  that  the  lack  of  contact  with  the
    appellant's family in Sri Lanka by  the  authorities  is  a  matter  of
    significance either way.

47. Although Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant's activities  on  behalf
    of the LTTE were low level, that, with respect, is not the point.   The
    facts reveal that  the  appellant  was  detained  and  ill-treated  and
    regarded with suspicion by the authorities at that time.   His  release
    was secured on payment of what is described  by  Judge  Manuell  as  "a
    large bribe".

48. It is true that no arrest warrant has been produced but that  again  in
    my judgement is not determinative.  Sometimes an arrest warrant is able
    to be provided, sometimes not.  The fact that the former  is  the  case
    does not mean that the latter equates  to  the  absence  of  an  arrest
    warrant.

49. I have set out the factual foundation upon which the appeal  is  to  be
    decided, with the additional finding that the appellant was  told  that
    he was on a list of  terrorists.  He  was  detained,  interrogated  and
    tortured. He was released on  payment  of  a  bribe,  and  required  to
    report. He absconded. His mother and brother  were  questioned  by  the
    authorities as to his whereabouts.

50. The Tribunal in GJ and Others said that a 'stop list'  comprises  those
    subject to an extant court order or arrest warrant. It is not suggested
    that this appellant is subject to a court order  but  it  is  suggested
    that he is reasonably likely to be subject to an arrest warrant. GJ and
    Others does not explicitly deal with who would be subject to an  arrest
    warrant. However, the evidence before the Tribunal  in  that  case,  in
    particular that of Dr Smith, indicates that those who are  recorded  as
    escaped or missing would be of  significant  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities. The fact that the appellant absconded  from  reporting  in
    circumstances where he was told that he was on a  list  of  terrorists,
    and that his family were  questioned  as  to  his  whereabouts,  are  a
    sufficient basis from which to conclude that it is at least  reasonably
    likely that he is subject to  an  arrest  warrant,  and  is  reasonably
    likely therefore to be on a 'stop list'.

51. The appeal is to be decided on the  basis  of  the  lower  standard  of
    proof. I conclude that there is sufficient evidence,  contained  within
    the evidence put before the Tribunal in GJ and  Others,  and  from  the
    established facts in the appeal before me, from which to conclude  that
    it is reasonably likely that  there  was  sufficient  interest  in  the
    appellant for there to be in existence an arrest warrant.  The evidence
    before the Tribunal in GJ and Others indicates that records are  likely
    to persist, even though the events occurred some years ago.

52. In the circumstances, and on the particular facts of this appeal, I  am
    satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the appellant would be on a
    'stop list' which would mean his detention on arrival at the airport in
    Sri Lanka.  That on the evidence gives rise to  a  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment, again with reference to the findings made in GJ and  Others.



53. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant has established  to  the
    required standard that he has a well-founded fear of persecution for  a
    Convention reason,  namely  his  imputed  political  opinion.   I  have
    confined that conclusion to the risk category under (7)(d) of the  risk
    categories set out in GJ and Others,  rather  than  with  reference  to
    (7)(a), which seems to me to be rather more speculative, and  which  in
    any event is not a necessary conclusion in the light of my  finding  as
    to his being on a 'stop list'.

54. It is not contended by either party that the outcome of the  appeal  in
    human rights terms, with reference to Article 3 of the ECHR, should  be
    any different from that under the Refugee Convention.



    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision, allowing the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            10/11/16




