

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/16235/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham     |Determination Sent       |
|On 11th June 2013                      |On 14th June 2013        |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TAONA LOICE DIYA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Vokes instructed by Bake & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. As it is common ground and agreed between the parties that this appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal is  one  that  falls  to  be  dismissed,  it  is
      necessary for us only briefly to explain why we agree that the parties
      are correct to agree on that disposal.


   2. The respondent, who is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  was  born  on  24th
      September 1983. She arrived in the United Kingdom in  April  2006  and
      was admitted as a student. That leave  was  subsequently  extended  in
      that capacity until October 2010 but only after she  had  successfully
      appealed against a refusal to vary her leave by way of  the  grant  of
      further leave. She claimed asylum shortly before her leave expired.

   3. Her appeal against the removal decision that  accompanied  refusal  of
      her asylum claim was allowed by  Immigration  Judge  Cox  following  a
      hearing on  4th  January  2011.  The  judge  reached  that  conclusion
      because, unlike the Secretary of State who disbelieved her account  of
      being at risk on return to Zimbabwe, the  judge  found  her  to  be  a
      credible witness who had given a truthful and accurate account of  all
      that was advanced.

   4. The Secretary of State  secured  permission  to  appeal  against  that
      decision. The result was a hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
      Parkes on 2nd June 2011 following which the deputy  judge  found  that
      the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  give  proper   or   adequate
      consideration to the evidence so that the determination  disclosed  an
      error of law such as to require it to be set aside. In short, he found
      that the decision  was  one  that  was  not  reasonably  open  to  the
      immigration judge. He went on to explain why, unlike  the  Immigration
      Judge who had allowed the appeal, he disbelieved the respondent and so
      substituted a fresh decision to dismiss her appeal.

   5. The matter now comes before us as a result of an order of the Court of
      Appeal, made by consent of both parties on  22nd  February  2013.  The
      effect of that order is to quash the decision of the deputy judge  and
      to remit the appeal to the Upper Tribunal for re-determination of  the
      appeal by a different judge of the Upper Tribunal.  The  agreement  of
      the parties is reflected in the Statement of Reasons in  which  it  is
      said that:

           "The respondent (i.e.  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department) accepts  that  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Parkes  gave
           insufficient reasoning in his decision  that  Immigration  Judge
           Cox had erred in his assessment of the Appellant's  credibility;
           in particular the respondent accepts that he failed to  make  an
           explicit finding of  irrationality  or  perversity  in  relation
           thereto."

   6. Thus, we now find ourselves in the position that the deputy judge  was
      in considering the challenge to the determination of Judge Cox. In the
      face of the consensus referred to above we need say only that  we  can
      find no error of law in the determination of Judge Cox. It is clear to
      us that he directed himself correctly in law, had  careful  regard  to
      all the evidence the parties chose to put before him and reached  well
      reasoned conclusions that were plainly open to him on the evidence.

   7. The effect of that is that his determination is unassailable.





   Summary of decision:

   8. Immigration Judge Cox made no error  of  law  and  his  determination,
      promulgated following the hearing on 4th January 2011, shall stand.


   9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.








                               Signed
                                   Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

