
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/16777/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 23 October 2013                              |On 25 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                        MR VASANTHAROOBAN KANTHASAMY
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker


                 NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF DECISION TO REMOVE


 1. The appellant applied for asylum.  A decision was made  to  refuse  his
    application and to remove him as an illegal  entrant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant appealed the decision.  The appeal was heard by  a  judge
    in the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed the appeal.  Ultimately and by
    consent that decision was set aside by the Court of Appeal and the case
    remitted to the Upper Tribunal "for reconsideration".

 3. Before me and after consideration of the evidence provided on  the  day
    of the hearing, Mr Walker, on behalf of the respondent, indicated  that
    the appellant was to be granted three years' discretionary leave on the
    basis of the appellant's ongoing mental health problems and the fact of
    his marriage.  For those reasons Mr Walker was instructed on behalf  of
    the respondent to withdraw the decision which is the  subject  of  this
    appeal under Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (as amended).

 4. I consider that the respondent has power at any time  to  withdraw  her
    decision and does not need my consent to do so but insofar as I may  be
    wrong about that then my consent is given and Ms Jegarajah on behalf of
    the appellant was content with the position.

 5. In the circumstances there is no longer any  adverse  decision  against
    which a valid appeal lies.

 6. No request for anonymity was made and in the  circumstances  I  see  no
    need for such a direction.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

