

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
     Appeal Number: AA/17037/2010
      AA/17227/2010
      AA/17224/2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th September 2013                        |On 1st October 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                        Vusumuzi Zachariah Ncube + 2
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. An error of law was been found by DUTJ Hall on 31st July 2012 in these
      three appeals such that the determinations of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Trotter were set aside to be remade; no findings of fact
      retained.


   2. DUTJ Hall directed that the resumed  hearing  be  listed  before  him.
      Having reviewed these files and in the light of the direction that  no
      findings of fact are to be retained with a full rehearing  I  propose,
      in accordance with the Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of
      the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
      Tribunal which states:

                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


      to remit these appeals for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. No objections having been received from either party  I  am  satisfied
      that  in the circumstances of  these  particular  appeals  the  proper
      course is for them to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  full
      hearing.


               Conclusions:

          The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

         I set aside the decisions and remit the appeals to the  First-tier
         Tribunal for rehearing.







                                    Date 30th September 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
