
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/17420/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2017                    |On 30 November 2018                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                     XY
                          (ANONYMITY DECISION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Fripp Counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Jarvis Home Office Presenting Officer for SSHD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born in Bangladesh on 7 January 1977.   This  is  an
    appeal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson
    (the judge) promulgated on 21 July 2016 which refused  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the respondent of December 2010 to refuse
    her claim for asylum as a divorced woman who had entered the  UK  as  a
    temporary visitor and who became embroiled in a dispute between a  male
    cousin (SM) who lives here.

2.   This matter has a protracted  history.   In  the  autumn  of  2009  the
    appellant applied for entry clearance as a family visitor stating  that
    she  intended  to  stay  in  the  UK  for  approximately  three  months
    travelling to the UK on 26 November 2009 and leaving on 1 March  2010.
    Her application was supported by an email from her UK sponsor, SM,  who
    lived in London and was employed as a senior accountant.

3.    SM  asked  that  the  appellant  be   granted   entry   clearance   on
    compassionate grounds since she was coming to the UK to save  his  life
    by donating one of her kidneys to him.   He  had  been  diagnosed  with
    chronic kidney failure and required an urgent kidney transplant.

4.   After some time the appellant  was  issued  with  a  medical  visa  and
    entered the United Kingdom  on  9  April  2010.   It  was  valid  until
    25 September 2010.

5.   On 10 September 2010 the appellant made a complaint about  SM  to  the
    police.  She gave a history of having been  sexually  assaulted  by  SM
    while living with him in London.  This, together with medical  problems
    of her own, had led her to decide not to donate a kidney to him and  to
    leave his house and return to Bangladesh.  She reported that "over  the
    past three weeks" SM had made telephone calls  to  her  threatening  to
    kill her and get somebody to rape her.  He had also threatened  to  get
    her family if she returned to Bangladesh.  He wanted the money that  he
    had paid for her air fare  to  be  returned.   She  had  recorded  five
    telephone calls and could provide a transcript if required.

6.   She applied for further leave to remain  on  15 September  2010.   The
    application was returned as invalid on 25 October 2010.

7.   She attended at a screening interview at  ASU  Crowden  on  6 December
    2010.  She claimed asylum.  She could not return to Bangladesh  because
    SM was threatening her because she had refused to give him her  kidney.
    She repeated her claims about sexual abuse.  She mentioned that  on  27
    July 2010 SM had filed a case against her through  an  intermediary  in
    Bangladesh alleging that she had dishonestly obtained money  from  him.
    She explained that she was divorced from her husband.  She was detained
    at Yarl's Wood IRC on 7 December 2010 and given a  substantive  Asylum
    interview on 14 December 2010.  Prior to that interview a statement was
    taken from her by her solicitors.  That statement is at F3 to F7 of the
    Home Office bundle.  In it she gave a detailed  account  of  the  abuse
    which she had suffered at the hands of SM while she lived with  him  in
    London.

8.   On 17 December 2010  the  respondent  gave  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise  the  appellant  as  a   refugee   or   otherwise   requiring
    international human rights protection.  It was not  accepted  that  she
    would be at real risk of serious harm on  return  to  Bangladesh.   She
    appealed against that decision.

9.   An accelerated hearing  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tiffen at Yarl's Wood.  The date on which that occurred  is  not  given
    but  must  have  been  shortly  prior  to  4  January  2011  when   the
    determination is dated.  The appellant was  legally  represented.   She
    gave evidence and was cross-examined by the Home Office representative.
     By that time she had provided certain  documents  from  the  court  in
    Bangladesh and copies of newspaper articles published there  supporting
    her contention that a court case had been  instituted  against  her  in
    that country.  These papers had been sent by her sister  who  lived  in
    Bangladesh.  The case was also directed against other  members  of  her
    family including her father.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen issued a decision dated 4  January
    2011 dismissing her appeal.   Judge  Tiffen  accepted  the  appellant's
    claim that she had come to the United Kingdom  in  order  to  donate  a
    kidney to SM and subsequently had been abused by him  because  she  had
    refused to donate her kidney to him as a result of which she  had  been
    threatened by him.  It was  also  accepted  that  a  criminal  case  in
    Bangladesh had been started  against  her  and  other  members  of  her
    family.

11.  Judge Tiffen found that, although it had been claimed  that  an  arrest
    warrant had been issued in Bangladesh against  her,  no  copy  of  that
    arrest warrant had been issued.   While  it  was  accepted  that  those
    proceedings had been instigated there was no reason why  the  appellant
    could not avail herself of the legal representation  which  her  father
    had instructed.

12.  Furthermore, it was found that the appellant had family  in  Bangladesh
    to whom she could return.  Members of her family had supplied her  with
    documentation in support of her claim.  Judge  Tiffen  considered  that
    the appellant was an  educated  woman  who  had  had  the  strength  of
    character  to  bring  divorce  proceedings  against  her   husband   in
    Bangladesh.  If she was wanted by the authorities in  Bangladesh,  that
    was because of a prosecution not persecution.  Reference  was  made  to
    the case of RA and Others (particular social group - woman)  Bangladesh
    2005 UKAIT 00070 in which it  was  found  that  while  there  was  some
    discrimination against women in Bangladesh, it is not as extreme as  in
    Pakistan.  There was domestic protection available to  the  appropriate
    standard and  internal  relocation  was  available.   Accordingly,  her
    appeal was refused.

13.  That decision was appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

14.  In a decision dated 25 March 2011  her  appeal  was  allowed.   It  was
    accepted by the Home Office Presenting Officer that  Judge  Tiffen  had
    erred materially in appearing to ignore the risk from  the  appellant's
    cousin SM.  The Upper Tribunal judge also considered  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge had erred in the approach to the  question  of  the
    risk of ill-treatment arising from the civil and  criminal  proceedings
    in Bangladesh.  The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a rehearing.  There was, in addition, a question as to whether the case
    might be suitable for country guidance.

15.   Thereafter,  consideration  was  given  to  the  question  of  country
    guidance but it was decided that it was not suitable for such guidance.
     A further decision and directions were issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Gleeson on 7 March 2016.  It was pointed out there that it had now been
    over 5 years  since  the  facts  of  the  appeal  had  been  assessed.
    Furthermore the respondent's file had been lost in the  meantime.   The
    matter was remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  substantive
    hearing on 5 July 2016.

16.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  also  directed  that  the  findings  at
    paragraph 20, 21 and 23 of Judge Tiffen's  decision  of  January  2011
    should be  preserved  (with  the  exception  of  a  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 23).  That was subject:

         "as always to the displacement of those findings in  the  light  of
         further evidence and or other changes which the First-tier Tribunal
         considers  to  be  relevant  to  the  continued  validity  of  such
         findings."

17.  Accordingly, the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  once  more
    for a Hearing on 5 July 2016.  By that time the appellant had  provided
    a number of additional statements.  In addition to the statement  given
    prior to the asylum interview of 14 December 2010 there was before the
    judge statements dated 14 February 2012, 24 November 2014 and 8  June
    2016.  In these statements she repeated her claims that she had come to
    the United Kingdom in 2010 in order to give a kidney to her cousin.  SM
    had proceeded to abuse her.  Furthermore, after she left his  house  SM
    had threatened her and her family in Bangladesh.  She stated  that  the
    court case in Bangladesh  continued  and  she  was  at  risk  from  the
    authorities since a warrant for arrest had been issued and she would be
    detained on return.  She stated that her family had turned against  her
    and she would have no family support on return.  That was because  they
    considered that she was not following  her  religion  by,  among  other
    behaviour, failing to wear the hijad, and had brought disrepute on  the
    family.

18.  Her evidence was supported  by  witness  NA  who  was  married  to  the
    appellant's first cousin.  He lived in Manchester.   He  and  his  wife
    had become aware in July 2010 that the appellant was in  distress  and
    being pursued by SM as a result of the dispute already described.  They
    suspected that harm might come to her and told her that she could  come
    and live with them until the matter was  resolved.   His  evidence  was
    contained in a  statement  dated  20 November  2014.   He  was  cross-
    examined.  He stated that one week after  her  arrival,  the  appellant
    began to receive numerous threatening phone calls from Nanu a cousin of
    SM who  objected  to  the  appellant's  presence  in  NA's  house.   He
    threatened to maim and cripple family members of NA  in  Bangladesh  if
    continued to harbour her.  Further he stated that SM himself  regularly
    phoned to threaten NA, his family and the appellant.

19.  He also said that received several phone  calls  from  the  appellant's
    older  sister  in  Bangladesh  expressing  dissatisfaction  about   the
    appellant.  She claimed that the appellant had brought a  bad  name  to
    the good repute of  her  family  and  that  the  family  had  basically
    disowned her and did not wish to see her again.  Her  village  kinsfolk
    were adamant that the appellant should be physically lashed if she  was
    to return to Bangladesh.

20.  A mutual uncle, AM, also repeatedly called from Bangladesh warning  him
    against giving the appellant shelter.  That uncle's son also phoned  to
    the same effect.

21.  A further witness, Munirul Mazumder, who was a friend of the appellant
    and had known her since April 2011, also gave evidence.  He  had  been
    introduced by the appellant to her cousin HA.  Mr Mazumder had invited
    HA to his  birthday  party  in  December  2015.   Subsequently  HA  had
    contacted him expressing disapproval of the appellant's  behaviour  and
    dress at that  party.   Mr  Mazumder  claimed  that  HA  had  sent  him
    threatening text messages.

22.  In the determination of 16 July 2016 the judge set out  in  detail  the
    history of the case and  the  appellant's  claims  and  summarised  the
    evidence he heard.  He recognised that certain findings made  by  Judge
    Tiffen had been preserved and  observed  at  paragraph  87  that  those
    findings were his starting point but did not disable  him  from  making
    findings which were at variance with those preserved findings where  he
    found them to be displaced by further evidence not before the  previous
    judge.

23.  He was not persuaded to depart from the findings  of  Judge Tiffen  in
    relation to what he described as "the  core  claim",  namely  that  the
    appellant had offered to come from Bangladesh to the  UK  to  donate  a
    kidney to her cousin, that he had paid her expenses and supported  her,
    that she had contracted hepatitis and  SM  had  become  angry  and  had
    sexually assaulted her.  He accepted that, as a result, she decided not
    to donate her kidney and left SM's house.  This had caused SM to spread
    rumours about her, to threaten her and her relatives in the UK  and  to
    arrange for a case  to  be  brought  against  her  and  her  family  in
    Bangladesh.  He narrates at paragraphs 89 and 90 and 91 the reasons why
    he finds that part of the appellant's evidence credible.

24.  The judge then turned to  considering  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to Bangladesh.  He noted that the  preserved
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Tiffen  included  those  at
    paragraph 21(iv), (v) and (vi).  Those were as follows:

    iv.  The appellant has family in Bangladesh to whom she can return.


    v.   The appellant's  family  in  Bangladesh  have  supplied  her  with
         documentation in support of her claim and


    vi.  The appellant's father has a legal representative to assist him in
         the case which has been  brought  against  the  appellant  and  her
         family in Bangladesh.


    The  judge  stated  that  the  appellant  had  sought  to  displace  or
    neutralise these preserved findings by presenting evidence that all her
    family in Bangladesh had turned against her and that they  had  already
    turned against her  by  the  time  she  sought  sanctuary  with  MA  in
    Manchester in about July 2010.  She therefore  would  not  have  their
    support on return.

25.  The judge states at paragraph 93 that this "new case" was inconsistent
    with what the appellant had told the police and with the fact that  the
    family in Bangladesh provided her with documents to assist  her  appeal
    hearing in January 2011.  The judge also points to what he describes as
    a fundamental discrepancy between the appellant's account and  that  of
    NA about her family's reaction to the news that she was not going to go
    through with a plan to donate a kidney to SM.   The  judge  points  out
    that, while the appellant's position was that SM began to make  threats
    against her in June 2010 and those threats escalated while  she  stayed
    with NA in July, she  did  not  go  to  the  police  about  them  until
    10 September 2010.  At that time her  claim  was  that  she  had  only
    recently begun to receive threats from SM, contrary to  the  claim  now
    being made that she had received such threats earlier when staying with
    NA and had been harassed by SM even earlier.  It is  also  pointed  out
    that, although she was now saying the threat from  SM  materialised  in
    June 2010, she had sold a shop in  Dahka  within  two  months  of  her
    arrival in the UK which was inconsistent with her  having  any  genuine
    intention to return to Bangladesh.  In  the  alternative,  if  she  was
    genuinely intending to return there in 2010 as she  stated,  she  could
    not have regard to the threats  made  by  SM  or  the  effects  of  his
    "scandal mongering", as posing a significant  risk  to  her  return  to
    Bangladesh.

26.  On that basis the judge was not persuaded to depart from the  preserved
    finding that, as at January 2011, the appellant had supportive  family
    to whom to return in Bangladesh.

27.  At paragraph 102 the judge finds that the appellant  had  not  brought
    forward credible  evidence  to  show  that  the  previously  supportive
    family's stance of her family in Bangladesh has changed as a result  of
    any development since  the  beginning  of 2011.   That  conclusion  is
    reached because of the finding that the family  did  not  believe  SM's
    malicious slurs in 2010 and there was no reason why they would start to
    believe them subsequently.    It is also pointed  out  that  there  was
    evidence that the appellant did  not  wear  a  headscarf  or  otherwise
    observe Muslim dress code in Bangladesh so that  it  was  not  credible
    that continuing such liberal behaviour in the UK has caused the  family
    in Bangladesh to  turn  against  her.   He  therefore  found  that  the
    appellant could return  to  live  with  supportive  family  members  in
    Bangladesh and that she can access the services of a lawyer  instructed
    by her parents to defend her claim as found by the previous  First-tier
    Tribunal judge.

Ground of Appeal 1

28.  Mr Fripp on behalf  of  the  appellant  advanced  all  his  grounds  of
    appeal.  The first is directed towards the treatment by  the  judge  of
    the new evidence presented by NA and Mazumder which  he  submitted  was
    not properly dealt with.

29.  The particular criticism is that the judge made no findings in  respect
    of the evidence of NA of threatening attitudes to the  appellant  by  a
    substantial  number  of  her  relatives,  including   her   sister   in
    Bangladesh.  Due to that omission,  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant  retained  sufficient  family  support  in   Bangladesh   was
    unsustainable.

Discussion on Ground 1.

30.  At paragraphs 71 to 80 the judge narrates in detail the evidence of NA
    as contained in his statement, in cross-examination and re-examination.
     It is correct to say that there  is  no  explicit  reference  to  that
    evidence in his discussion in the findings section and in particular at
    paragraphs 92 to 102.  However, the judge refers  expressly  in  that
    section to the appellant's "new case" and "the evidence that her family
    had turned against her". That must be a reference to  the  evidence  of
    NA, among others.  The judge says  that  in  doing  so  she  sought  to
    displace or neutralise the preserved findings to effect  that  she  had
    supportive family in Bangladesh.  The judge approached this  matter  in
    two stages.  First,  he  examines  the  position  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's family as at the date of the hearing in  January 2011.  He
    observes that those findings had been preserved  at  paragraph  87  but
    that they can be displaced by further evidence, as  directed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson.  He then sets out his reasons for  refusing  to
    depart from those findings. He gives three reasons for that.  The first
    is that the appellant's "new case" is not consistent with what she  had
    told the police (paragraph 93).  When she first went to the police  in
    September 2010 to complain about the conduct of  SM  towards  her,  she
    informed them that she intended to return to Bangladesh "in two  weeks"
    (see the "Primary Investigation" details dated  10 September  2010  at
    page J21 of the Home Office bundle).  If she  intended  to  return  to
    Bangladesh some time in September 2010 that would indicate that she had
    a supportive family, otherwise she would not want to go  back,  in  the
    face of threats from SM. As such, it was  capable  of  undermining  her
    evidence that her family had turned against her, as at September  2010.
    It could also be used as a reason for rejecting the evidence of NA  who
    spoke to the attitude of the appellant's family in the second  half  of
    2010. The second reason given at paragraph 93 is that the appellant had
    previously stated that her sister had assisted her in  connection  with
    the appeal  hearing  at  Yarl's  Wood  in  January  2011  by  providing
    documents.  That was inconsistent with the proposition that her  sister
    had turned against her by that time and wanted nothing to do with  her.
    So that evidence was again capable of undermining not only the evidence
    of the appellant but that of NA about the family's attitude.  The third
    reason given is the discrepancy between her  account  and  that  of  NA
    about the family's alleged reaction the news that she was not going  to
    go through with a plan to donate a kidney to  SM.   The  appellant  had
    claimed that her proposal to donate a kidney was contrary to Islam  and
    that was one of the reasons that  members  of  her  family  had  turned
    against her.  However, that evidence was contradicted by  the  evidence
    of NA who was asked  about  this  matter  in  cross-examination.   This
    exchange is recorded at paragraph 74 of the determination.  In  cross-
    examination NA had said that he had learned this from the appellant and
    was happy  to  hear  that  news.   Anybody  would  be  happy.   In  re-
    examination set out in paragraph 78,  he  was  asked  whether  he  had
    discussed this matter with family in Bangladesh.  He answered: "Yes, he
    had discussed it with  Asma  (the  appellant's  sister)  and  with  the
    appellant's  uncle".   That  evidence  was,  as   the   judge   stated,
    fundamentally at odds with that of the appellant.  It  also  undermined
    the contention that the sister and indeed the  appellant's  uncle,  had
    turned against her.  It is pointed out in this ground  of  appeal  that
    NA's evidence is expressly accepted as credible  on  this  issue.   The
    implication being that there is no explicit rejection of  his  evidence
    on other issues.  I do not consider that it was necessary for there  to
    be any such rejection. The reasons advanced in paragraphs 93-97 provide
    a legitimate basis upon which to  reject  the  evidence  of  NA  as  to
    conversations he claimed to have had with members  of  the  appellant's
    family.

31.  Since NA's evidence  only  impacted  on  the  attitude  of  the  family
    towards the appellant in the period during which she had stayed at  his
    house, he could not contribute any evidence  of  the  attitude  of  the
    family since that date.  His evidence therefore only impacted upon  the
    first stage of the judge's approach.  But it is clear from the analysis
    I have set out above that the judge did deal with NA's evidence, albeit
    he does not again rehearse it  or  name  NA  in  this  section  of  his
    determination.

32.  Furthermore, the judge points out that  the  appellant's  position  was
    that SM began to make threats against her  prior  to  her  leaving  his
    house on 10 June 2010 and, by the time she arrived at  NA's  house  in
    Manchester two weeks later, those threats had become more  extreme  and
    extended to threats  of  violence  against  relatives  in  the  UK  who
    harboured her.  The fact that she  did  not  go  to  the  police  until
    10 September 2010 and told the police that she had only recently begun
    to receive threats  "over  the  past  three  weeks"  (see  the  Primary
    Investigation details 10 September 2010 at  J21  of  the  Home  Office
    papers) undermined her claim she had received  threatening  calls  when
    staying with NA in Manchester.  That discrepancy was  also  capable  of
    undermining NA's evidence.

33.  At paragraph 102 the judge proceeds to deal to the second stage,  that
    is the position after January 2011. He states that  the  appellant  had
    not brought forward credible  evidence  to  show  that  the  previously
    supportive stance of her family in Bangladesh had changed.   The  judge
    states that, since the family had not believed SM's  "malicious  slurs"
    in 2010, there is no reason  why  they  would  start  to  believe  them
    subsequently.  Having made the finding that the appellant was  prepared
    to return to Bangladesh in  September 2010  and  having  rejected  the
    evidence of NA, it was open to the judge to infer that that was because
    she had supportive family to whom to return  and  further  that,  as  a
    consequence, the family had not taken SM's malicious  slurs  "at  their
    face value" (see paragraph 98).

34.  He also deals with the new evidence of Mr Mazumder in  the  context  of
    her fear that the threats on her life made in the UK  will  be  carried
    out on her return to Bangladesh at  paragraphs  103  to  105.   I  have
    summarised that evidence at paragraph  21.   Mr  Fripp  criticised  the
    judge for falling into error in the treatment of this evidence  because
    there was no "general finding" as to the credibility  of  this  witness
    and because he mistakenly found there to be  a  disparity  between  the
    dates of the text messages  (they  appear  as  email  messages  in  the
    documents provided) to which he spoke and the timing in the body of the
    messages themselves.  I do not consider there is any force in the  lack
    of what is termed general findings on  credibility.   The  question  is
    whether the judge gave adequate reasons for  rejecting  this  evidence.
    The messages are contained in exhibit 1  attached  to  the  appellant's
    statement of 8 June 2016.  The first bears to have been sent by HA  (an
    email address is shown) to the appellant and bears a date 3 April 2016.
     It is mentioned in the appellant's statement at paragraph 8 where  she
    states "He followed  this  conversation  up  with  threatening  texts".
    There are also 2 emails which contain identical  messages  said  by  Mr
    Mazumder to be from HA but which do not bear his name or  his  address.
    They each indicate they were sent by  Mr  Muzumder  to  the  appellant.
    One has a date of 30 April and the other 8 June 2016.  Mr  Mazumder  in
    his statement says that he received one text message on his mobile from
    HA on 2 April.  He does not mention passing that on to the appellant by
    phone or email.  These 2 messages are accordingly on the face  of  them
    contradictory as not bearing the same  dates,  being  emails  not  text
    messages  and  bearing  no  indication  that  they  were  sent  by  HA.
    Furthermore, the third page of exhibit 1 contains  more  messages  also
    bearing dates of 30 April and  8  June  sent  by  Mr  Mazumder  to  the
    appellant to which  the  former  does  not  appear  to  speak  at  all.
    Attached to Mr Mazumder's statement there is a document which  is  said
    in his statement to be a text message from  HA  but  in  this  case  it
    consists simply of typing and there is no address of any sort, no  date
    or any provenance.  It is not replicated in the appellant's exhibit  1.
    In the circumstances, the judge was entitled to reject the evidence  of
    these messages.  There is no material error of law shown in this ground
    of appeal and I reject it.

35.     Mr Fripp also argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
plausibility of the
     appellant's claims as to  the  hostility  of  her  family  against  the
    objective and expert evidence as to  the  general  position  of  single
    women  in  Bangladesh  who  have  no  support  there.    The   evidence
    highlighted focusses upon the  plight  of  women  who  are  subject  to
    domestic abuse and is not easily transferred to the sort  of  situation
    in which the appellant would find herself if returned.  In  any  event,
    having found  that  the  appellant  would  have  supportive  family  in
    Bangladesh, the judge cannot be said to have materially erred in law in
    this respect.

Ground of Appeal 2.

36.  The second ground criticises  the  judge  for  pointing  out  that  the
    appellant's delay in claiming asylum undermined her evidence as to  the
    hostility of her family.  It is said that this indicates that the judge
    unfairly departed from the preserved findings.

Discussion on Ground 2

37.  In the paragraph highlighted at paragraph 97, the  judge  is  expressly
    dealing with the appellant's "new case" which was a  challenge  to  the
    previous findings (themselves preserved) that she had family support in
    Bangladesh.  In doing so, evidence was advanced from, among others, NA.
     It was the appellant's position at the hearing of July 2016  that  her
    family had already turned against her by July 2010, due to the attitude
    of  SM,  which  was  consistent   with   NA's   evidence.    In   those
    circumstances, the judge was entitled to test that evidence against the
    factual backdrop of her complaints to the police in September  2010  as
    he did at paragraph 96 and 97.  She stated at that time that "over  the
    last 3 weeks" SM had made phone calls threatening her (see J21  of  the
    Home Office bundle).  That was, as the  judge  says  at  paragraph  96,
    inconsistent with her new case (as spoken to by NA) that  SM  had  been
    threatening her since July 2010.  Furthermore, NA would  have  been  an
    obvious candidate at that time as a supporting witness but  no  mention
    was  apparently  made  of  him  by  the  appellant   to   the   police.
    Accordingly, the criticisms made at paragraph 97 are legitimate ones in
    the analysis of the appellant's new case as presented to the judge.   I
    therefore reject this ground also.

Ground of Appeal 3.

38.  Mr Fripp  also  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that the case in Bangladesh raised against the appellant and
    other members of her  family  was  no  longer  proceeding.   The  judge
    accepted the preserved finding that the case had been initiated in 2010
    and accepted in that regard the evidence of Mr  Chanda,  an  expert  in
    Bangladesh law.  But Mr Chanda did  not  address  the  question  as  to
    whether in 2016 the case was still proceeding, notwithstanding the fact
    that his report is dated 20 February 2016.  However,  the  judge  found
    that there was no reliable evidence that it was ongoing at the time  of
    the hearing.  He did so for the reasons set out in paragraph 100.   The
    first of these related to the evidence of NA that the debt said  to  be
    owed to SM by the appellant in respect of financing her trip to the  UK
    had been repaid.  The judge concluded that there would be no reason for
    it to be continuing if the debt had been repaid.  Secondly,  he  placed
    no weight on a handwritten note attached to the  appellant's  statement
    of 24 November 2014 which purported to demonstrate that  the  case  was
    still proceeding, at least up to June 2014.  Thirdly the appellant  had
    produced a recent newspaper announcement showing that an arrest warrant
    was outstanding against her.  This is attached to her  statement  of  8
    June 2016.  This is a "Memorandum" published in a national newspaper on
    16 December 2015 intimating that  an  arrest  warrant  was  outstanding
    against her and, if she did not surrender  herself  to  the  Court  for
    trial within 10 days of the order, the trial would take  place  in  her
    absence.  The judge states  that  this  document  is  self-serving  and
    lacking in internal credibility.  He found that  it  was  not  credible
    that the court would proceed on the fictional basis that the  appellant
    is an absconder from justice and that her whereabouts are unknown  when
    her family is in Bangladesh and they had instructed a lawyer the defend
    the claim who knew where the appellant is.  He therefore found that the
    appellant had failed to discharge the burden on her of proving  to  the
    lower standard of proof that the case was ongoing and that there was an
    outstanding warrant against her.

39.  It was argued for the respondent that  there  was  no  expert  evidence
    that the case had been terminated and there was evidence from  NA  that
    it had (see paragraph 80).  It  was  also  argued  that  there  was  no
    background evidence that all women were treated  in  the  same  way  by
    their family or by the State.  The appellant had  the  support  of  her
    family, she had run her own business and had come to the UK on her own.
     She had been found by  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Tiffen  to  be  an
    educated woman who had strength of character.  Her circumstances  could
    not be said to be analogous to those outlined in  SA  (Divorced  woman-
    illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG paragraph 74. The judge was  entitled
    on the evidence before him to conclude she would not suffer any serious
    harm on return.

Decision on ground 3

40.  There are a number  of  difficulties  with  the  analysis  set  out  in
    paragraph 100.  The first  reason  given  appears  to  proceed  on  the
    assumption that the case was  a  civil  one  which  would  be  rendered
    academic if the debt had been repaid.  Thus it was unlikely still to be
    proceeding.  However, it is clear from Mr Chanda's report that the case
    is a criminal one taken under various sections of the Penal Code.   One
    of the offences is  under  section  420  which  creates  the  crime  of
    "cheating and dishonesty inducing delivery of property".   This  brings
    with it a sentence of imprisonment of up to 7 years.  It cannot be said
    with any degree of confidence, absent some evidence on the matter, that
    such a charge would necessarily  fall  away  on  payment  of  the  debt
    constituting the property delivered.  The  judge  had  pointed  out  at
    paragraph 90 that SM was motivated by  "anger,  bitterness  and  hatred
    towards the appellant" and it was thus credible that he had launched  a
    criminal case against her.  If  so,  payment  of  the  debt  would  not
    necessarily lead him to abandon it.   The second reason is a legitimate
    one since the document referred to has, on its face, no real provenance
    and the judge was entitled to place  no  weight  upon  it.   The  third
    reason, however, is not  sustainable.   It  cannot  be  assumed,  again
    without evidence, that the procedure of the  Bangladeshi  courts  would
    proceed on the reasoning outlined by the judge.  On  the  face  of  the
    Memorandum, it gives notice that the case will proceed in  the  absence
    of the appellant if she does not surrender herself.  There  is  nothing
    inherently incredible about a court  making  such  an  order,  even  if
    informed that the appellant is  not  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    court.

41.  The judge goes on to state that, even if he  is  wrong,  the  appellant
    still has the support of her family and can "access the services of the
    lawyer instructed by her parents". This  conclusion  derives  from  the
    preserved finding, at paragraph 23 of First-tier Tribunal judge  Tiffen
    that,  since  the   appellant's   father   had   instructed   a   legal
    representative, there was no reason why the appellant could  not  avail
    herself of the same representation.   But  that  finding  was  made  in
    January 2011 and the assumption that such a course  was  still  open  5
    years on may not be well founded.  But even if it is, there remains the
    point that the appellant, because of her circumstances  as  a  divorced
    single woman and the position of SM, who is said to have some political
    influence, would not be able properly to  defend  herself  against  the
    accusations made in the charges.  As this ground  of  appeal  contends,
    there was evidence of substantial bias in the  justice  system  against
    women, of corruption and of excessive  cost  of  litigation  (see,  for
    example Asian Human Rights Commission, Bangladesh May 2013 at page  473
    to 475 of the appellant's bundle).  I conclude on this ground that  the
    judge has materially  misdirected  himself  and  has  failed  to  apply
    appropriate scrutiny to the question  of  whether  the  case  is  still
    proceeding against the appellant and, if it is, whether  the  appellant
    would thereby have a well-founded fear of persecution or would  face  a
    real risk of suffering serious harm on  return.   I  therefore  sustain
    this ground

42.  In his Order of 3 May 2017, Mr Justice Collins, sitting as a  judge  of
    the  Upper  Tribunal,  directed  that  parties  should   file   updated
    statements and evidence and  serve  skeleton  arguments  prior  to  the
    hearing before me.  Although  the  appellant  did  so,  the  respondent
    failed to respond to that order.  The appellant  has  produced  further
    material relating to the case in Bangladesh and has submitted a further
    statement from NA, who seeks to withdraw some of his  evidence  already
    given.  Even though I have not sustained ground 1 and various facts are
    preserved, there is some element of fact finding to be  done.   In  the
    circumstances, I consider that the matter should be remitted once again
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing, as Mr Fripp requested.  Mr
    Jarvis did not demur  from  that  suggestion.    At  that  hearing  the
    following facts will be preserved:

    (i)  those set out at paragraphs 20, 21 and 23 of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Tiffen's  determination  (with  the  exception  of  the  last
         sentence of paragraph 23).

    (ii) those set out at paragraphs 88 and 89 of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Monson's determination regarding the appellant's "core claim".

    (iii)    those set out in the first 7 lines of  paragraph  90  of  that
         determination regarding the attitude of SM and his  motivation  for
         launching the case against the appellant in Bangladesh.


    (iv) those set out at paragraph 91 of that determination.


    Once again, those findings are subject to displacement in the light  of
    further evidence and/or other changes  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considers to be relevant to the continued  validity  thereof.   If  the
    tribunal are satisfied that the case against  the  appellant  is  still
    proceeding or has been concluded with a decision against her,  it  will
    be  necessary  to  consider  whether  she  is  entitled  to  asylum  or
    protection in the light of the background evidence provided.

Notice of Decision

    The Appellant's appeal is allowed in respect of ground of appeal 3.


                                                                  Lord Burns
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                     Date:









Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
