

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00633/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th to 18th September 2014                |On 5th March 2015            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                NDRICIM KACI
                       (Anonymity order not in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Pretzell instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent: Mr Smart and Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On the 14th March 2011 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French set aside
        the determination  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
        dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  order  for   his
        deportation from the United Kingdom.


     2. On the 21st December 2006 the Appellant was convicted after  trial,
        with others, on what was  said  by  HHJ  Ensor  in  his  sentencing
        remarks to be clear and compelling evidence of  trafficking  within
        this country, in varying ways, of two young women for the  purposes
        of sexual exploitation. The Judge also  stated:  "No  one  who  has
        listened to the evidence given in this court over the five  or  six
        weeks, could fail to feel revulsion, when hearing the way these two
        young women, aged 18 years and 20 years, from rural backgrounds  of
        Lithuania, were duped into coming onto this country, with  promises
        of normal jobs.  When they arrived here, there were  trafficked  by
        you, in different places, but all with the same intent,  that  they
        should be incited into prostitution".


     3. In relation to the  Appellant  the  Judge,  when  passing  sentence
        stated:


     Ndricim Kaci. You were involved in the trafficking of [R],  sorry  [I],
   for sexual     exploitation.  Having regard to  the  telephone  evidence,
   and your own   evidence, I am sure you are  heavily  implicated  in  this
   case.  In a car, used by     you, there was found  a  list  of  telephone
   numbers of massage parlours in your   area. In a  notebook,  found  under
   the bed, in the main bedroom of the house     you shared with [SH], there
   was a hand written list of prices for services,    obtainable at  massage
   parlours. [SH's] credit card, was used to pay for  [V]  and    her  son's
   flight back to  Lithuania,  a  few  days  after  [V]  had  been  able  to
   persuade [R] and [I] to  work  as  prostitutes.   You  are  a  person  of
   considerable   intelligence, with a good command of English.


     You became a valuable lieutenant to [VI]. He trusted  you,  to  provide
   [I] with   accommodation in Nuneaton, hastily obtained, for this purpose,
   and you    detained her there. You used your unctuous charm to groom her,
   and prepare    her for prostitution. Fortunately, she was able to escape,
   before she was put to   work.


     On Count 1, involving the trafficking of [I], back to  your  home,  you
   will serve     a sentence of 3 years.   On  Count  2,  for  inciting  for
   prostitution, 3 years   consecutive. On Court 5, a  consecutive  sentence
   of 3 years, for the false    imprisonment, making  a  total  of  9  years
   imprisonment.


     4. As a result of his conviction the Appellant is  excluded  from  the
        protection  of  the  Refugee  Convention  pursuant  to  section  72
        Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but seeks to rely  upon
        Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR. Articles 2 and 3 state:

         ARTICLE 2
         Right to life

         1.   Everyone's right to life shall be protected  by  law.  No  one
shall  be  deprived  of  his             life  intentionally  save  in   the
execution    of    a    sentence    of     a     court     following     his
conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law.
         2.   Deprivation of life shall not  be  regarded  as  inflicted  in
contravention of this           Article when it  results  from  the  use  of
force which is no more than absolutely           necessary:
              (a)  in defence of any person from unlawful violence;
              (b)  in order to effect a lawful  arrest  or  to  prevent  the
     escape of a person                  lawfully detained;
              (c)  in action lawfully taken for the purpose  of  quelling  a
     riot or insurrection.

         ARTICLE 3
         Prohibition of torture


          No one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or  degrading
   treatment or        punishment.


     5. Notwithstanding the heinous nature of the crime  committed  by  the
        Appellant, which seems to take little account  of  the  rights  and
        dignity of his victims and was in effect an attempt to ensnare  the
        women involved into modern slavery, this Tribunal is bound to apply
        the law as it stands at the date of the hearing as per the will  of
        Parliament to the issues when deciding the outcome of this case and
        to apply the lower standard ordinarily  applicable  to  protections
        claims when assessing whether Mr Kaci has discharged the burden  of
        proof in relation to those matters that rest upon him.


     6. Although Article 8 is a provision which requires an  assessment  of
        the proportionality of the  decision  i.e.  the  balancing  of  the
        rights and claims of both parties to ascertain which  carries  more
        weight, there is an absolute  prohibition  on  ill-treatment  which
        cannot be the subject of a proportionality assessment. In A  v  The
        Netherlands (Application no. 4900/06)  ECtHR  (Third  Section),  20
        July 2010, several governments, including the UK, intervened in the
        proceedings and sought to challenge  what  they  considered  to  be
        Strasbourg's rigid application of the absolute prohibition on  ill-
        treatment. They argued that the Court's interpretation of Article 3
        meant that risk of ill-treatment could not be weighed  against  the
        reasons  for  expulsion,  even  national  security  and  that  this
        approach  prevented  them  in  practice  from  enforcing  expulsion
        measures. The States proposed that if evidence was  presented  that
        the individual posed a  threat  to  national  security,  then  that
        individual should have to prove that "it was more likely than  not"
        that they would be subject to ill-treatment. It was held  that  the
        prohibition of torture or ill-treatment was absolute in nature.  It
        was not possible to weigh the risk  of  ill-treatment  against  the
        reasons put forward for the expulsion in order to determine whether
        the responsibility of the State was engaged under Article 3.


     7. Mr Kaci asserts he cannot be returned to Albania as he faces a real
        risk of death or harm arising from an alleged  blood  feud  between
        the Burelli and Hoti clans and his family, the Kaci clan. If such a
        blood feud is found to exist but the 'blood debt' is with the  Kaci
        family that will not assist the Appellant for  in  AMM  and  others
        (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]
        UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal held that a person is not entitled to
        protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,   the   Qualification
        Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR, on the basis of a risk of  harm
        to another person, if that harm would be willingly inflicted by the
        person seeking such protection.



The relevant chronology




         Date              Event

         13/07/1979             Appellant born in Albania.

         17/11/1993             Teuta Kaci and Ritvan Burelli married.

         17/11/1994             Daughter of Teuta Kaci was born.

         29/04/1995             Teuta Kaci was killed.

         06/07/2000             Appellant claimed asylum  in  the  UK  as  a
Kosovan.

         18/06/2001             Appellant's son MH is born.

         22/07/2001             Ritvan Burelli was killed.

         27/12/2001             Lurjan Kaci found guilty of  the  murder  in
his absence.

         20/09/2002             Appellants appeal dismissed by  Professor  J
Ritson.

         11/10/2002             Lurjan and Lindita Kaci arrested for  murder
of Ritvan Burelli.

         03/11/2003             Appellant claims asylum as an Albanian.

           01/04/2004               Appellant's   asylum   claim    refused.


         20/04/2004             Lufti Kaci entered the UK on visit visa.

           28/07/2004               Appellant's   appeal   hearing    before
Immigration Judge C J Lloyd.

          03/08/2004              Appellant's  appeal  dismissed  by   Judge
Lloyd.

         23/09/2004             Lufti Kaci re-enters the UK on visit visa.

         11/10/2004              Lufti  Kaci  claims  asylum  with  wife  as
dependant.

         11/10//2004       Jetmira Kaci claims asylum having entered the  UK
on visit                            visas.

         06/01/2005             Jetmira Kaci appeal dismissed.

         08/03/2005             Appellant's permission to  appeal  to  Upper
Tribunal refused.

         20/10/2005             Appellant's application for Judicial  Review
refused.

         06/01/2006             Jetmira Kaci removed to Albania.

         18/12/2006             Appellant applies for ILR.

         21/12/2006              Appellant  convicted  and  sentenced  to  9
years imprisonment at                        Manchester Crown Court.

         28/06/2007             Appeal of Lufti Kaci allowed by  Immigration
Judge Cox.

         19/06/2009             Appellant issued with  liability  to  deport
letter.

         20/07/2010             Appellant's deportation order issued.

         18/11/2010             Appellant's deportation appeal dismissed  by
Immigration Judge                            Shammin and Mrs S.A Hussain.

         29/11/2010             Death of appellants brother Pellumb Kaci.

         14/03/2011             Finding  of  error  of  law  in  appellant's
determination  by  Deputy                           Upper   Tribunal   Judge
French.

         25/04/2011             Nuri Kaci is killed.

         05/06/2011             Jetmira Kaci re-enters the  UK  with  Eduart
Domi who both                           apply for asylum and are refused.

         13/12/2011             Appeals of  Jetmira  Kaci  and  Eduart  Domi
allowed by                              Immigration Judge Andrew.


The evidence


Previous judicial findings- Devaseelan

     8.  The  staring  point  for  our   deliberations   is   the   earlier
        determination of the Appellant and those of other  members  of  his
        family in the United Kingdom.


     9. In Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 the Tribunal was concerned with  a
        human rights appeal which followed an asylum  appeal  on  the  same
        issues.  The Tribunal said that, in such circumstances,  the  first
        Tribunal's determination stands as an assessment of the  claim  the
        Appellant was making at the time of that first  determination.   It
        is not binding on the second Tribunal but, there again, the  second
        Tribunal is not hearing an appeal against it.  The Tribunal set out
        various principles: the first   decision  is  always  the  starting
        point; facts since then can always be considered; facts before then
        but not relevant to the first decision can  always  be  considered;
        the second Tribunal should treat with circumspection relevant facts
        that had not been brought to the  first  Tribunal's  attention;  if
        issues and evidence on the first and second appeals are  materially
        the same, the second Tribunal should treat the issues as settled by
        the first decision rather  than  allowing  the  matter  to  be  re-
        litigated.  The Tribunal also gave a caveat  and  said  that  there
        will be occasional cases where the  circumstances  surrounding  the
        first appeal were such that  it  would  be  right  for  the  second
        Tribunal to look at the matter as if the  first  determination  had
        never been made.  In Lkrim Djebbar [2004] EWCA Civ 804 the Court of
        Appeal effectively approved the guidance given in Devaseelan.


    10. In relation to the determinations of family members, there  appears
        to be a slightly different  approach  to  the  application  of  the
        Devaseelan guidelines in such cases, as accepted by Mr Pretzell  in
        his closing submissions. In MJ (Iran) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  564
        the Adjudicator made reference  to  the  case  of  the  Appellant's
        brother, whose asylum claim had resulted  in  a  finding  that  the
        Appellant  was  not  a  credible  witness.   The  Court  of  Appeal
        commented that it was not unusual for siblings' asylum  appeals  to
        be heard separately.  The introduction of evidence from a  separate
        hearing in such cases to support  either  a  positive  or  negative
        outcome was generally resisted on the ground that  no  factual  res
        judicata or issue estoppel was  created  by  one  determination  in
        relation to another.  The principle was to  be  distinguished  from
        the cross examination of an Appellant or other  witness  about  any
        conflict between his or  her  testimony  that  had  been  given  in
        another case; evidence of what a witness or party had  said  on  an
        earlier occasion was generally  admissible,  subject  to  the  well
        known inhibition on self  corroboration  and  to  the  finality  of
        answers going to credit alone.  In this case the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that the Adjudicator should not have been  presented  with  or
        placed any reliance  on  evidence  gathered  in  the  case  of  the
        claimant's brother when making an assessment as to credibility.


    11. Other cases have supported a limited application of Devaseelan.  In
        AS and AA (Somalia) [2006] UKAIT 00052 the  Tribunal  said  that  a
        judicial determination stands  as  a  determination  of  the  issue
        between the parties but does not govern  later  litigation  between
        other parties.  Accordingly, a previous determination of an  appeal
        of another claimant (i) has no evidential value as such;  (ii)  but
        its narrative content is to be taken as evidence of what  was  said
        and done leading  up  to  that  determination;  (ii)  the  Tribunal
        determining the later case is required to make  its  own  decision;
        (iv) the decision in the earlier case is not  itself  part  of  the
        evidence in the  appeal  of  a  later  litigant;  (v)  the  earlier
        decision should be treated as a starting point, if only because the
        principles of good administration require that decisions should not
        be needlessly divergent: but the  Tribunal  will  not  hesitate  to
        depart from that starting point in every case in which the evidence
        requires it. On appeal in AA (Somalia) v SSHD and AH(Iran)  v  SSHD
        [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 the Court of Appeal said that  the  Devaseelan
        guidelines extended to cases where the  earlier  decision  involved
        different parties and  where  there  was  "a  material  overlap  of
        evidence" in the sense of matters arising out of the  same  factual
        matrix. The first Adjudicator's decision was  not  binding  in  the
        sense of issue estoppel but was the  starting  point  and,  in  the
        interest of good administration, should be followed unless  a  good
        reason was advanced to the contrary.  The Court of Appeal said that
        there must be a material overlap of evidence, rather than  just  an
        overlap; that the second Tribunal should have regard to the factual
        conclusions of the first Tribunal; but  that  the  second  Tribunal
        still had to evaluate the evidence as it would in  any  other  case
        and independently  decide  the  second  case  on  its  own  merits.
        However, the Court also said that in  applying  the  guidelines  to
        such cases involving different claimants, there could  be  a  valid
        distinction depending on  whether  the  previous  decision  was  in
        favour  of  or  against  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
        Department.  In the former case the Secretary of State  would  have
        been a direct party to the  first  decision  whereas  the  litigant
        would not.  It would be unfair  to  impose  a  restriction  on  re-
        litigating an issue  on  someone  who,  although  involved  in  the
        previous case, perhaps as a witness, had not formally been a party.


    12. In Ocampo v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1276 a claimant sought  asylum  on
        the ground that he was targeted by the Revolutionary  Armed  Forces
        of Colombia.  His daughter subsequently arrived in  the  UK  saying
        that she had received death threats after he left Colombia  because
        of her relationship to him.  Her appeal, which  relied  heavily  on
        evidence he gave, was allowed.  He sought to rely on  the  positive
        findings of credibility made by the Adjudicator in  his  daughter's
        appeal.  The Secretary of State sought to undermine his credibility
        by adducing a copy of a record  of  interview,  which  demonstrated
        material inconsistencies with the account the claimant had given in
        his daughter's appeal.  On appeal the Court of Appeal said that  it
        was doubtful whether  the  principles  of  res  judicata  or  issue
        estoppel had any application to immigration appeals.  However,  the
        Court also said that the Devaseelan guidelines remained relevant to
        cases such as the claimant's, where parties involved were  not  the
        same, but there was a material overlap of evidence.  For reasons of
        justice and fairness it was possible to adapt the guidelines to the
        nature of the new evidence and the circumstances in  which  it  was
        given or not given in earlier proceedings, bearing in mind the need
        for firm immigration control.  The Court  said  that  the  IAT  was
        correct to  take  into  account  material  inconsistencies  in  the
        claimant's two accounts, the second of which  was  not  before  the
        Adjudicator in his daughter's appeal.   The  evidence  amounted  to
        "new  and   compelling"   evidence   in   the   Devaseelan   sense.
        Accordingly, if an Appellant was found to be credible  when  giving
        evidence in another appeal as a witness, it did not follow that the
        same evidence must be accepted as  true  in  another  appeal.   The
        Respondent is not stopped from adducing fresh evidence  tending  to
        show that the Appellant  is  not  to  be  believed,  even  if  that
        evidence could have been adduced with reasonable diligence  at  the
        earlier appeal.


    13. The first  in  time  of  the  earlier  determinations  is  that  of
        Professor Ritson who in September  2002  dismissed  the  Appellants
        claim for asylum. It is not disputed before us that  the  Appellant
        made this claim using a false name,  false  nationality  and  false
        identity as a Kosovan. As a result of his  non  attendance  at  the
        hearing and lack of suitable evidence his appeal was dismissed.


    14.  On  4th  February  2004  Professor  Ritson  also   promulgated   a
        determination in respect of the Appellant's sister  Mimosa  Bajrami
        (AKA Mimosa Kaci) who had claimed to be a citizen of Albania/Serbia
        Montenegro. In her  interview  on  the  30th  September  2003  that
        appellant claimed that the content of  her  Statement  of  Evidence
        form were untrue alleging she was an Albanian claiming to have left
        Albania due  to  imminent  arrest  for  political  activities.  She
        admitted having provided a false  asylum  claim  initially.  Having
        considered the documentary and oral evidence Professor Ritson  sets
        out  a  number  of  reasons  for  finding  the   appellant   lacked
        credibility in paragraph 7 of  the  determination  leading  to  the
        conclusion in paragraph 8 in the following terms:


              8.  In the circumstances I note that the appellant  was  quite
   unscrupulously                    prepared  to  lie  to  an   immigration
   officer, to a medical practitioner, with the                result that I
   did  not  consider  that  she  would  have  any  scruples   about   lying
   to me at the hearing of the appeal. I had not the slightest confidence in
   any                 of her evidence.


    15. The Judge found that the appellant before him had  not  established
        she was entitled to international protection as a refugee or  under
        the human rights convention and dismissed the appeal.


    16. The claim to be  at  risk  on  return  as  a  result  of  political
        activities based upon being a member of the Legality Movement Party
        which supported the King  of  Albania  was  not  supported  by  any
        evidence of membership of that party or explanation as to why  even
        if she was a member she would be at  risk  upon  return.  Professor
        Ritson also made the following observations in respect of an  issue
        relevant to this appeal in paragraph 7:


         . ........ the appellant claims that she fears a return to Albania
           due to the existence of a  blood  feud.  Her  evidence  in  this
           regard is extremely confused. She states that  this  blood  feud
           began in 1995 when her sister was killed  by  her  husband.  She
           then states that she does not know why her sister was killed  by
           her husband. She alleges that there is no  evidence  to  support
           this that her father's brother  subsequently  paid  somebody  to
           kill her dead sister's husband and that  she  and  her  children
           would now be targeted if returned to Albania  as  part  of  that
           blood feud. Her three brothers could not be targeted she says as
           one of them is in prison, the other one is in the United Kingdom
           and the third's whereabouts are not know.  Since  the  appellant
           has no explanation for the initial killing has  no  evidence  of
           her being targeted, has no explanation for  her  father  who  is
           still alive in Albania not being targeted, I did not believe the
           evidence in this regard. I could  not  exclude  the  possibility
           that she has introduced this evidence into her appeal  for  self
           serving reasons.


    17. The next determination in time is that of  Immigration  Judge  Cox,
        heard on 22nd June 2007 at Birmingham, of the  Appellant's  father,
        Lufti Kaci. Judge Cox records the evidence he received and was able
        to consider including a video recording of a  television  broadcast
        from Albanian news concerning the arrest and sentencing of  Lufti's
        son and daughter Lurjan and Lindita  Kaci.  Judge  Cox  records  in
        paragraph 9 (g) - (r) the following elements of the claim  made  by
        Lufti Kaci:


              (g) You have also encountered problems in Albania due to  your
                  daughter being killed by her husband.  Your daughter Teuta
   was                 married on 20th November 1993 and had a child on 17th
   November                1994. On 29th April 1995 your daughter was killed
   by her husband,                  Ritvan Burelli.  She  was  shot  in  the
   neck by a weapon used for                     hunting.


              (h) Your daughter's murder was  reported  to  the  police  and
   Ritvan was                   punished for six  months.  Ritvan  was  only
   punished six months                       because  he  carried  a  weapon
   illegally. He was not punished for the                 murder because "he
   just said he killed her accidentally."


              (i) On 22nd July 2001  Ritvan  was  killed.  However  you  are
   unaware of                   who killed him. You have heard  that  Ritvan
   was killed with a                     Kalashnikov.


              (j) On 11th October 2002 two of your children  were  arrested,
    Lindita and            Lurjan. Lindita was released after 30  days  but
    Lurjan is still in prison           as he has been accused of  Ritvan's
    murder but without  any  evidence               because  "this  is  the
    Communists, they want money.  They need  5              million  for  a
    year. This is justice from the Communist system."


              (k) It is possible that your  brothers  were  responsible  for
    Ritvan's death             but not you or your children.


              (l)  After the arrest of your children "they came to my  house
    and shot               at it.  For two years I have  been  in  my  home
    only four times, no more            than two hours each." The  shooting
    occurred 5 to 6 months after the             arrest  of  your  children
    but you were not at home. You believe that             the  people  who
    shot at your house were paid to do it by Ritvan's               father,
    Fatmir Burelli.


              (m) The Burelli's have attempted to kill you on four  or  five
    occasions,             however "the neighbours  and  people  around  us
    protected us because            we are not guilty". You are  unable  to
    remember the dates of those             attacks, however you know  that
    they began after 11 October 2002.


              (n) On the 11 October 2002 " I was in town called Kamez, I was
    in a van               used as a taxi there.  I was speaking  with  the
    driver. Two people              came from the coffee  bar,  the  driver
    seen these two people, he started            the car and drove off.   I
    asked why he drove off and he said 'I think           these people have
    a problem with you' however, you did not see the               people.


              (o) Since the 11 October 2002 you have left your home and  all
    of your           children left the area due to problems with  Ritvan's
    family.


              (p) You have encountered further problems when walking in  the
    street.           "People I knew on the street saw these people on side
    streets and            told me to go back so I changed direction.  This
    happens all the time,           finally I decided to leave."  You  have
    never seen the people waiting to             attack you on the  street.
    This happened on three to four occasions.


              (q) You have reported three of these incidents to  the  police
    in Kamez               police station, you did not  go  to  the  police
    station you only                telephoned  them.   You  spoke  to  the
    officer in charge but  did  not            speak  to  the  same  police
    officer as "every six months the police                   change."


              (r) The police never took any action.


    18. Judge Cox also noted the claim Mr Lufti Kaci first left Albania  on
        20th April 2004 but returned hoping to "finish the problem" with  a
        reconciliation although it did not solve the problems.


    19. In his findings, at paragraphs  11  to  24,  Judge  Cox  notes  the
        complexity of the case in part as a result of  various  credibility
        issues that arose before him. He refers in paragraph 12 to  certain
        core facts which he considered to  have  been  established  by  the
        evidence before him as follows:


              (a) On 29 April 1995 the daughter of Lufti  Kaci,  Teuta,  was
   killed by her                husband Ritvan Burelli.


              (b) On 22 July 2001 Ritvan Burelli was murdered.


              (c) On 11 October 2002 Lurjan and  Lindita  were  arrested  in
   connection                   with the killing of  Ritvan  Burelli  having
   previously been convicted                 and sentenced in their absence.
   Lurjan was sentenced to 25 years                   imprisonment,  Lindita
   to 8 years.  According  to  TV  reports  Lindita                 attacked
   Ritvan   Burelli   with   a   knife   "causing    heavy    wounds".    He
   was recovering  in  hospital  when  Lurjan  "managed  secretly  to  enter
     the hospital" and killed him.  Both  had  been  in  hiding  until  they
     were found and arrested by the police some 18 months later.


              (d) Attempts a resolution of the blood feud were made  through
   a                       reconciliation committee in 2002 and 2004 without
   success,  the                      Burelli  family  refusing   to   reach
   agreement. Their stance was that the                Kaci  family  had  no
   right   to   kill   their   son   because    he    had    killed    Teuta
   unintentionally.


    20. Thereafter Judge Cox examined the  expert  report  provided  by  Dr
        Antonia Young and found the claim that a blood feud existed between
        the Kaci and Burelli family and circumstances  giving  rise  to  it
        derived significant support from the expert's report.


    21. Judge Cox,  however,  also  noted  difficulties  in  terms  of  the
        credibility of the case for the reasons set out in paragraph 16  of
        the determination.  In  paragraph  17  the  Judge  found  that  the
        inconsistencies gave cause for  concern  although  found  the  core
        factors had been established.  In  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  the
        determination Judge Cox sets out his conclusions as follows


              19. I therefore take all of that  into  account.  But,  having
   considered the evidence                   as a whole and having heard and
   watched the Appellant give evidence, I                 draw an  inference
   that   the   Appellant   is   in   some   form   of   denial.     I    am
   inclined to believe him when he says that he did not personally  wish  to
          make his daughter's death the pretext or cause for  a  blood  feud
   with the                Burelli's. However, a blood feud  did  arise  and
   Ritvan Burelli was                     undoubtedly  murdered.   It  looks
   from the media reports as though his               daughter Lindita  made
   the first attempt on Ritvan's life by stabbing him                   and,
   when that was unsuccessful, the job was later finished by his  son.   The
          sentences passed on each of them are consistent with that scenario
   and,  as  I                have  already  commented,  the  Reconciliation
   Committee seems to have                   proceeded  on  the  basis  that
   Lurjan killed Ritvan.  If that is right, then  it                 follows
   that the two siblings took revenge on behalf  of  their  deceased  sister
          and, in all probability, against the wishes of their  father,  the
   Appellant.  I                am taken to the conclusion  that  these  are
   unpalatable facts which the                   Appellant finds  difficulty
   in acknowledging and, again if that is right,  then                    it
   would go a  long  way  towards  explaining  the  inconsistencies  in  his
          evidence peripheral to the core facts.   Furthermore,  as  to  the
   inconsistency                as to whether he had ever been "arrested", I
   think that that turned out to be                   a  simple  problem  of
   semantics.    When   his    response    to    Question    30    of    his
   asylum interview (to the effect that he had not been arrested in Albania)
                  was put to him in  contrast  to  his  oral  testimony,  he
   replied "Well, I did not                  stay in prison. They would take
   me for one night and then release me the               next day.  I  have
   never   been   imprisoned."     In    other    words,    the    Appellant
   construed,  through  interpretation,  the  word   "arrest"   as   meaning
          "imprisonment". That is not implausible.


              20. Thus I find that the core account of the  Appellant  being
   the victim of a                  blood feud with the  Burelli's  is  well
   established and that the peripheral                inconsistencies,  some
   real some apparent, do not detract from that core.   I                 am
   satisfied that the Appellant has a  genuine  and  well  founded  fear  of
     being killed in Albania by the Burelli family and that he has exhausted
   the                 reconciliation process. As to state protection, it is
   the  Appellant's  evidence                   that  he  has  been   denied
   protection by the police and, more than that, he has                 been
   arrested and ill treated by them on  many  occasions,  seemingly  with  a
          view to their getting him to confess  that  he  was  in  some  way
   instrumental                 in the killing of Ritvan Burelli.   I  think
   there was some exaggeration in  his                  evidence  about  the
   number  of   times   he   had   tried   to   access   police   protection
   ("hundreds", later revised to "more than a hundred" times)  but  again  I
          think there is a core of truth in what he says. The expert  report
   from which                   I have quoted speaks of a lack of protection
   from the police "who  are  very                  cautious  to  avoid  the
   complications involved in blood feud cases" and                 there  is
   also some suggestion that the police  lack,  or  perceive  themselves  as
          lacking, a legal basis for doing so, the Albanian penal  code  not
   directly                addressing blood feuds (see for example paragraph
   24  Respondent's                        refusal  letter).   The  Albanian
   President has expressed himself as "totally                 committed" to
   reducing   blood   feuds   and   no   doubt   Albania's   aspiration   to
   join the EU will act as a spur. It  is  noted  that,  by  his  decree,  a
   Serious Crime                Unit was set up on 1 January 2006 with blood
   feuds falling within  its  remit.                     However,  there  is
   little   to   suggest   that   the   President's   initiative   is    yet
   bearing fruit.  For example, at paragraph 1a of the US  State  Department
          Report 2006 (issued 6 March 2007) we find:


                        "In  May  2005  the  parliament   approved   a   law
   establishing a co-                        ordination Council, chaired  by
   the President, to develop a national                    strategy  against
   blood      feuds      and      to      coordinate      activities      of
   government  agencies.  The  Council  was  inactive  during   the   year."
          (emphasis supplied).


                  At paragraph 1d.


                       "The overall performance of law enforcement  remained
   weak.                         Unprofessional  behaviour  and   corruption
   remained major                            impediments to the  development
   of an effective civilian police force.                      According  to
   the  Ministry  of   the   Interior,   only   40%   of   police   officers
   received  training  beyond  basic,  despite   assistance   from   foreign
              governments. Corruption remained a problem among police forces
                       and low salaries and widespread corruption throughout
   society made                     to the problem difficult to combat.  The
   Ministry of the Interior's                    Office of Internal  Control
   engaged       in       the       prevention,        discovery,        and
   documentation  of  corruption  of  other  criminal  activities  committed
          by police."


    22. Judge Cox therefore found that the Albanian authorities had been in
        part unable and in part unwilling to afford  the  appellant  before
        him protection up to his final leaving in September 2004  and  that
        there was nothing of  substance  in  the  evidence  before  him  to
        suggest, in that in the  appellants  particular  circumstances,  he
        would fare any better today. The Judge also  concluded  that  there
        was no reasonable alternative available to avoid the  risk  arising
        from the blood feud. The appeal was  therefore  allowed  under  the
        Refugee Convention and on Article 3 ECHR grounds.


    23.  The  third  determination  involving  a  family  member  is   that
        promulgated on 13 December 2011 by Immigration Judge Andrew who was
        considering the appeals of Mr Ndricim Kaci's  sister  Jetmira  Kaci
        and Mr Eduart Domi against the refusal of the Secretary of State to
        recognise them as refugees or persons entitled to a  grant  of  any
        other form of international protection.


    24. Judge Andrew accepted that both appellants before her were citizens
        of Albania and  noted  that  the  first  appellant,  Jetmira  Kaci,
        arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 with a visit visa valid for a
        period of six months. She claimed asylum on 11 October  2004  which
        was refused on 25 October 2004.  Her appeal against  that  decision
        was dismissed on 6 January 2005 and she was returned to Albania  on
        6 January 2006.  An  application  for  a  further  visit  visa  was
        refused on 16 December 2008. Jetmira Kaci  is  said  to  have  left
        Albania again on 12 May 2011 and to have  travelled  through  Rome,
        Belgium and France using her passport before gaining entry  to  the
        United Kingdom illegally on 5 June 2011  after  which  she  claimed
        asylum on 15  August  2011.   The  second  appellant,  Eduart  Domi
        arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 June 2011 by the same route  and
        claimed asylum on 27 June 2011.


    25. Judge Andrew records in paragraphs 26 and 27 of  the  determination
        late evidence being produced including a report from Mr Gjin Marku,
        an unsigned letter from the Kaci family and, during the  course  of
        submissions, a faxed letter from  the  appellants'  representatives
        containing what was purported to be  a  death  certificate  of  the
        first appellant's brother Pellumb Kaci which was not translated and
        which the Judge indicated she was not willing to place  any  weight
        upon.  Oral evidence was provided to the tribunal by both Mr  Marku
        and Antonia Young in addition to the named appellants.


    26. The basis of the claim before Judge Andrew is that both  appellants
        claimed to be at risk on return to Albania as a result of  a  blood
        feud between the Burelli and Hoti families. It  was  not  submitted
        before the Judge by the Secretary of  State's  representative  that
        blood feuds do not  exist  or  it  not  accepted  that  there  were
        continuing difficulties for the family  in  Albania.   Nor  was  it
        accepted that the second appellant was related to Lufti Kaci who he
        claimed was his grandfather.


    27. Judge Andrew refers at paragraph  36  of  the  determination  to  a
        previous determination of Judge Pirotta promulgated  on  6  January
        2005 in which findings were made that Jetmira Kaci  was  vague  and
        inconsistent in her evidence in support of the claim that  she  and
        her family were involved in a blood feud.


    28. Judge Andrew thereafter refers to the determination of  Judge  Cox,
        including the core findings he made recorded above and to be  found
        in paragraph 12 of Judge Cox's determination.


    29. In paragraph 45 of her determination  Judge  Andrew's  records  the
        following finding:


              45. I am satisfied, to the lower standard, that the blood feud
   continues. I say                 this for the following reasons:


                  (a)  The killing of the first Appellant's brother  Pellumb
   Kaci on 29                            November 2010.


                  (b)  The killing of the first Appellant's nephew Nuri Kaci
   on 25 April                      2011.

    30. The Judge accepted the evidence of Antonia Young and Mr Marku  that
        the  blood  feud  is  ongoing  although  in  paragraph  49  of  her
        determination the Judge stated: "In saying  this  I  find  that  Ms
        Young in her oral evidence to me, did  not  show  the  impartiality
        which is required of an expert witness. She made  remarks  such  as
        'facing the dangers she has would be horrendous - she  has  already
        been through five years'. Further she comments upon the credibility
        of the Second Appellant in her report. This is  not  what  I  would
        expect an expert witness to do".  The  Judge  noted  this  evidence
        was, however, accepted by Judge Cox and saw no reason why she could
        not accept Antonia Young's report as background evidence to confirm
        the continuation of the blood feud.


    31. Judge Andrew accepted the oral evidence of Mr Marku although  notes
        in paragraph 52 of her determination:


              52. I am satisfied that  I  am  able  to  accept  his  written
   evidence. He did attend to                give oral evidence however,  he
   seemed to find great difficulty in actually                 answering the
   questions  that  have  been  put  to  him   and   in   keeping   to   the
   specifics of these particular Appellants. However , I am  satisfied  that
   he is               aware of the deaths of Pellumb Kaci  and  Nuri  Kaci,
   both of which are as a                result of the blood feud.


    32. Judge Andrew accepted the feud had not been reconciled to date  and
        that there was no viable internal relocation  alternative  for  the
        First Appellant.


    33. In  relation  to  the  second  appellant  before  her  the  adverse
        credibility issues raised in the refusal letter  were  noted.   The
        Judge found little weight could be placed upon  evidence  submitted
        to prove the alleged relationship although did accept to the  lower
        standard for the reasons set out  in  the  determination  that  the
        second appellant is the grandson of Lufti Kaci and would thus  face
        a real risk on return due to the existing blood feud.  The  appeals
        were therefore allowed on asylum grounds and in relation to Article
        3 ECHR grounds, but she found that the United Kingdom would not  be
        in breach of any of its obligations under Articles 2 or 8 ECHR.


    34. In relation to Ndricim Kaci, the appellant before  us,  there  have
        been two previous determinations. The first being that  of  the  20
        September 2002 promulgated by Professor Ritson  who  dismissed  the
        claim made on a false  premise.   Mr  Kaci  failed  to  attend  the
        hearing of his appeal on that occasion.  The  second  determination
        was promulgated on the 3 August 2004 by Adjudicator Lloyd  who  was
        considering an appeal against the refusal by the Secretary of State
        to recognise Mr Kaci as a refugee or person entitled to  any  other
        form of international protection, made in what he claimed to be his
        true identity which is that he uses before us today. The  basis  of
        the claim was an alleged real risk on return as a result of a blood
        feud  with  another  named  family  and  secondly  the  Appellant's
        membership of and activities for the Legality Party, a pro-monarchy
        party in Albania.


    35. Having identified the evidence relied  upon  by  both  parties  and
        applying  the  appropriate  burden  and  standard  of   proof   the
        Adjudicator  sets  out  her  findings  in  paragraph  32   of   the
        determination which include, at paragraph 33, a finding that "It is
        quite clear that the Appellant is capable  of  deceit  on  a  large
        scale - he now says that his first asylum application was  entirely
        false."


    36. Adjudicator Lloyd accepted that Mr Kaci  spoke  with  some  passion
        about the blood feud and accepted the account of his sister's death
        and her husband's subsequent death  at  the  hands  of  his  family
        members and his fear the feud would continue, but also  noted  that
        nobody else in the family had been killed in either Albania  or  in
        the United Kingdom.  The Adjudicator also specifically  noted  that
        his  brother  Pellumb  lived  in  Albania,  his  father   who   the
        Adjudicator found she was able to infer, if the claim was  genuine,
        would also be at risk as a male  family  member  had  been  in  the
        United Kingdom but voluntarily returned to Albania. It was found he
        would not have done so if he felt genuine risk in that country.


    37. Adjudicator Lloyd also found that the  country  information  showed
        the government had taken steps to address the blood feud issue  and
        the case law indicated that the UN Convention is  not  engaged.  It
        was therefore concluded that (a) Ndricm Kaci had not established  a
        Convention reason in respect of the blood feud aspect of his claim,
         (b) there was a commitment by the government to address this issue
        and protection was available,  (c)  there  was  no  overlap  proved
        between the blood feud and political aspects of the claim,  (d)  no
        real risk had been established with regard  to  membership  of  the
        Legality Party and accordingly  (e)  that  the  Appellant  was  not
        entitled to be recognised as a refugee on the basis of  failing  to
        prove a well founded fear of persecution for a  Convention  reason,
        or that he was able to succeed under Articles 2  and  3  ECHR.  The
        appeal was therefore dismissed on all grounds.


   Witness evidence


    38. For the purposes of the hearing before us a considerable volume  of
        evidence has been provided which  appears  to  be  far  greater  in
        number of documents and content than that available to any  of  the
        previous tribunals considering these matters. During the course  of
        the hearing we heard evidence from the Appellant, Mr Coka described
        as a  missionary  for  the  National  Reconciliation  Committee  in
        Shkoder, Mr G Marku, and James Korovilas.  The evidence of three of
        the witnesses was given by electronic means, live video  link  from
        Rome in the cases of Mr Coka and Mr Marku and via a Skype link from
        Bristol in relation to Mr Korovilas.


    39. The Tribunal had earlier referred  to  the  determination  of  Nare
        (evidence by electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00043 in  which
        the tribunal found that whether to  allow  evidence  by  electronic
        means involved a judicial decision requiring consideration  of  the
        need to do so, the  arrangements  at  the  distance  site  and  the
        ability to access such evidence, by reference to the guidelines set
        out in the determination.


    40. In  this  case  it  was  necessary  to  receive  such  evidence  by
        electronic means as an Entry Clearance Officer  had  refused  entry
        clearance to the United Kingdom in relation to Mr Marku and Mr Coka
        although they were able to enter Italy  as  a  result  of  separate
        arrangement between the Italian and Albanian authorities. Had  such
        means of giving evidence not been employed no oral  evidence  could
        have been received from these individuals. The  evidence  of  James
        Korovilas was given via Skype as he  was  absent  from  the  United
        Kingdom for the first three days of the hearing only  returning  on
        the Wednesday evening.  Other arrangements made it  impossible  for
        him to travel to Birmingham and therefore evidence was  taken  from
        what appeared to be  a  room  within  his  house  in  Bristol.  The
        Tribunal was satisfied with the quality  of  the  electronic  links
        such that the evidence received can be accepted.  It was clear that
        communication both to the witness and from them to the hearing room
        was clear and without interference.


   Mr Kaci


    41. Mr Kaci has provided two witness  statements  the  first  dated  18
        October 2010 and the second 6  June  2013.  In  his  first  witness
        statement he claims to have been born in a town  in  North  Albania
        and to have three brothers and six sisters. He  claims  the  family
        were persecuted in Albania during the Communist regime due  to  his
        grandfather, resulting in a need to move  to  different  towns  and
        cities.


    42. Mr Kaci claims in paragraph 6 of his witness statement  dated  18th
        October 2010 that on 29 July 1995 a man came  to  their  house  and
        informed him that his sister Teuta Kaci had been shot and killed by
        her husband Ritvan Burelli.  We note  the  date  of  death  in  the
        chronology provided is 29th April 1995. Thereafter  he  claims  his
        uncles arrived at the house demanding that his father  revenge  his
        sister's spilt blood although his father declined. Mr Kaci  asserts
        that at the time  a  war  began  in  the  family  with  his  uncles
        approaching him claiming he should avenge his sister as a matter of
        honour. He states he knew his father had refused to take revenge.


    43. Mr Kaci also claims that he was placed under pressure by his uncles
        who told him they had already disavowed  his  family  and  that  he
        should join their side. They tried to arrange a marriage for him as
        a way to get him to join them, although he  refused,  resulting  in
        his been given two options either to kill Ritvan  Burelli  or  they
        would kill him. He claims it was for this reason  he  fled  Albania
        arriving in the United Kingdom in June 2000.


    44. Mr Kaci claims that in 2001 his uncles arranged for the  murder  of
        Ritvan Burelli although his younger brother was subsequently blamed
        for the killing and imprisoned.  He also claims that following this
        killing many attempts were made on the  lives  of  his  father  and
        other family members including their house being burned down, as  a
        result of which the family living there went into hiding.  Attempts
        by his father to resolve the situation failed as the Burelli family
        were not willing to discuss the issue as  a  result  of  which  his
        father and two sisters left Albania  and  are  now  living  in  the
        United Kingdom. He claims that the remaining members of the  family
        in Albania are always on the move for fear of losing their lives.


    45. In relation to his conviction the Appellant states at paragraph  18
        of his witness statement:


              18. A man called Vladimir stayed at my place for two days with
   his girlfriend.                  I understood there  to  have  been  some
   problems between them but did  not                   understand  anything
   because    they    were    speaking    in    a    different     language.
   Vladimir  and  I  were  granted  bail  but  Vladimir  absconded.   I  was
          subsequently convicted but I feel that I did  not  express  myself
   properly at                  the trial and explain my  situation  to  the
   jury.  I am due to be released on 15                December  2010  after
   serving half of my prison sentence.


    46. Mr Kaci also claims that whilst on bail in 2006 he  was  approached
        by an uncle who had travelled to the United Kingdom who told him he
        wanted him  to  return  to  Albania  to  marry  the  woman  he  had
        previously arranged to marry and that more members of  the  Burelli
        family needed to be killed in order to restore the  family  honour.
        The Appellant claims his uncle had interpreted the  Kanun  Code  of
        Honour (see later for further information) as meaning  the  Burelli
        family still owed them blood, although when he refused  he  claimed
        there was an argument at the end of which his uncle  threatened  to
        kill him. He also claims that if returned to  Albania  he  will  be
        killed as a result of his uncles and/or the ongoing blood feud.


    47. The witness statement dated 6 June 2013 updates Mr Kaci's situation
        in relation to his domestic  arrangements,  repeats  his  claim  if
        returned to Albania, although on this occasion only referring to  a
        risk of killing as a result of the ongoing blood feud at  paragraph
        7.


    48. The copy maps provided show that Mamurras, the  town  in  which  Mr
        Kaci claimed to have been born, is a small town of 7,600 people  in
        Kurbin District of northwestern Albania. The  town  lies  near  the
        Mediterranean Sea and is also  described  as  being  in  near  Lac,
        Albania. It is 21.6 miles North West of Tirana and, as such, not in
        the far north of the country.


    49. In his oral evidence Mr Kaci confirmed he is from a  close  family.
        Both his parents and sisters are now  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
        claims not to have maintained contact with his parents before  they
        entered the UK and to be unable  to  recall  in  detail  when  they
        arrived. Mr Kaci confirmed that he claimed to  have  come  to  this
        country due to a blood feud as stated in his 2000 witness statement
        and referred to the pressure from his father's side of  the  family
        to  become  involved  in  the  blood  feud.  When  asked  in  cross
        examination if this was the case why he claimed asylum on the basis
        of being from Kosovo he stated that  those  who  brought  him  here
        advised him he stood a greater chance  of  succeeding  than  if  he
        claimed as an Albanian.


    50. Mr Kaci did eventually, in 2004, claim as an Albanian.  When  asked
        why he waited so long between 2000 and 2004 to make a claim in  his
        true identify he claimed that he did  not  have  the  means  to  do
        otherwise which is a claim not substantiated.


    51. In relation to the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation (NRC)  he
        claimed they had been involved with  the  blood  feud  between  the
        families from the  beginning.  His  father  was  the  one  involved
        although he was in Albania at that time too.   Mr  Kaci  was  asked
        why, when he claimed asylum in 2003 he had failed  to  mention  the
        involvement of the NRC in the alleged blood feud. His response  was
        to say that as far as he can recall he was not asked. He stated the
        reason there was no mention of this in his statement of  3  January
        2004 was because he did not think it was important.


    52. The family with whom the dispute is said to have existed in 2004 is
        the Hoti family with  whom  there  has  been  a  dispute  for  more
        generations than Mr  Kaci  claims  to  be  able  to  remember.   He
        confirmed this was a blood feud but when asked if that was the case
        why he failed to mention it, he claimed that he did  not  think  it
        was relevant.


    53. It was put to Mr Kaci that the first time the Hoti family had  been
        mentioned in the evidence from members of his  family  was  in  the
        statement of Jetmira some years later, which he claimed was because
        it was at this time that  the  Hoti  family  became  more  involved
        against his family. Mr Kaci claimed not to have been sure  when  he
        discovered that his sister had been arrested and to have discovered
        this through his brother although he then claimed not to be able to
        remember how he was told or who told him. It was  also  put  to  Mr
        Kaci that there was no mention that his sister was with his brother
        in his 13th August 2010 evidence which he  blamed  on  his  brother
        although Mr Kaci had attended that hearing and gave  oral  evidence
        too.


    54. Mr Kaci was asked where he lived at the date his appeal  was  heard
        on 28 July 2004 but claimed not to be able to recall  but  that  he
        lived with his partner. When it was put to him that he had  claimed
        to have two partners and clarification sought, he  claimed  he  was
        with Camilla.  Mr Smart then referred Mr Kaci to a letter dated 5th
        April 2004 from the landlord of a property in Nuneaton addressed to
        'Sophie' acknowledging notification by her that Mr Kaci  had  moved
        into that property with her. The response was to state that  Sophie
        was his current partner and mother of his son and that at that time
        he was 'making to  transaction  of  living  with  her'.   This  was
        challenged as the letter from Sophie states that  he  had  recently
        moved in with her which he claimed not to be able to recall.


    55. In July 2004 Mr Kaci had given evidence to what is now  the  First-
        tier Tribunal in which he claimed to have been living with Camilla.
        When it was put to him that both accounts could not be  correct  he
        claimed they were as he had problems to sort out with  his  partner
        and his son. Mr Kaci was asked when he started to see Sophie  again
        which he claimed was at Christmas/New Year 2003 but  definitely  in
        2004. This was also challenged by reference  to  a  statement  from
        Sophie in which she had stated the date was in October  2004.  When
        the clear discrepancy between a claim in a letter that he moved  in
        with  Sophie  in  April  2004,  his  claim  to  have  started   the
        relationship at Christmas 2003 and her claim it  was  October  2004
        was put to Mr Kaci he referred to their differing religious beliefs
        and to the fact he wanted to put everything in place  and  that  it
        took along time. He stated that  the  statements  and  letters  are
        correct but that 'the story  is  not  as  recorded'.  When  he  was
        reminded that he told the tribunal in July 2004 that he lived  with
        Camilla whereas he was really living with Sophie, he  then  claimed
        he lived with both.


    56. In relation to his brother Pellumb, Mr Kaci claimed that he had not
        obtained the original death certificate and that he was  unable  to
        recall who had. It was sent by a person  working  at  the  relevant
        counter in Albania although he claimed  not  to  have  requested  a
        copy. He named this person although claimed not  to  know  him.  Mr
        Kaci then stated that a member of the  family  had  asked  for  the
        document although he then claimed not to know who although  it  was
        one of his sisters.


    57. Mr Kaci agreed that the original certificate he  received  did  not
        contain an entry for the cause of death.  He  claimed  this  was  a
        normal practice by the Albanian authorities. When Mr Kaci was asked
        how he said Pellumb died he stated he was killed by  a  firearm  in
        2010. He also claimed to be unaware of the circumstances  but  then
        claimed to believe he was killed  by  the  Burelli  family  in  co-
        operation with the Hoti clan. Mr Kaci claimed to be unaware of  the
        fact Pellumb was admitted  to  hospital  or  of  the  evidence  now
        available that showed the cause of death was as a result of a heart
        attack.


    58. In relation to Nuri Kaci, it was put to Mr Kaci that  the  evidence
        suggested he was killed as a result of  a  land  dispute  regarding
        trees on land which he rejected, claiming the  trees  were  on  the
        land and he was killed due to the blood feud. This  connection  was
        not  mentioned  in  his  written  evidence  which  he  claimed  was
        unnecessary for even though there may  not  have  been  any  direct
        involvement there was influence from the Burelli clan.


    59. When it was put to Mr Kaci that the death of Pellumb and Nuri  were
        not connected to the Burelli clan he disagreed. When it was put  to
        him that there was no ongoing blood feud he disagreed too. When  it
        was put to him that the outcome of the  court  case  involving  the
        killing of his sisters ex-husband was that it was not as  a  result
        of a blood feud he claimed that if this was so the next person  in-
        line to be killed is a  member  of  his  family  and  that  if  his
        brother's death did not avenge the killing, this will be him.


    60. In the alternative Mr Kaci was asked if the  killing  of  Nuri  and
        Pellumb did avenge the debt it cannot be against him  to  which  he
        replied by claiming that his father  swore  an  oath  in  front  of
        people not to avenge his sister's death but there  was  nothing  to
        say he should not avenge the death. His father's side of the family
        arranged the killing and according to the code his father broke the
        oath so they owe the Burelli more blood debt which he claimed meant
        they must kill more members of his family although such a claim  is
        not substantiated as a general rule of the Kanun  in  the  evidence
        before us.


    61. It was put to Mr Kaci that when his father made a statement he made
        no mention of breaking the code to which the response  was  to  say
        that he also failed to mention it in his statement and  his  father
        did not either. Mr Kaci was asked if his  father  was  aware  of  a
        blood feud regarding the Hoti clan, which Mr Kaci  stated  he  was,
        following which Mr Smart   referred  to   the  fact  there  was  no
        mention by his father of this either. Mr  Kaci's  response  was  to
        state this was an old feud.


    62. Mr Kaci was also asked how the Hoti  and  Burelli  clans  would  be
        aware of his return to Albania which  he  stated  was  because  his
        house was ten minutes from their house and that  a  member  of  the
        Burelli clan works at the airport  and  Police  Station  Number  4,
        which is their local police station. He  claimed  not  be  able  to
        enter Albania without detection as he would  return  by  plane  and
        even if he was able to get through the airport he  would  be  found
        unless he hid to keep safe. When it was put to him that his  sister
        Jetmira had returned and  lived  in  Albania  for  five  years,  he
        claimed not to be aware of the details of this.  It was put to  him
        that she survived which he denied. Mr Kaci claimed the family  home
        had been burned down although neither his father  nor  sister  made
        the same claim just referring to it being burned.


    63. In relation to the uncle Mr Kaci claimed he  met  in  Greenwich  in
        2006, he claimed he did not know  the  name  of  the  girl  he  was
        supposed to marry but that she was not  a  member  of  the  Burelli
        clan. When it was drawn to his attention that in the  statement  by
        Lufi Kaci it is clearly stated that  it  was  agreed  that  Ndricim
        would marry one of the daughters of the Burelli family but that  he
        refused, Mr  Kaci  claimed  this  was  another  marriage  that  was
        mentioned and that inter-clan marriages are used to reconcile blood
        feuds. When pressed on details such  as  when  the  marriage  to  a
        Burelli was proposed Mr Kaci claimed  not  to  know.  When  he  was
        referred to the fact it is stated he refused he claimed he  refused
        when he was asked but when asked when this was he claimed not to be
        able to remember.


    64. In re-examination  Mr  Kaci  stated  his  father  was  involved  in
        attempted mediation. He was unable to comment  upon  the  terms  of
        settlement as his father was in charge. Mr Kaci stated that  before
        Burelli lost his life the clan never accepted he would be shot  but
        that  the  situation  was  tense.  The  Burelli  family   situation
        regarding the killing of his sister was not reconciled although his
        father's position was that it was reconciled. His  father  did  not
        change his position.


    65. Mr Kaci was asked about his comment that the death of  Nuri,  as  a
        result of trees and land, was one reason and to explain the others.
        He claimed these were the killing of his grandfather  by  the  Hoti
        clan and the latest the marriage of Burelli to a  daughter  of  the
        Hoti clan, although he claimed not to be able to provide names.


    66. In relation to the Sophie/Camilla questions Mr Kaci stated that his
        relationship with Sophie re-started when he found out about his son
        which was at the beginning of 2004. It was  very  complicated  from
        that time. Mr Kaci claimed to have had a personal relationship with
        Camilla but not with Sophie until he finished  with  Camilla  which
        was in 2005 although he was unable to recall the date.


    67. We did not find Mr Kaci to be a reliable witness on whose  evidence
        we can place great weight. He is clearly an intelligent person  but
        one willing to employ dishonesty and deception when he  chooses  to
        further his desired aims, be they economic as  illustrated  by  the
        trafficking issues or to secure a right to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom. The inability  to  provide  clear  relies  and  denial  of
        matters it was reasonable to expect him to recall suggests  evasion
        if such events were true. It was also noted that in Mr Kaci's  mind
        there was no other possible explanation  for  the  events  we  were
        considering other than an existing blood feud. We also found claims
        made by Mr Kaci not  to  be  substantiated  when  the  evidence  is
        considered as a whole and  when  due  weight  is  placed  upon  the
        evidence we accept as being reliable as discussed below.


    68. Specific concerns that arose from his evidence  include  the  claim
        Pellumb was shot and that he had no details of his death  when  his
        sister was the complainant according to Pellumb's death certificate
        and the details must have been  known  to  the  family,  the  false
        evidence he gave to the First-tier Tribunal in relation to where he
        was residing with Sophie, the claim of existing blood feud  between
        the Kaci and Hoti families when his own evidence at page 14 of  the
        Source Bundle, in a document dated 31st December 1998 indicated any
        such feud was resolved, his claim in his witness statement that the
        family home in Albania had been burned down and the family were  in
        hiding which is not a claim supported or made by any  other  family
        member and which has been shown not to be true as illustrated below
        and his claim not to know who his uncle  had  suggested  he  should
        marry whereas in his written evidence he claims it was  to  one  of
        the Burelli family indicating he must have known to whom,  if  this
        evidence was true.


   Mr Coka


    69. The next witness was Mr Coka. He was born on 1st April 1950 and  is
        retired now working land he owns. In 1991 he started working  as  a
        missionary for  the  National  Reconciliation  Committee  (NRC)  in
        Shkoder, Albania. In 1992 he became the Deputy Chairman of the NRC.
        Between 1999 and 2001 he held the position of Interim  Chairman  of
        the Committee of Nationwide Reconciliation (CNR) at which point  Mr
        Gjin Marku was elected who has remained Chairman since.


    70. In his witness statement of 14 March 2014 he states that  he  first
        became aware of the Kaci blood feud towards the end of 1995 when he
        and other missionaries saw the report of the death of Teuta Burelli
        (nee Kaci) in the television news. Forty days later he  received  a
        telephone call from the Chairman  of  the  NRC  who  asked  him  to
        mediate a  blood  feud  between  the  Burelli  and  Kaci  families.
        Meetings with the family occurred and Mr Coka recalls Mr Lufti Kaci
        being in favour of reconciliation whereas his brothers Man and  Ali
        were not. The following day there was a meeting  with  the  Burelli
        family  at  which  Fadil   Burelli   was   willing   to   negotiate
        reconciliation  although  Ritvan  was  arrogant  and  shouting  and
        claiming he was going to kill each and every  member  of  the  Kaci
        clan if the Kaci family did not forgive him.


    71. A number of further visits occurred over the intervening four years
        between 1996 and 1999  although  Mr  Coka  claims  they  could  not
        negotiate a settlement. Mr Coka also postulates  that  two  further
        reasons for the failure of the negotiations were the arrest in 2001
        of  Lurjan  Kaci  for  killing  Ritvan  Burelli  and  admitting  to
        committing the offence and in 1998 Ritvan re-marrying a  member  of
        the Hoti clan. The NRC was not asked to assist further  until  2002
        at the request of the Kaci family which did not  prove  successful.
        Mr Coka made no attempt to reconcile this feud after 2002.


    72. Mr Coka states he saw members of the Kaci family in Tirana as  this
        was where they lived.  He met Lulzime Domi in 2005 in  Tirana  when
        getting off a bus with his wife. He states he  saw  the  end  of  a
        fight between two men and a woman. The men grabbed  the  woman  and
        were attempting to force  her  into  a  waiting  car  although  she
        managed to escape  when  other  men  who  saw  what  was  occurring
        intervened. He recalls she had scratches on her neck and was upset.
        Mr Coka stated he cannot remember anything else in  particular  but
        then that the woman told him the men had tried to kidnap  her.  The
        woman stated she did not want to report the matter to  the  police.
        Mr Coka alleges the woman  told  him  she  was  travelling  to  the
        officer of the NRC. He took her there and to  the  office  of  Gjin
        Marku. He  then  left  the  building  with  his  wife  to  keep  an
        appointment at the hospital.


    73. The following day he returned to the NRC offices and met the  woman
        again who he claims told him she was Lulzime Domi the  daughter  of
        Lufti Kaci. Mr Coka states that he did  not  recall  seeing  anyone
        else at Mr Marku's office and he has  never  met  Lulzima's  sister
        Jetmira Kaci. He specifically states that he has never seen Jetmira
        being abducted and has never met her. Mr Coka also states  that  Mr
        Marku asked him to re-visit  the  Burelli  family  as  Lulzime  had
        identified those attempting  to  abduct  her  as  being  from  this
        family. At the visit he states Fadil Burelli told him he  does  not
        care what the Kanun states and that he will do whatever it takes to
        men, women and children.


    74. In relation to Pellumb Kaci, Mr Coka states he met this  person  on
        two occasions and became aware of the date of the funeral in  2010.
        He claims to have overheard talk at the funeral  that  Pellumb  had
        been beaten by an iron rod. On looking into  the  coffin  the  face
        appeared to be bruised and marked. Others were heard  to  say  that
        Pellumb had been killed by the Burelli family and  that  they  were
        going to kill the father of Burelli. Four to  five  days  later  Mr
        Coka attended the Kaci family and was asked to  visit  the  Burelli
        family to see if they would answer truthfully whether  they  killed
        Pellumb and if the answer was no to swear to the same. During  that
        visit Fadil Burelli refused to swear he had not killed Pellumb  and
        said nothing further.


    75. Mr Coka states that in his opinion there is  a blood  feud  between
        the Kaci clan and the Hoti and Burelli clans


    76. In response to supplementary questioning Mr Coka stated that as  he
        had not sworn he would have lied if he had done the crime.


    77. In reply to questions put in cross examination Mr Coka stated  that
        Ritvan and his father did not listen to each other  and  that  this
        was problematic family.


    78. Mr Coka was asked about the documents provided and stated  he  only
        wrote one of them which was a statement for the NRC.


    79. After an adjournment had been granted to allow Mr Coka to return to
        his hotel to collect the bundle of documents  he  failed  to  bring
        with him on the morning, he stated the  meeting  with  the  Burelli
        family was at the end of 1995 beginning of 1996. Mr Coka has stated
        that visit  occurred  40  days  after  Teuta's  death  whereas  the
        document being referred to was dated  30  December  1995.  Mr  Coka
        suggested the date was wrong as they went in early 1996.


    80. Mr Coka confirmed that when there is a meeting as a  missionary  no
        record of the meeting is created.  He  does  not  keep  a  personal
        record although at the end of the month reports to the Chairman.


    81. When asked to explain the feud between the Kaci and  Hoti  families
        in 1998 Mr Coka corrected Mr Smart and stated it was 1928.


    82. Mr Coka had no  knowledge  of  documents  relating  to  1998  which
        mention the Cena family and was unaware of any dispute between  the
        Cena-Hoti-Burelli families. There was no meeting with a  member  of
        the Hoti family.


    83. It was put to Mr Coka that it was right to say  that  in  1928  the
        Hoti-Kaci dispute was no longer active.  He  stated  this  was  not
        directly but it has not continued but indirectly,  yes.  They  have
        not asked if it is over but there is suspicion due to  the  passage
        of time.


    84. Mr Coka confirmed the attitude of Ali Kaci did  not  change  during
        reconciliation.  He was asked how  he  learned  of  the  arrest  of
        Lurjan Kaci as he claimed in his witness statement that  Lujan  was
        arrested in 2001 whereas he was not arrested until  2002.  Mr  Coka
        stated he could have been in the mountains at that time that is all
        he knows - this is what was said to  them  that  he  had  done  the
        killing.


    85. It was suggested to Mr Coka that the information they get from  the
        families may not be accurate and that  they  try  to  deal  with  a
        matter on the basis of such information. His  reply  was  that  the
        information they received is based upon an oath and based upon that
        incident. The police are only involved in minor incidents  such  as
        stabbings.


    86. When asked for the month of the incident in Tirana in 2003 Mr  Coka
        could not recall.  He  was  adamant  he  only  saw  one  woman  who
        approached him. He  was  aware  the  description  of  the  incident
        provided by Mr Marku differed from  his  but  maintained  that  his
        recollection is what he saw. Mr Coka claimed to have made a note of
        the incident although it was not available at the  hearing  and  he
        then stated he had no knowledge in relation to that. He  stated  he
        left a note of the incident with Mr Marku as he  tends  to  forget.
        The incident recorded by Mr Marku at page 481 was not  as  Mr  Coka
        recalls.


    87. When pressed on the fact there were conflicting  accounts  Mr  Coka
        became less precise and somewhat evasive. He was asked  whether  he
        saw one or two women  being  attacked.  He  in  his  statement  and
        earlier evidence was adamant there was only one although his  reply
        on this occasion was "yes".  When asked again whether there was one
        or two he then claimed there was a van full of people, he  did  not
        know how many, the woman he saw was  one  before  it  stopped.  One
        woman separated and came before him - maybe  her  sister  was  some
        distance away.


    88. Mr Coka denied telling Mr Marku both women were fighting  with  the
        criminal gang.


    89. Mr Coka stated that apart  from  this  incident  he  has  heard  no
        information indicating  the  Burelli  family  intended  to  traffic
        female members of the Kaci family.


    90. A further contradiction in his evidence was raised with Mr Coka. In
        his statement  at  page  544  he  stated  that  the  woman  escaped
        following the  intervention  of  other  men  whereas  in  his  oral
        evidence he claimed fifteen people intervened. When asked how  many
        people had intervened he claimed that even if he saw  the  incident
        yesterday he would  not  remember  let  alone  ten  years  ago.  He
        eventually stated there were twelve to fifteen people -  a  lot  of
        people there.


    91. In relation to the death of Pellumb, Mr Coka  stated  that  on  the
        television it was reported as an accident, cause unknown. It was at
        the funeral he  heard  people  whispering  that  it  was  "done  by
        Burelli". The head of the Burelli  family  did  not  admit  to  the
        killing. The media reported there had been  an  accident  but  also
        that the accident was being disputed. The reports stated there  had
        been an accident and the police were pursuing it.   He  was  asked,
        therefore, about his statement at paragraph 16  to  a  news  report
        claiming Pellumb had been 'massacred' by people in Kamez  to  which
        he was asked what the difference was between  being  massacred  and
        being involved in an accident. He could see no  difference  between
        the two and claimed in addition that some say he  had  an  accident
        and some that he was thrown out of a building.


    92. Mr Coka was also asked about a  reference  in  a  document  in  the
        Appellants bundle to BENA Association but claimed not to know  what
        this was although he then stated that they get  involved  with  the
        reconciliation process and that he knows the  Association  and  its
        Chairman. Mr Coka's name appears on a document they  have  prepared
        in which it is reported that they were told that the 'firearm  will
        not stop shooting'. Mr Coka denied claiming that Pellumb was killed
        by a firearm. He also accepted that if Pellumb had died of a  heart
        attack and fallen this may explain the marks on his head  which  he
        accepted could be the case.


    93. It was put to Mr Coka that  he  had,  in  fact,  assumed  that  the
        Burelli family were responsible for Pellumb's  death  without  even
        knowing how he died, which he accepted was true.  He  confirmed  he
        had not asked the police who were  investigating  the  matter.  The
        Burelli family did not swear they had not killed him and  were  not
        prepared to do so. When asked to give a straight yes or  no  answer
        to the question whether Burelli told him  he  or  his  family  were
        responsible for the death of Pellumb, he replied 'no'.


    94. Mr Coka was also asked whether during the reconciliation process he
        had asked Mr Kaci to marry one of the  Burelli  clan  although  the
        Burelli clan did not offer the hand of one of them for marriage.


    95. In relation to the death of Nuri Kaci, Mr Coka stated they had  not
        'gone to the death'.


    96. In re-examination Mr Coka confirmed the information relating to the
        arrest of Lurjan came from the family and that they do not  involve
        the police as it could cause more harm as their work is based  upon
        trust.


    97. In relation to the incident at the bus station in Tirana, he stated
        there were a lot of people and that a woman aged about  40  managed
        to separate and come towards them at which point he  and  his  wife
        left.


    98. We found Mr Coka to be a helpful witness who has been  involved  in
        the  reconciliation  process  for  some  time.  He  was  honest  in
        admitting selective memory as his memory is poor but  those  issues
        he could recall he was very clear about. This was  demonstrated  in
        relation to the issue of the incident at the bus stop where he  was
        adamant one woman had been present and approached him for help  and
        that he and his wife had taken her to the offices of Mr  Marku  and
        he had left a note  to  this  effect,  and  the  later  documentary
        evidence of Mr Marku claiming there were two women  present,  which
        Mr Coka denied.


    99. Mr Coka also assisted in our understanding of  the  methodology  of
        the missionaries who adopt an informal undocumented approach to the
        cases they are asked to investigate. It  is  a  system  based  upon
        trust and word of mouth and the Kanun Code. It is clear that in the
        absence of sworn statements a large part of the  picture  is  based
        upon supposition possibly backed by experience.  Reports are  given
        to the Chairman, Mr Marku,  but  not  maintained  locally  and  the
        police are not involved.


   Mr Marku


   100. Mr Marku has provided  a  statement  and  a  number  of  additional
        documents. He confirmed that the content of his statements is true.
        In the most recent statement, dated 14 March 2014 Mr  Marku  states
        that the Committee of National Reconciliation was founded  in  1990
        and his involvement with the organisation commenced in  1991  as  a
        coordinator. He also worked as a journalist for a newspaper and his
        work with the CNR was voluntary and unpaid. Mr Marku describes  his
        motive for joining the organisation being of the fact he grew up in
        the northern part of Albania where blood feuds are known to  occur.
        He grew up with the law of the Kanun which he studied in his  spare
        time. His paternal grandfather together with his great  uncle  used
        to adjudicate over blood feuds. Reconciliation did not  take  place
        in Albania during the communist regime, between 1967 and 1990.


   101. It is said that in his capacity  as  a  coordinator  there  was  an
        average 10 to 20 blood feuds a year although there was no system of
        registration  and  control  in  the  sense  they  did  not  have  a
        membership card system or database. The organisation was  based  on
        tradition and reputation and did not function in the same  way  as,
        for example, political parties did.


   102. In 1992 the Ministry of Information asked Mr Marku  to  become  the
        Director  of  the  Albanian  Analyst  of  the  Intelligence  Secret
        Service. He served as a Director of  the  Albanian  Secret  Service
        from 19 September 1992 to 25 March 1995 at the same time  remaining
        a coordinator for the nationwide CNR. Families  involved  in  blood
        feuds usually contact the missionaries and following the traditions
        of Albania one individual who is part of the body of village elders
        or from a respected clan is nominated to be  a  missionary  by  his
        community. There are normally three people in a community who  come
        together to resolve blood feuds, which was adopted by  the  CNR  as
        its own model in July 2001.


   103. The CNR is contacted if the families or 'Committee of Three' cannot
        resolve a blood feud. No records are  kept  by  the  'Committee  of
        Three' in over 3000 villages across Albania, such  incidents  being
        committed to memory by  the  group  and  remaining  part  of  their
        knowledge. It is said this is because the committees  do  not  have
        offices and so it is unlikely that they would keep records.  It  is
        also  based  upon  tradition  because  keeping   records   by   the
        missionaries may create suspicion in the minds of the  families  as
        to why the records are being kept.


   104. Albania has a great oral tradition and blood feuds can be  hundreds
        of years old with details  of  the  feud  being  passed  down  from
        generation to generation.


   105. In 2000 the CNR was  restructured  with  a  centralised  office  in
        Tirana and two offices one in the north and the other in the  south
        of the country.  Mr Marku receives expenses for costs incurred. The
        office of the CNR is located in a property owned by his family. The
        organisation  is  self-supporting  relying  on  donations  with  no
        external funding or funding from central government.


   106. In relation to the record-keeping of the CNR at a national level it
        is said that records are kept in the three large offices throughout
        Albania relating to the larger conflicts/blood feuds although there
        is no centralised list of missionaries in Albania as they  are  not
        employees of the CNR.  The  missionaries  as  part  of  their  role
        within the Committee of Three  keep  their  own  records  of  major
        disputes which are  not  maintained  centrally  although  they  are
        likely to get sent records of cases that cannot  be  solved.  Those
        records normally include (a)  hand  written  letters,  (b)  stamped
        letters from the commune or other groups, (c) notes from the  local
        committee (d)  ID  cards,  (e)  death  certificates  (f)  newspaper
        cuttings, all depending upon the individual case. It  is  said  the
        CNR has kept notes of all blood feud killings happening in  Albania
        since 1991 which are held in a  card  index  in  their  offices  in
        Tirana.  The  index  is  not  complete  as  unless   the   families
        acknowledge there is a blood feud they cannot record the killing as
        such. Work has commenced to store  details  from  the  files  on  a
        computer but not all such data is stored electronically.


   107. The statement refers to the Kanun which is discussed in more detail
        below.


   108. The statement also refers to an earlier letter dated  18  September
        2010 addressed to Sophie House defining features of blood feuds. It
        is said there are two categories of blood feud cases those that are
        ongoing and those  that  are  concluded.  It  is  said  that  those
        concluded are no longer referred to as a blood feud.


   109. In paragraph 23 Mr Marku  acknowledges  that  if  he  was  given  a
        document such as a stamped letter  from  one  of  the  villages  or
        communes purporting to be evidence of the existence of a blood feud
        he would  not  necessarily  know  whether  it  is  genuine  without
        undertaking further checks to  verify  the  source.  He  knows  the
        missionaries and representatives  in  each  district  whom  he  can
        contact if required. He claims to have come  across  documents  and
        letters that have not been genuine mainly  produced  for  Albanians
        who are abroad claiming asylum and who are trying to put forward  a
        claim to  be  involved  in  blood  feuds  and  documents  involving
        families who are  genuinely  involved  in  blood  feuds  that  have
        obtained letters that are not genuine. He claims he is  unaware  of
        any representative taking money  in  exchange  for  fake  documents
        although some representatives abuse the system and an unnamed group
        is under investigation for abusing their position which is a matter
        that has been passed on  to  the  prosecution  services.  Mr  Marku
        denies taking money for providing letters of support and states  he
        would never issue a document that was not genuine.


   110.  A  letter  on  headed  paper  from  the  Committee  of  Nationwide
        Reconciliation  has  been  provided  dated  20  of  September  2013
        addressed to the Appellant's solicitors, Duncan Lewis. This  letter
        asserts that the National Committee of Reconciliation was aware  of
        the ongoing blood feud involving the family of Lufti Kaci since  30
        December 1995.  It is said the three named  representatives  'dealt
        with full  respect  concerning  the  blood  feud  family  Kaci  who
        accepted reconciliation with the Burelli  family  in  2002  and  in
        November 2004 but that part of the Kaci clan did not agree and  put
        pressure on the other family members to take blood'.   It  is  said
        these are the uncles of Teuta Kaci, Man Kaci and Ali  Kaci.  It  is
        that  these  individuals  felt   shamed   due   to   Lufti   Kaci's
        determination to pursue peace and refusal to revenge the  blood  of
        his daughter despite the Kanun obligating him to take  revenge  for
        his daughter's death.


   111. It is said the situation has led the Burelli family to  think  they
        will further shame the Kaci family and clan. Knowing there could be
        revenge feelings the Burelli family wanted to intimidate  the  Kaci
        family so they would not take revenge.   It  is  said  that  Ritvan
        Burelli has challenged the representatives about the Kaci  families
        'might', claiming "I killed you once and I will  kill  you  again".
        It is also said that threats  have  been  made  when  relatives  or
        acquaintances of the Kaci family had passed by to  intimidate  them
        and that on this basis Ritvan Burelli found support from  the  Hoti
        clan who are said to  have  been  enemies  of  the  Kaci  clan  for
        generations.   Mr Marku states that Mr Coka  had  heard  from  Arif
        Hoti one week after the killing of Pellumb during the meeting  with
        the missionaries that they have old enmities with the Kaci clan and
        that the families of the Burelli and  Hoti  are  becoming  lifelong
        friends.  It is also said the alliance between these  two  families
        was strengthened when Ritvan chose to take a  wife  from  the  Hoti
        clan in 1998.


   112. It is said the Kaci family suffered depression and stress not  only
        as a result of the killing of their daughter Teuta  Kaci  but  also
        because of the challenges that the Burelli  family  showed  by  the
        marriage after the killing and the selection of  a  member  of  the
        Hoti clan for the marriage. Mr Marku states the killing  of  Ritvan
        Burelli came as a result of this  situation  as  the  Kaci  family,
        already troubled and humiliated in public by  the  challenging  and
        humiliating behaviour of the Burelli clan, did not have  any  other
        choice in front of these challenges and provocation to  the  honour
        of the Kaci family for the killing of a female,  even  after  other
        conflicts.


   113. It is Mr Marku's opinion that the killings came from the Kaci  clan
        to pass the blame to the family of Lufti  Kaci.   Mr  Marku  states
        that the killing was undertaken by a representative the family  who
        did not accept the reconciliation but was attributed to Lurjan Kaci
        who, according to the Kanun, should have undertaken the killing  to
        take the blood of his sister. Mr Marku states that Lurjan Kaci  who
        is imprisoned for the killing of Ritvan Burelli was forced to  take
        the blame because if he did not he would be killed by his own  clan
        members.


   114. Mr Marku  asserts  that  on  9th  of  February  2001  the  National
        Reconciliation  Committee  was  contacted  by  Lindita   Kaci   who
        indicated that the blood feud situation was very dangerous  due  to
        the remarriage of Ritvan Burelli to a member of the Hoti  clan.  He
        states  that  he  tried  to  verify  the  information  with   other
        missionaries and was  informed  that  the  two  clans  have  become
        powerful by the marriage.


   115. It is stated that in general the police are  reluctant  to  involve
        themselves in case of blood feuds and that  on  this  occasion  the
        police were intimidated by the Hoti and Burelli clans and  did  not
        follow the investigation. He stated that members of  the  Hoti  and
        Burelli clans threatened members of Lufti Kaci's family  regardless
        of gender including an alleged attempt to violate female members of
        the family such as Jetmira Kaci who was violated and 'attempted  to
        be robbed by trafficking'.


   116. The letter refers to June 2003  when  the  National  Reconciliation
        Committee was contacted by Lulzime  Domi  who  was  frightened  and
        upset.  It is said that she had a pale face and dry lips with signs
        of violence on her neck which was considered during a meeting  with
        her at their offices where Mr Coka and his wife were  also  present
        having arrived an hour earlier than Lulzime Domi  and  having  told
        them they had seen how Lulzime Domi and Jetmira Kaci were caught by
        gangs although they were unable to push them into a car.  The  last
        contact with Lulzime Domi was in December 2012 when it is said  she
        and her family were in hiding in northern Albania to avoid  revenge
        been taken upon them.


   117. In relation to Pellumb Kaci the letter states that on  29  November
        2010 he was killed in unknown circumstances  although  at  a  later
        stage it was clarified through missionaries that  his  killing  was
        undertaken by the Burelli and Hoti  clans.  The  missionaries  were
        called to a meeting by the relatives of Ritvan Burelli  who  openly
        claimed that they had done the killing and that they were not over.
          It is also said that police did  not  intervene  to  clarify  the
        circumstances of the killing.


   118. On 25 April 2011 Nuri Kaci, first cousin of the children  of  Lufti
        Kaci, was killed by the Hoti clan in cooperation with  the  Burelli
        clan in the Forest of the village of Lures. The letter concludes by
        stating that Jetmira Kaci the daughter of  Lufti  Kaci  and  Eduard
        Domi the son of Lulzime Domi (Kaci) are in grave danger as a direct
        result  of  the  blood  feud  that  exists  between  the   families
        indicating that the letter  was  written  for  earlier  proceedings
        before the First-tier Tribunal and perhaps in connection with those
        asylum claims to which we have referred above.


   119. In his oral evidence Mr Marku confirmed that the  contents  of  his
        statement were true and that there was no need to make any  changes
        although in cross-examination he accepted a date appearing  in  the
        letter as 2013 should have been 2003.


   120. Mr Marku was asked about a considerable number of documents that he
        had provided appearing in the 150 page bundle marked as the "Source
        Bundle". He stated these were documents from people such as letters
        put under the door or from the Committee. The  remainder  were  his
        notes that he had written  over  the  years.  He  was  specifically
        referred to a document of 30 December 1995  and  asked  where  that
        document had been for the last 19 years to which he  claimed  there
        were many folders with notes in them that were kept in  his  office
        as a coordinator. Mr Marku was referred to  the  criticism  of  his
        note keeping in the country guidance case of EH (discussed in  more
        detail below) specifically  at  paragraph  44  which  recorded  his
        evidence to the Upper Tribunal hearing that country  guidance  case
        that his filing system was chaotic with no official record or paper
        keeping within the organisation. He was  asked,  if  this  was  the
        case, how he could produce very significant  numbers  of  documents
        for this case the first of which is over 20 years old.  Mr  Marku's
        reply was to deny the criticism of his record keeping, to refer  to
        the fact there are files with hundreds of notes that they follow up
        with many documents and that many pages exist. This  filing  system
        is not the same as in other offices as all records are  kept  on  a
        file and filed in due time.


   121. Mr Marku was also asked about  what  appears  to  be  contradictory
        evidence in his witness statement in which he refers  to  the  fact
        that the missionaries of the committees do not have offices and are
        unlikely to keep records as this may lead to suspicion in the minds
        of families which appears to be contrary to his claim that  records
        are kept by the Committee of National Reconciliation at the offices
        in Albania. This was confirmed to be correct by  the  witness.   It
        was also put to him that in paragraph 16 of his  witness  statement
        he claims that they kept their own  records  and  the  missionaries
        kept their records with them. Mr Marku claimed that  both  accounts
        were correct and that is how they were keeping notes or not keeping
        notes or records which were the method of their own voluntary  work
        and that it was the decision of the missionaries to keep mental  or
        written notes.


   122. At this stage an issue arose during the evidence as there  appeared
        to be an additional note attached  to  a  document  in  Mr  Marku's
        possession  which  had  not  been  seen  by  the  Tribunal  or  the
        advocates. When this was raised with Mr Pretzell he indicated  that
        the  difficulty  the   Tribunal's  faced  is  that  copies  of  the
        documents had been made by Mr Marku and sent to  Duncan  Lewis  and
        included in the bundle as he was not willing to allow originals  to
        leave Albania.


   123. A question was then raised by Mr Smart regarding a document dated 9
        September 1998 and how it related to these proceedings although  as
        there was no translation it was not admissible. When pressed on the
        relevance of the record of a conversation in this document and  its
        relevance to the proceedings the only response elicited was that it
        was about a conversation about the situation  and  how  to  proceed
        although when it was indicated the note only referred to  the  Hoti
        and Burelli families and not the Kaci family. His response  was  to
        claim that it was the Burelli family regarding the Kaci family.


   124. In relation to the death of Pellumb, Mr  Marku  was  asked  whether
        there was any evidence the Kaci clan  are  a  prominent  clan.   He
        claimed he had no great  knowledge  of  their  economics  but  what
        happened was in the newspapers. The witness  was  referred  to  the
        fact that press coverage had been provided of the killing of Ritvan
        Burelli and he was asked why he had therefore  not  provided  press
        reports relating to Pellumb's death in 2010. The response  referred
        to there being  many  killings  and  many  people  who  died  being
        reported as victims and that families do not  report  them  to  the
        media because they try to  cover  it  up.  Many  killings  are  not
        reported and not recorded by the police which, to our mind, did not
        answer the question.


   125. Mr Marku was asked when he was aware of Pellumb's death to which he
        stated he could not recall the date but that he was concerned about
        it earlier on. When it was put to him that if he was aware  shortly
        after the death the newspapers would  be  aware,  he  responded  by
        stating it might have been in the press as that's what one  of  the
        missionaries told him.  He  thought  he  recalled  "something  like
        that".


   126. Mr Marku was asked how Pellumb was killed to which  he  stated  the
        information he had was that he had been kicked  and  his  face  had
        been damaged. He was assaulted. He was then referred by Mr Smart to
        an e-mail that he had sent to  the  appellant's  solicitors  on  14
        November 2013, which he claimed to be unsure of, in which  he  told
        representatives that Pellumb had been killed by a gun.  He  claimed
        this is was what he believed when he wrote the e-mail.


   127. Mr Marku was then asked about  the  document  from  BENA  which  he
        claimed to be aware of and the reference in that  to  'the  firearm
        never stops shooting'.  He claimed this to be a  figure  of  speech
        according to the Albanian version. He also claimed  that  the  word
        "gun" in Albanian has different meanings and that  it  was  more  a
        metaphorical rather than a literal meaning.


   128. Mr Marku was referred to the evidence  of  Mr  Coka  regarding  his
        understanding of the cause of death of Pellumb  and  the  claim  to
        have seen press reports that he was massacred  or  involved  in  an
        accident to which he claimed that he had seen no reports  from  the
        press even if there had been some and that  his  understanding  was
        that he had been killed or injured by a blow to the face.


   129. Mr Marku was asked who obtained the death certificate  for  Pellumb
        that had been disclosed by the appellant to which he claimed he had
        no knowledge but that  it  would  normally  be  obtained  from  the
        Register Office; but in any event that would record cause of  death
        and not the killers. It was put to him that Pellumb  died  on  29th
        October yet within a few days a copy of his death  certificate  was
        faxed to the United Kingdom. He was asked whether he  had  obtained
        the certificate and faxed it through but he claimed not to be  able
        to remember.


   130. Mr Marku was referred to the fact he sent a number  of  reports  to
        the United Kingdom regarding the Kaci family and  in  particular  a
        report regarding Lufti Kaci for the  purposes  of  his  hearing  in
        2007. It was put to him that at the hearing there was no mention of
        the feud with the Hoti family and the only concern was  surrounding
        the Burelli family. When asked for an explanation his response  was
        to state that he would have given the information they had at  that
        time and which was remembered. He could not recall details  of  the
        case. It was put to him his report must have  reflected  what  they
        had in their paperwork concerning each case to which  his  response
        was to state "of course I cannot explain why it was  left  out  and
        forgotten."


   131. Mr Marku was then referred to a document at page 12 of  the  Source
        Bundle dated the  31  December  1998  concerning  the  relationship
        between Teuta and Ritvan Burelli  and  regarding  the  Hoti  family
        involvement in the dispute. He was asked why such  information  was
        not included in the 2007 report. The response was that he could not
        recall why it was not included and it could be due to  the  wording
        and the author concentrating on information regarding the  Burelli-
        Kaci dispute. Mr Marku was also referred to concerns regarding  the
        involvement of the Hoti clan at page 320 of the Respondent's bundle
        which was  said  to  relate  the  death  of  Nuri  Kaci  due  to  a
        disagreement over woodland. Mr Marku was asked  whether  he  linked
        this to the feud between the Kaci and Burelli families. In response
        to which he said although  referring  to  the  seriousness  of  the
        killing, "that continuation of blood feuds  with  a  reconciliation
        are always being killing - a reference  to  hate  between  the  two
        families and the fact that killings occur over ownership  and  that
        such killings could start a feud and that this was a case involving
        disputed ownership of the  land  in  the  forest".  When  asked  to
        clarify his answer and whether he was  saying  this  is  simply  an
        issue of ownership of the land he confirmed it was not.


   132. Mr Marku was asked about the account relating to  the  incident  in
        which he describes Luzime Domi as being in shock with a  pale  face
        and dry lips referred to above. It was put to him that Mr  Coka  in
        his evidence stated he had not seen Jetmira and an explanation  was
        sought. Mr Marku's response was that this  is  his  report  and  he
        believes his report is correct which he had compiled from his  best
        memories and beliefs  when  checking  the  paperwork  and  what  he
        recalled from the meeting with Lulzime. When  it  was  put  to  him
        again that Mr Coka was clear he only saw Lulzime and not Jetmira Mr
        Marku claimed he was convinced that  both  those  individuals  were
        there together. He was unable to explain Mr Coka's recollection and
        could not say if he saw one or  more  people.     When  asked  what
        evidence he had that Jetmira  was  present  at  that  incident  his
        response was to state that that was from what he remembers  looking
        at the paperwork and that that was the conclusion he  reached  from
        other records not just a meeting with Lulzime. It was  put  to  him
        that although that might be what others had said his own missionary
        who had seen the event only saw one woman and when asked why he did
        not accept his word over others, the response  from  Mr  Marku  was
        that he cannot insist that what he says is the truth  but  this  is
        what he believes anyway.


   133. Mr Marku was asked where the notes were of the reports in the  file
        relating to the incident  to  which  he  claimed  to  have  a  note
        relating to 25 June 2003 appearing pages 62 and 66 and  73  of  the
        Source Bundle.  When asked how he supported the claim in  the  note
        that people were trying to traffic the women and  that  there  were
        many  times,  he  claimed  to  know  this  from  Mr  Coka  and  the
        conversation in the office and his note taking. Mr Marku was  asked
        again where his evidence was to support the  claim  the  women  had
        been the subject of attempted abductions to which he again referred
        to a conversation with Lulzime and Jetmira about  their  being  the
        targets of traffickers and that  was  his  understanding  from  the
        meetings and what he remembers. It was specifically put to Mr Marku
        that this was an  example  of  him  attempting  to  exaggerate  the
        situation which he denied, claiming it was his wish and  desire  to
        help the court.


   134. Mr Marku was also asked about the content of another note  at  page
        482, paragraph 7, where he claimed that Jetmira had  been  violated
        between 2006 2011. He claimed that from  the  missionaries  he  was
        pretty certain she left and went to the North and that that is what
        happened. When asked when she went to North Mr Marku claimed not to
        have the notes in front of him but it was 2006 to 2011. When  asked
        whether somebody tried to abduct her when she was in the  North  he
        stated he believed if she was found she would have  been  abducted.
        Mr Smart indicated all he was trying to establish was why Mr  Marku
        said she was saved many times from being grabbed.  He referred to a
        visit to his office in 2001 in which he was told that all the  Kaci
        sisters are at risk which  is  a  common  occurrence  in  the  many
        reports from missionaries regarding the case.


   135. Mr Marku was then referred  to  a  further  document  described  as
        report or letter regarding the death of Pellumb Kaci which referred
        to him being  killed  in  unknown  circumstances  and  the  comment
        referred to above, of it being claimed that the Burelli family  had
        admitted being responsible for the killing. It was put to Mr  Marku
        that Mr Coka's evidence was that there had been no such  admission,
        which he countered by claiming there had been no open admission. It
        was put to him that in his statement he had claimed that  they  had
        openly admitted to being responsible for the killing. The  response
        from Mr Marku was that he had read the information  somewhere  that
        they admitted they had done the killing  of  them  and  that  there
        would be continued  killings,  this  is  what  happened  when  some
        families tried to imitate others not to take revenge in many cases.
         It was then  put  to  Mr  Marku  that  the  information  available
        suggested that Pellumb in fact died  from  heart  attack  and  that
        although the death certificate relied upon by the appellant did not
        show cause of death a complete certificate has  now  been  obtained
        signed by a doctor confirming this fact. Mr Marku was asked whether
        he disputed that the named doctor existed, especially in  light  of
        the fact information had been provided showing she does  exist  and
        did provide the death certificate.   Mr  Marku's  response  was  to
        claim that he could not remember.  He  stated  that  he  heard  the
        report and remembered going to the hospital to seek the information
        and asking whether the doctor was there and being told she was not.
        He  claims  in  many  cases  reports  are  signed  by  the  doctors
        justifying death with causes in other people's interests  which  he
        claim to be common practice in the Albanian Health Service.


   136. Mr Smart then asked whether there had been news  reports  that  the
        Belgium and Albanian authorities were considering  prosecuting  him
        regarding letters emanating in such cases which  he  confirmed  was
        the case.  Mr Marku stated that he had never been at the  beginning
        of any prosecution for such purpose but when asked whether  he  was
        interviewed by prosecutors he stated that the prosecutors would not
        continue as they realised that all was within the law. He was again
        asked whether he was interviewed by the police and  prosecutors  to
        which he stated that everything had  he  sent  to  the  prosecution
        office informing them that the media allegations were false and  in
        his opinion the information in the media was produced to damage the
        reputation of his organisation. Mr Marku  then  produced  documents
        indicating that he was not the subject of any ongoing  prosecution,
        the most recent of which is dated the 31st February 2014, but  also
        claiming that he has other related documents.


   137. In relation to the law in Albania and  documents  indicating  there
        had been a number of prosecutions  including  lawmakers  sentencing
        individuals to 25 years to life if a person  is  killed  for  blood
        feud which is a marked change in practice, Mr  Marku  confirmed  it
        was a change that had been made in 2013. At the moment the  minimum
        sentence killers will get is at least 25 years and his organisation
        submitted proposals to change the law to increase the sentence  for
        blood feud killings. He was asked to confirm whether  his  position
        was that there should be a specific finding if it is a  blood  feud
        killing which he confirmed was the case. When asked whether he  and
        his Committee were prepared to  assist  the  court  and  police  to
        obtain a just result he confirmed that they  would  be  willing  to
        help and still are.


   138. Mr Marku was then asked about a court document which we refer to in
        further detail below in which the District Court has found that the
        killing of Ritvan was not as a result of a blood  feud.  The  Court
        considered the verdict in 2002-2003 at  which  time  Mr  Marku  was
        claiming his organisation had a lot of information that  he  claims
        would show there was a blood feud. He was asked why  that  evidence
        had not been made available to the prosecutor to which  he  claimed
        that they could not notify the court or make them aware but that he
        was happy to say it  was  blood  feud  related.   He  asserted  the
        statement by Lufti Kaci to the  court  was  made  to  mitigate  the
        circumstances of his son.  When asked whether  he  was  aware  what
        Lindita Kaci received eight years imprisonment for her part in  the
        killing  of  Ritvan  Burelli  he  claimed  he  did  not  have  that
        information which was out of his memory.


   139. At the commencement of the  fourth  day  Mr  Marku  resumed  cross-
        examination. He was asked whether he was aware of a meeting between
        his missionaries and the Hoti family which he claimed took place in
        1998-2000. He was referred to the documents appearing to refer to a
        meeting between Mr Coka and a member of the Hoti family whereas  Mr
        Coka's evidence had been that  no  such  meeting  occurred.  Having
        examined the documents Mr Marku claimed that the person  with  whom
        the meeting had taken place was not a member of the Hoti clan  that
        had a dispute with the Kaci clan as it was a different  Hoti  Clan.
        Mr Marku says that individuals can have the same name but this does
        not mean they are related.


   140. In his letter of 20th September 2013 Mr Marku had referred  to  the
        killing of Nuri Kaci in the forest and included the statement  that
        he had been killed by the Hoti Clan in cooperation with the Burelli
        Clan.  He was asked how he knew the Burelli Clan were  involved  in
        the killing to which he claimed it was from a conversation with the
        missionaries and that all was from contact with  the  missionaries.
        He claims he was told this by the missionaries  that  it  was  just
        conversation although when he was advised it  is  in  the  document
        before the court he claimed not to know. When the  further  wording
        of that part of the letter referring to the cooperation between the
        two families involved in the enterprise in the forest it was put to
        him and he was asked how that was known to him,  Mr  Marku  claimed
        there was a company with the names of the two  families  in  Tirana
        trading in timber and that his note is based upon the logic of that
        and some conversations with missionaries.


   141. It was put to Mr Marku that much of his statement was an assumption
        of what may be the case rather than  being  a  factual  record.  He
        accepted that it is based upon evidence but at the same  time  upon
        his professional knowledge. Issue was raised regarding the  comment
        in the statement that is not recorded anywhere  within  the  source
        bundle to which Mr Marku to sought to assure Mr  Smart  that  there
        are thousands of conversations that are not recorded as it  depends
        on the place they are discussed.


   142. Mr Marku was then asked about whether he received  notification  of
        further action against him, an  issue  that  had  been  raised  the
        previous day,  as  he  provided  evidence  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        claiming he had been arrested in 2013 due to  allegations  that  he
        provided documents for money that had been used to secure asylum in
        a European countries. Mr Marku denied the allegation and claimed he
        had never been arrested and that he found the line  of  questioning
        insulting. It was put to him that this was an issue in  a  document
        before the Tribunal stating he had been arrested. His response  was
        to state that did not mean he was arrested. When asked  whether  he
        had been invited to go to the official building of the  prosecutors
        to assist with the investigations he claimed that he had been there
        at times to the police not to the prosecutor's office and that  the
        last time he went to the police was two months  ago  when  he  sent
        documents to them and they thanked  him  for  his  cooperation.  He
        never thought that he was going to be the subject of a  prosecution
        although he was then asked why he therefore obtained a  certificate
        from the prosecutor to show there were no proceedings against  him.
        He stated this was for an immigration tribunal that he believed was
        for a Canadian tribunal.


   143. Mr Marku was then referred to a document at page 111 of the  source
        bundle written by the humanitarian organisation BESA 03  and  dated
        23 December 2010 and  addressed  to  him  personally.  That  letter
        contains the following statement "this month, after the  murder  of
        Pellumb Kaci the  family  has  been  crushed  and  humiliated.  And
        because it is the Kaci family turn to "take blood" the Kaci  family
        feels even more in a risky situation after this Mafia  murder."  Mr
        Marku was asked whether he agrees with that sentiment that it is in
        fact the Kaci family turn to take blood  to  which  he  stated,  in
        effect, that as head of the Committee he could not  tell  the  Kaci
        family what they had to do. When it was put to him that  under  the
        terms of Kanun law that is a true statement Mr Marku  responded  by
        claiming that "Kanun was not successfully used to justify terrorist
        acts during this period of transition".


   144. In response to questions  asked  in  re-examination  Mr  Marku  was
        referred to page 99 of the source bundle translation page 101 which
        is a note dated 25th March  2005  containing  the  phrase  "current
        preferences for the traffickers, which are the same  as  two  years
        ago, are to kidnap Jetmira Kaci.  Jetmira has escaped several times
        from being kidnapped." Mr Marku confirmed that this is correct  and
        although he could not recall everything, that it was correct.


   145. In relation to a document on page 109 of the court bundle, a letter
        30  November  2010  from  BENA,  purportedly  written   from   this
        organisation indicating the acquisition of knowledge  the  previous
        day that Pellumb Kaci was killed, Mr Marku stated as far as he  was
        concerned the phrase that 'firearms would never stop shooting  from
        now on' meant the blood feud was continuing.


   146. In relation to the evidence regarding  the  difference  between  an
        open admission and an admission Mr Marku stated an  open  admission
        in his opinion occurred  if  the  parties  were  correct  with  one
        another or public admission such as could occur in court. Admission
        will be something  that  occurred  in  private  between  them  with
        evidence remaining between them. The Burelli family were  aware  of
        the missionaries confidentiality.


   147. A reference to documents appearing at pages 40, 42 and  46  of  the
        court bundle, the latter being  a  note  purportedly  from  Maharen
        Taloshi dated 21 January 2002 indicating the situation between  the
        Kaci and Hoti/Burelli families had worsened and that the  daughters
        of Lufti Kaci still worried about the situation, was made. Mr Marku
        confirmed this recorded that the situation had been  aggravated  as
        the Hoti Clan continued their aggression to shed  blood  and  cause
        violence.


   148. In relation to the judgment of  the  Albanian  District  Court,  Mr
        Marku stated that the testimony  of  the  witness  Lufti  Kaci  was
        recorded and that the court did not accept the nature of the  blood
        feud. When asked for his view as to why a family member would  tell
        the court his son was not involved in a blood feud he  claims  that
        it was testament to cover up the existence of the blood feud.  This
        was said because it excluded the motive  of  blood  feud  from  the
        killing.


   149. We note that during the course of the cross examination  there  was
        reference to the country guidance case of EH (blood feuds)  Albania
        CG [2012] UKUT  348.  Mr  Marku  appeared  as  a  witness  for  the
        appellant before that Tribunal and their impression  of  him  as  a
        witness is recorded at paragraphs 43 to 47 in the following terms:


              43. Mr Marku's evidence, and that of the  CNR,  underpins  all
   the international                press reports and many of  the  national
   reports too.  Mr Marku's position                   was  that  the  blood
   feud problem was widespread and serious.  He stated                  that
   blood feuds were  a  continuing  and  growing  problem,  with  very  many
     deaths and thousands of self-confined problems; that the  Kanun  system
          had broken down, with murders taking place  on  non-Kanun  grounds
          treated as blood feuds, and the CNR was the only  NGO  to  provide
   blood               feud attestation letters.


              44. Mr Marku's evidence was  unimpressive,  as  a  reading  of
   Appendix C makes                 plain.  We heard a  lengthy  description
   of his network of contacts  in  every                 village  (which  Dr
   Schwander-Sievers   acknowledged   to    be    the    case),    but    he
   told us that his filing was chaotic with  files  only  created  for  some
   blood               feuds and  most  reconciliations  being  carried  out
   informally over  cigarettes,                coffees,  and  long  periods.
   That was inconsistent  with  what  Mr  Marku  told                    the
   Canadian  IRB  about  the  CNR's   filing   system   and   methods;   the
     international sources record his stating that the SNR  had  a  detailed
   filing                  system, with a file for every feud.


              45. In his oral evidence it became clear that the  figures  he
   used were arrived at                  by adding up any records of violent
   deaths in newspapers, land disputes                (based on  information
   from the local Land Registries), and even the  killing                 of
   unfaithful wives by their husbands. The definition of a blood  feud  used
          by Mr Marku was excessively  wide  and  the  resultant  statistics
   dubious.  At                 the end  of  Mr  Marku's  oral  evidence  in
   September 2011, we had formed the                  view that he was not a
   truthful    or    reliable     witness     and     the     rumours     of
   attestation letters being available for payment to the CRN were likely to
   be                  correct.  We were not disposed to place any weight on
   the attestation letters                   in this appeal.


              46. We bore  in  mind  that  the  CNR  attestations  were  all
   personally signed by                  Mr Marku: the  credibility  of  his
   account of their preparations and the basis                 on which they
   were   issued    was    therefore    very    important    in    assigning
   weight to any individual letter from the CNR.  A CIRB  Research  Response
          dated 1 February 2012 recorded Mr Marku as stating he was aware of
   at                   least  some  occasions   when   his   signature   on
   attestation letters  was  forged.                     We  also  note  the
   existence    a    well-publicised    hidden    camera    recording     of
   Mr Marku offering to sell an attestation letter and coaching  the  family
   on                  the  account  to  be  given  of  their  difficulties,
   without any investigation of the                   claimed feud at all.


              47. The subsequent arrest and investigation of  Mr  Marku  and
   the CNR by  the                    Albanian  authorities  on  charges  of
   selling genuine CNR attestation letters                for use abroad  to
   support    false    asylum    claims    are    compatible    with     our
   concerns  about  his  credibility  after  hearing  and  seeing  him  give
   evidence;                but   we   emphasise   that   we   had   already
   independently  formed  an  adverse                view  of  his   general
   credibility   and   the   ultimate   outcome    of    criminal    charges
   is, therefore, not a  matter  that  requires  the  finalisation  of  this
   determination                to be further delayed.


   150. We have  had  sight  of  a  letter  from  the  CNR  postdating  the
        determination stating  that  no  further  action  was  being  taken
        against Mr Marku, although the statement in EH is that the  adverse
        credibility findings stand  irrespective  of  the  outcome  of  the
        criminal investigation.


   151. A police certificate dated 17th  April  2012  certifying  no  penal
        proceedings were being issued against Gjin Marku has been found  to
        be genuine. Mr Marku was clearly very sensitive to  the  suggestion
        he had been arrested and was the subject of prosecution. He  denied
        being so but the Appellants own evidence, additional  bundle  filed
        in response to the Respondents County Guidance: Albania Blood Feuds
        2014 report, raised the issue further where it states at page 49:


              "Also note that Operazione Colomba reports that Gjin Marku was
   arrested for a               second time in 2013. However,  corroborating
   information for the incident could            not be  found  amongst  the
   sources   consulted,   and   note   it   was   not   reported   by    the
   Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada in their February  2014  research
   memo           cited above.


              Operazione Colomba, Operation Dove Report:  January  2013,  10
   April 2013


              [...] Albania


              Current situation


              [...]    Gjin Marku, President of the National Association  of
   Bajraktar, was                   arrested for the second time because  he
   was accused of signing false documents,            certifying  that  some
   families are in revenge, for money.  These documents are             used
   to obtain the right of asylum in European countries. [...]


   152. We note the responses from Mr Marku in particular and his  practice
        of not accepting evidence that suggests the claimed feud is  wrong.
        For example his reasoning for the evidence given  to  the  Albanian
        Court regarding the existence of a blood feud was stated  to  be  a
        desire by the  witness  to  mitigate  his  son's  position  and  in
        relation to the death certificate, no acceptance it was correct but
        an  assertion  that  false  information   is   provided   in   such
        circumstances within the Albanian Health  Services.  We  also  have
        concerns about the reliability of the information particularly that
        in direct conflict to that of Mr Coka, his own missionary, and that
        identified by Mr Smart in his submissions. We note in particular Mr
        Coka's evidence that no admission had  been  made  by  the  Burelli
        family for the death of Pellumb Kaci even though Mr Marku attempted
        to claim he did. We also note the contradictory evidence  regarding
        Jetmira's claimed abduction which we have referred to above.


   153. The final witness was the expert Mr  Korovilas  whose  evidence  we
        shall refer to in more detail when discussing the death certificate
        below.



The Documentary evidence

   154.  As  stated  above,  there  has  been  a  considerable  volume   of
        documentary evidence all of which has  been  considered  in  detail
        even  if  not  specifically  referred  to  in  the  body  of   this
        determination.  These included in the Source Bundle copies  of  the
        notes cited by Mr Marku purporting to originate from the records of
        the Committee for National Reconciliation, the  majority  of  which
        are hand written.


   155. The method of record keeping has been the subject of criticisms  in
        the past and the evidence we have received  supports  the  concerns
        the Tribunal recorded in paragraph 44  of  EH.  Although  Mr  Marku
        denied in his oral evidence having stated that  his  record  system
        was chaotic we note a common theme in relation to the way in  which
        the CNR operates which is on the basis  of  informal  contacts  and
        discussions. Mr Marku clearly administers the  system  but  is  not
        personally involved in  all  blood  feuds.  Although  there  is  no
        evidence he has been charged  with  a  criminal  offence  there  is
        reference above to the recording regarding the production of  false
        testimony. There is no evidence that records are maintained  in  an
        orderly manner. The claim is that documents are created in  varying
        forms, including on scraps  of  paper,  from  various  sources,  in
        relation to cases in which the missionaries have  become  involved.
        No local records are kept setting out in detail the activities  and
        issues on a contemporaneous basis and or, it  appears,  a  detailed
        system of reporting to Mr Marku in terms of timing and content.  He
        may therefore not be told all relevant information or only be  told
        what a missionary is able to recall. It is therefore a system  that
        has an inherent problem of the reliability of the information being
        compromised.


   156. The source of information is also  relevant.  It  appears  this  is
        gathered from various sources including gossip,  what  persons  may
        have said and overheard being said privately or  in  meetings  with
        the missionaries, the missionaries' perception of  the  issues  and
        events,  or  even  just   potential   intelligence,   rather   than
        independently verified facts.
   .
   157. The documents are said to be stored at the CNR offices, the central
        one of which is a building owned by Mr Marku's family. There is  no
        evidence they have been sorted to a defined file or the full extent
        of the available documents. It was noted in cross examination  that
        Mr Marku was asked why a document he had produced for this  hearing
        was not made available or referred to in an  earlier  appeal  where
        the issue would have been just as relevant. His  response  was  not
        persuasive and if such a document had existed at that time or could
        be located one would have expected it to  have  been  presented  in
        evidence.


   158. Another issue of concern related to the fact that Mr Marku  claimed
        the original documents could not be sent from Albania  where  there
        appears to be no legal justification for such  a  statement.  As  a
        result no advocate in the case has been permitted  to  inspect  the
        original documents and Mr Marku is the only person responsible  for
        the selection and disclosure of such evidence.


   159. Mr Marku's evidence also contains inaccuracies  as  illustrated  by
        the conflict between Mr Marku  and  Mr  Coka  in  relation  to  the
        presence of Jetmira at the alleged attempted abduction. It is  also
        alleged at page 481 that Jetmira has been a victim since  2003  and
        had been 'saved many times' but Jetmira entered the UK in 2004  and
        so she could not have been involved in events in Albania after this
        time. This is relevant for Mr Marku also refers to an event in 2005
        involving Jetmira in Albania which is clearly incorrect as she  was
        in the UK until 2006.


   160. The evidence in the bundle is in the majority therefore hearsay but
        still admissible. In R (Ullah) v SSHD (CIS 4/12/03)  the  Court  of
        Appeal said that the Secretary of State could not be precluded from
        advancing his case on the basis of an  interview  note  between  an
        immigration officer and a witness simply because  the  witness  was
        not called and there was no witness statement.   It  was  evidence,
        albeit hearsay in form, to which the judge  was  entitled  to  have
        regard.  The weight to be attached to it was, however, a  different
        matter.


   161. There is also reference above to two very important documents being
        the  verdict  of  the  Albanian  District  Court  and   the   death
        certificate of Pellumb Kaci.


   162. In relation to the death certificate; the Appellant provided in his
        original bundle a document purporting to be a copy of the  original
        death certificate  of  Pellumb  Kaci.  A  copy  together  with  the
        translation appears pages at 581 - 582 of  the  first  bundle.  The
        certificate contains the name and surname of the  deceased,  family
        details,  date  of  birth,  gender,   civil   state,   nationality,
        citizenship, and date of death, place of death, cause of death. The
        certificate is dated 20 January 2011. The date of death  is  stated
        to be 29 November 2010 although the reference to the National Civil
        Register Number and year has not been completed and both the  place
        and cause of death has been left blank. The document is  also  said
        to contain an illegible signature in the  space  provided  for  the
        Civil Registry Clerk to sign the document. At  page  585,  with  an
        English translation on page 586, is a permit for  burial  referring
        to Pellumb Kaci who died on 29th November 2010 with permission  for
        the burial to take place after 14:00 hours on 30 November 2010.


   163. The omission from the certificate of the cause of death was  raised
        at an earlier case  management  hearing  and  directions  given  to
        enable further evidence to be obtained in relation to this specific
        matter. The Secretary of State was able to make  further  enquiries
        through the British Embassy in Tirana who undertook enquiries  with
        the General Directorate of Civil Registry (GDCR) at the Ministry of
        Interior of Albania officially requesting verification of the death
        certificate that had been disclosed. The response  is  recorded  in
        the Document Verification Report at page 444  of  the  Respondent's
        bundle in the following terms


              The GDCR has confirmed through a copy of the death act that Mr
   Pellumb Kaci            has died on 29/11/2010 and  11:45  at  a  medical
   institution due to a heart                arrest/attack. The statement of
   his death has been declared by his sister, Jetmira              Kaci  and
   has been confirmed by the GP Stela Taci.


              The cause of death is missing from the death certificate which
   is submitted for             verification. Referring to the sample  death
   certificate that is made available from            the GDCR/MOI (Ministry
   of the Interior) the cause of death element should be           completed
   by  the  Registrar.   Therefore  while  the  subject's  death  has   been
     registered no explanation has been provided as  to  why  the  cause  of
   death was           omitted.


   164. In addition to  the  Document  Verification  Report  we  have  been
        provided with a blank death certificate together  with  a  properly
        completed death certificate confirming information provided to  the
        Embassy by the Albanian authorities.


   165. Following disclosure of this document a further issue was raised by
        the Appellant and the Tribunal advised that issue was  being  taken
        regarding the existence of Stela Taci. Mr  Marku  was  specifically
        asked about this in his evidence and indicated that he had  visited
        the hospital and asked to speak to this individual  and  been  told
        she was not  there,  which  appears  to  be  beyond  the  scope  of
        expectation of a neutral country expert and rather of a person  who
        had placed himself in the position of an  investigator  working  on
        behalf of Mr Kaci.


   166.  In  relation  to  the  other  key  issue  that  arises  from   the
        certificate, namely that the complainant is recorded  as  being  Mr
        Kaci's sister Jetmira, in the two statements she  has  provided  to
        the Upper Tribunal dated 18 September 2013  and  18  November  2013
        there is no mention of such activity. Indeed she claims that having
        been returned to Albania in 2006 she was required  to  protect  her
        life by going into hiding moving from village to village, receiving
        help from her father's friend, with no contact from family,  living
        in fear, and  moving  as  the  Burelli  family  kept  locating  her
        whereabouts. She claims to have lived life  for  five  years  as  a
        prisoner but also records in paragraph 11 of  the  first  statement
        the following:


              12. My brother , Pellumb Kaci was killed on 29  November  2010
   as a result of                   the blood feud with the Burelli family.


   167. In the second statement dated the 18 November 2013  Jetmira  refers
        to the documents provided by the Home Office referencing the  death
        of her brother and the statement that she was an informant  to  the
        death.  She claims the document shows a signature but that her name
        is simply her name typed which confirms the document is not genuine
        as she claims not to have signed or declared anything by  reference
        to her brother's death. She states that her brother did not die  of
        a heart attack but that he was killed as a result of the blood feud
        with the Burelli family. Although  she  was  in  Albania  when  her
        brother was killed and a friend of the family informed her  of  his
        death she was not at hospital or an informant of any such event.


   168. If the certificate provided by the Secretary of  State  is  genuine
        this casts doubt upon the truth  of  the  evidence  of  Jetmira  to
        effectively have been in hiding since she returned in 2006 in  fear
        of her life and in the protection of a named individual as well  as
        the claim that her brother was killed as a result of a blood  feud,
        when she must have known that he  died  as  a  result  of  a  heart
        attack.


   169. Following the Appellant's position being known, further checks were
        undertaken with the Albanian Ministry of the Interior  in  relation
        to which there is a further letter  from  the  British  Embassy  in
        Tirana dated 31 January 2014. The author of that letter  refers  to
        an  excerpt  from  the  official  letter   from   the   Immigration
        Directorate of the Albanian State Police citing the results of  the
        verification checks which is in the following terms:


              In response to your request dated  22.01.2014,  through  which
   you request             confirmation of  the  death  certificate  of  the
   Albanian national Pellumb             Kaci, issued by the Civil  Registry
   Office of  Kamez, Tirane, we inform you            that:


              The document issued by the civil registry office Kamez, Tirane
   is identical            with the document sent by you.


              Also, the death act issued by the  "Mother  Theresa"  Hospital
   Centre Tirana           confirms the cause of death of this national.


              I attach the relevant documentation.


               I  avail  myself   of   the   opportunity   to   express   by
   considerations.
   .
   170. The Embassy letter continues stating they can attest of veracity of
        the enclosed results  as  the  verification  checks  are  conducted
        between  named  individuals  from  the  Albanian  Ministry  of  the
        Interior and the British Embassy Tirana, as stipulated in the  data
        sharing agreement, and were carried out in a manner consistent with
        each country's immigration and data  protection  laws,  regulations
        and policies.


   171. The Embassy also concludes that due to the accuracy of  report  and
        the account received from the Migration  Directorate  that  Pellumb
        Kaci died of cardiac arrest on 29/11/2010. The letter also contains
        the following on the second page:


              Your subject, Nadricim Kaci has therefore produced irregularly
   manipulated             evidence to convey the impression that the  cause
   of Mr Pellumb Kaci's death was             other  than  that  of  natural
   causes.


              I attach the following as evidence to support this conclusion:




                  1)   Copy of original death certificate
                   2)     Ministerial   confirmation   that   the   original
   certificate  states  the  same                    details   as   on   the
   electronic    version    of    the    death     certificate     (supplied
   earlier to the Embassy/Home Office)
                  3)   Copy of the original death act (two pages)


              The documents, signed and  stamped  by  the  Border  Migration
   Directorate show             the death certificate, issued by  the  Civil
   Registry in Kamez Municipality. The           death certificate has  been
   signed    by    the    chief    registrar     Anila     Haxhiaj.      The
   certificate has been issued for official purposes. It confirms the  venue
   and the             cause of death:  venue-medical  institution  and  the
   cause-cardiac arrest.


              The Border Migration Directorate has also attached a  copy  of
   the Death Act form           extracted by the  archive  of  the  National
   Institute of Statistics. The death  has  been             signed  by  the
   Medical  Doctor   Stela   Taci,   Gastrohepathologost   and   bears   the
   official stamp of the "Mother  Theresa"  University  Hospital  Centre  in
   Tirana. The             title of  the  death  act  is:  Death  Form  D-4,
   Medical Certification of the cause of              Death.


              Among others, the death form  confirms  the  venue  of  death:
   medical institution              (see tick) and ultimate cause of  death:
   cardiac and respiratory arrest.


   172. A further letter from the British Embassy in Tirana, sets  out  the
        standard procedures to be followed in Albania when issuing a  death
        certificate. The first step when a person dies  naturally  is  that
        the medical doctor certifies that the person is dead and  completes
        a death schedule. The schedule defines the details of  the  person,
        the place of death and the cause of death and is signed by  the  GP
        and is stamped by the nearest health centre authority if the person
        dies at home. If a person dies in hospital the  death  schedule  is
        signed by the medical doctor responsible for the particular ward of
        a hospital which in this case was Stela Taci a  Medical  Doctor  at
        Tirana Mother Theresa Hospital. The death schedule is  then  handed
        to a family member of the deceased person and  by  law  the  health
        centres and hospitals are obliged  to  notify  the  relevant  Civil
        Registry  of  the  area  where  the  deceased  person  is   legally
        registered as a resident of the death within five days.


   173. The second step is that the family member called  the  declarer  or
        the informant having received the death  schedule  is  required  to
        attend the Civil Registry to declare and register  the  death.  The
        Registrar prepares or writes the death act  a  copy  of  which  was
        dispatched in the  initial  correspondence  from  the  Embassy  and
        electronic copy of which was provided by the Albanian  Ministry  of
        the Interior.  Electronic  documents  are  not  signed  or  stamped
        because  they  are  printed  from  an  electronic  system  and  are
        accompanied by a  note  signed  by  the  Secretary-General  of  the
        Ministry of the Interior bearing the official stamp.


   174. The third step involves the Registrar issuing the death certificate
        and providing the  informant  with  an  original  copy  signed  and
        stamped.


   175. A further document  relevant  to  the  issue  of  the  validity  of
        Pellumb's death certificate  is  a  copy  letter  from  the  Mother
        Theresa Hospital dated 10th April 2014 confirming  that  Mrs  Stela
        Jorgo Taci is an employee of the hospital in the capacity of Gastro-
        hepathologist.


   176. The Appellant adduced evidence relating to the death certificate by
        way of two documents the first being described as an observation by
        Armanda Hysa on documents provided by the Respondent and secondly a
        report by James Peter Korovilas of death  certificates  in  Albania
        dated 2nd February 2014.


   177. Armanda Hysa describes herself  as  an  Albanian  citizen  who  has
        studied history in Albania and who is  currently  a  Post-Doctorial
        Fellow in Albanian studies at University  College  in  London.  The
        report  contains  a  declaration  that  the  author  is   able   to
        distinguish when  there  are  problems  with  legal  documents  and
        certificates due to her qualifications and Albanian knowledge.


   178. There is set out in the document a list of  material  sent  by  the
        Appellant's  solicitors  which  are  followed  by   a   number   of
        observations in the following terms:


              a.  None of the certificates stating in which precise hospital
   Pellumb Kaci died.


              b.  None of the certificates makes it clear where  does  Stela
   Taci work, in which                   precise institution, in  ambulatory
   or neighbourhood (would be  GB)  or  in                any  hospital  (in
   which, and where)?


              c.  The death certificate released from Kamez Municipality  is
   only sealed but                  not signed. It misses the  name  of  the
   official  of  the  municipality  who                        released  the
   certificate, and his or her signature.


                  There is no number and year of the civil register.
                  No cause of death is written
                  The personal number of Pellumb  Kaci  (the  unique  number
   which  every                   citizen  has)  is  also  missing.  I  have
   attached a  death  certificate  in  order  to                compare  the
   difference.


              d.  Albanian state does not consider  any  death  certificates
   valid released before                 23.05.2011. Valid certificates  are
   only those released after the said date.


              e.  The name Isuf Celaj is correctly written.


              f.  With regards to the Act of Death:


                  It is not written which commune or  municipality  released
   the document                 it is not  specified  which  hospital  death
   happened  (only  medical  institution                  this  is   not   a
   hospital)
                  There is no sign and  no  seal  of  the  official  of  the
   municipality or commune                   who released this act of death
                  The personal number of the legal  expert,  Stela  Taci  is
   also missing.


              According to what I have observed above I  conclude  that  the
   documents related            to the death of Pellumb Kaci lack  necessary
   official data and are not to be trusted.
   179. The report of Mr Korovilas sets out the  contents  of  an  Albanian
        death certificate following which the  following  observations  are
        recorded:




              I am aware that the place of residence section has  been  left
   blank on the death           certificate of  Pellumb  Kaci  (dated  7  to
   December 2010) and this section has also           been left blank on the
   death certificate of Nuri Kaci (dated 3rd May 2011).  The            fact
   that this section of these two certificates has been left blank  is  most
   likely an           indication of the fact that this is not a vital piece
   of information for identifying            the deceased.


              The 'cause of death' section on an Albanian death  certificate
   is by far one of the             most controversial sections.  The  cause
   of death is usually recorded by a doctor,              who then issues  a
   'medical  verification  or  death  schedule'.   The  cause  of  death  is
   then recorded on the death certificate. Albania uses the ninth edition of
   the                 International Classification of Diseases  (ICD-9)  to
   record  the  medical  causes  of               death.  According  to  the
   procedures    outlined    in    ICD-9,    the    'causes    of     death'
   should take into account both the primary and secondary causes of  death.
              However, the procedures laid  out  in  ICD-9  are  not  always
   followed  in  Albania,              with  approximately  10%   of   death
   certificates not containing a clear indication of           secondary  or
   external causes of death.


   180.  Mr  Korovalis  opines  that  the  fact  certain  sections  of  the
        certificate had not been completed, such  as  place  of  residence,
        should not  be  taken  as  a  significant  omission  on  the  death
        certificate as the absence of information as to the cause of  death
        may simply reflect the fact that the cause of death is unclear, for
        example, if there is  uncertainty  of  the  primary  and  secondary
        causes of death.


   181. The report also refers to the fact there are two death certificates
        for Pellumb one issued  in  2011  and  one  in  2013  by  the  same
        authority in Albania. The expert refers  to  possible  explanations
        for the differences in the two documents but, as he rightly states,
        he cannot assume the role of the decision maker which is  a  matter
        for the Tribunal. The expert  does,  however,  refer  to  the  fact
        failure to record the death on the first certificate may be because
        the primary cause was unclear, it may reflect  the  fact  that  the
        family of the deceased have insisted that the  cause  of  death  is
        either 'modified' or left blank. This in turn could be a reflection
        of petty corruption within the Albanian medical  services  although
        it is difficult to be  certain  about  the  extent  to  which  this
        particular process is subjected to corrupt practices.


   182. Under the heading "specific questions relating  to  this  case"  Dr
        Korovilas states he has examined the death  certificates  of  Teuta
        Burelli and Nuri Kaci. Whether the reference to the former name  is
        an error as the death certificate in dispute  is  that  of  Pellumb
        Kaci is not clear but his conclusion is  that  omissions  from  the
        certificate  should  not  be  taken  to  indicate  that  there  was
        something essentially wrong with the death  certificate.  The  main
        purpose of Albanian death certificates is to confirm that a  person
        is dead and that the identifying information is vital  rather  than
        incidental information such as the  cause  of  death  or  place  of
        residence.


   183. In his oral evidence to the Upper Tribunal Dr  Korovalis  confirmed
        he is an academic and researcher in Economics who has undertaken in
        a lot of work in Albania since 1996.  He  was  asked  by  Mr  Smart
        whether he had seen the second death certificate regarding  Pellumb
        as the report  suggests  the  certificate  seen  relating  to  this
        individual is expressed in the singular although Dr Korovalis could
        not recall off the top of his head  whether  he  had  seen  it.  He
        referred to the bundle he had been sent although he did  understand
        that one certificate had said cause of death was natural causes and
        the other had said nothing.


   184. When asked whether the ICD-9 classification included natural causes
        Dr Korovalis stated he was not sure as he could not  recall.  There
        then followed an exchange between the witness and Mr Smart relating
        to whether the expert had a copy of the death certificate that gave
        the cause of death and whether his impression would  change  if  he
        knew that cardiac arrest was given as  cause  of  death  which  the
        expert  responded  to  by  stating  he  was  asked  to  comment  on
        discrepancies in the certificates and that he could not  recall  if
        copies of the certificates were placed in front of him or not.


   185. In relation to the Albanian health service, Dr Korovilas's evidence
        was that the health service is underfunded and  corrupt  with  some
        officials asking for a fee to provide documents  and  that  it  was
        within the bounds of possibility that pressure could be put  on  an
        official issuing a document.


   186. In relation to the  question  of  whether  family  had  reports  of
        deaths, Dr Korovilas stated the death schedule had to be filled out
        by a doctor who has to put the cause of death. The issue is whether
        there was conflict between primary and secondary cause.  There  was
        the chance the family might want to call a cause of death something
        else which may be an explanation as to why information recorded may
        not be accurate.


   187. Having considered all the available evidence  regarding  the  death
        certificate of Pellumb Kaci we prefer the evidence  emanating  from
        an official source in  Albania  communicated  through  the  British
        Embassy supported by the letter from the Hospital confirming  their
        employment of the doctor who signed the death certificate. There is
        insufficient  evidence  before  us  to   establish   a   reasonable
        likelihood that the completed death certificate recording death  by
        natural causes is not a genuine document. The  weight  of  evidence
        proves it is. We find the Respondent has proved it is evidence that
        can be relied  upon.  The  evidence  supports  the  claim  that  an
        altered/incomplete certificate has been provided with the cause  of
        death removed or  omitted  by  the  Appellant  or  his  family.  Dr
        Korovilas gave evidence that members of a family may have their own
        reasons for not wanting the cause of death recorded which  in  this
        case may be to avoid it being shown that the cause of death was  as
        a result of natural causes and not the alleged blood feud.


   188. The second piece of material documentary evidence is the transcript
        of the judgment of  the  Judicial  District  Court  of  Tirana,  an
        English translation of which appears at page  574  to  580  of  the
        Appellant's first bundle. This records the verdict of a three judge
        Judicial  Panel  delivered  after  the  conclusion  of  a  criminal
        prosecution on 13th May 2003. The defendant is stated to be  Lurjan
        Kaci, the son of Lufti Kaci, born in 1980 and a resident in Kamez a
        district of Tirana. It is recorded that Lujan was tried  whilst  he
        was 'on custody' from  11/10/2002  and  sentenced  through  a  fast
        judicial process.


   189. The charges  are  stated  to  be  premeditated  murder/first-degree
        murder and illegal possession of a firearm. It is noted at the  end
        of the hearing the Court heard the Prosecutor's case who asked  for
        (a) the  defendants  to  be  found  guilty  of  the  penal  act  of
        premeditated murder/first-degree  murder  in  accordance  with  the
        relevant article of the  Albanian  Penal  Code  and  (b)  that  the
        defendant be found guilty of the penal act of illegal possession of
        a firearm and given a one-year jail sentence.


   190. It is noted in the judgement that  on  the  27  December  2001  the
        Judicial District Court of Tirana heard the case in the defendant's
        absence, found him guilty, and sentenced him  to  a  25  year  jail
        sentence. The Court of Appeal Tirana ruled on 19 June 2002  against
        the decision of the District Court and  remitted  the  case  for  a
        retrial to be heard by different Judging Panel. During the  retrial
        process the  defendant  was  arrested  and  the  court  proceedings
        carried out in his presence.


   191. On 18 April  2003,  following  the  request  of  the  defence,  the
        defendant underwent a psychiatric examination  in  accordance  with
        the legal medical Article 50 which showed:


              1.  The defendant, Lurjan Kaci, shows  the  present  signs  of
   remission of                 schizophrenia (no complete recovery).
              2.  The defendant carried out his  act  under  reduced  mental
   equilibrium                   in  circumstances   of   psychopathological
   disorder as above.
              3.  The defendant is accountable in front of the law  for  the
   act he                       committed.


   192. The judicial review of the case is said to show  that  on  27  July
        2001 the defendant Lujan Kaci killed  with  a  firearm  the  victim
        Ritvan Burelli. Immediately after that the defendant left the scene
        and also the machine gun with which he carried out the murder.  The
        defendant admits that he  committed  the  murder  but  rejects  the
        Prosecution's claim that the murder was carried out for blood  feud
        motives. He claims that he carried out the murder under an  instant
        strong shock, which was caused by the victim's insults towards  the
        defendant.


   193. The judgment of the court is recorded in the following terms:


              The victim, Ritvan Burelli,  was  married  to  the  defendants
   sister, Teuta Kaci, and               they had a child.


              In 1995, the victim, Ritvan  Burelli,  killed  his  spouse  in
   ........ (illegible).


              For this reason, the defendant's family  forgave  the  victim,
   Ritvan Burelli.  Based           on this and in compliance with the rules
   of Article 284/1 of the Code of Penal               Procedure  (prior  to
   the   amendment   -   Article   8813    dated    13/06/2002)    it    was
   decided to drop the charges against the victim, Ritvan Burelli.


              After this incident, the friendship between the  two  families
   remained at the same             level as before by visiting  each  other
   and both families maintaining normal               relationships with the
   child.


              In 1997, the victim, Ritvan Burelli, got  married  to  a  girl
   from  Lura,  the  same               village  where  the   defendant   is
   originally from.


              After the second marriage the  victim  started  to  cut  every
   contact with the                 defendant's family.  He  aggravated  the
   relationship to the point of not  allowing               the  defendant's
   family to meet their grand daughter.


              After this situation caused by  the  victim,  Ritvan  Burelli,
   heated exchanges took            place often between the latter  one  and
   the defendant, because of the child. As             mentioned  above  the
   victim  refused  to  allow   the   defendant's   family   to   meet   the
   child.


              After this  situation  the  victim  continued  to  insult  the
   defendant constantly even             by saying that the  defendant  will
   have the same fate as his sister.


              According to the witness, Lufti Kaci, in  some  occasions  the
   defendant fought             against the victim and every time the  cause
   of the fight was the defendant's niece             and not  his  sister's
   death.


              Being under continuous provocation of the victim, who insulted
   and threatened               constantly to kill the defendant, he decided
   to commit the murder of the victim,           Ritvan Burelli.


              On the day of  the  incident,  the  defendant  left  his  home
   holding the bag where he              held his machine gun.


              At the village Laknas' stop (taxi stand) the defendant got  on
   as a passenger in a              taxi (minivan type) towards  Kamez.  The
   taxi belongs to Muharrem Peposhi.


              After driving for a while, the victim  and  a  friend  of  his
   appeared and wanted to           get on the taxi where the defendant was.


              When the defendant saw the victim, he told the driver to  stop
   the car and shot             twice towards the victim.  After  this,  the
   defendant came back to get on the taxi,            but the witness driver
   did not let him  in.  The  defendant,  shot  another  spray            of
   bullets towards the victim, left the machine gun at the  scene  and  flee
   away           from the scene.


   194. The Court in their  findings  rejected  the  defendant's  claim  of
        murder under a strong shock of psychic state  and  found  that  the
        murder  committed  by  the  defendant   must   be   classified   as
        premeditated murder.  In relation to  the  blood  feud  motive  the
        Court found as follows:


              The court does not accept the blood feud motive,  because  the
   murder of               defendant's sister by the victim is considered  a
   closed matter from the                defendant's family as well  as  the
   victim's family, legal point of view and  canon               law,  facts
   which were also accepted by the Prosecution Services.


              Another convincing evidence  for  the  Court  is  the  witness
   statement of Lufti Kaci,               who  categorically  dismisses  the
   blood feud  motive  in  the  murder  of  victim                    Ritvan
   Burelli by the defendant.


              This statement becomes convincing for the Court,  because,  as
   it was explained             above, the two  families  had  closed  blood
   feud matter.


              Another argument for the Court is the fact that  the  starting
   point of aggravated              relationship between  the  two  families
   has  been  the  victim's  second   marriage   and                worsened
   relationship  with  the  child,  who  is  defendant's  niece.  This  fact
     dismisses the blood feud motive.


              The circumstances explained above dismiss.... (illegible)  and
   also the blood feud              motive for the murder, a motive which is
   required under Article 78/2 of the            Penal Code.


              The fact to be accepted is that the defendant acted in revenge
   against the victim.              However, in this case the motive must be
   considered as  a  weak  motive  guided  by               the  defendant's
   patriarchalism,    because    the    defendant,    insulted    by     the
   provocative and teasing behaviour of victim, decided to kill  the  victim
   to fulfil           his aim.


   195. The conviction of premeditated murder by weak motive is the verdict
        entered. The Court took into account the fact  Lurjan  carried  out
        the crime in the  state  of  psychiatric  disorder  caused  by  his
        illness as stated in the legal medical expert report together  with
        attenuating circumstances and handed down a sentence  of  15  years
        jail with a one third reduction of first-degree murder and  a  jail
        sentence of one year for the conviction of the  illegal  possession
        of a firearm.


   196. The transcript also notes that an appeal was launched  against  the
        ruling and the documents sent to the Court of Appeal who decided to
        uphold the District Court  ruling.  The  document  does  not  state
        whether it was the Prosecution or defendant who appeal.


   197. What is of particular note in the transcript is the finding of  the
        Court that:


              The court does not accept the blood feud motive,  because  the
   murder of               defendant's sister by the victim is considered  a
   closed matter from the                defendant's family as well  as  the
   victim's family, legal point of view and  canon               law,  facts
   which were also accepted by the Prosecution Services.


   198. The evidence of the Appellant, Mr Coka and Mr Marku  was  that  the
        killing was a blood feud killing and  that  there  had  never  been
        reconciliation for the killing of Teuta Kaci.  Not  only  does  the
        evidence accepted by the Court show that  killing  was  reconciled,
        this is a finding based upon not only the evidence of Lufti Kaci as
        suggested by Mr Marku given as a means  to  mitigating  the  impact
        upon his son of the offence, but also from Ritvan's family who must
        have  been  contacted  or  spoken  to  during  the  course  of  the
        investigation. This fact  was  also  accepted  by  the  Prosecutors
        office that would  have  had  access  to  the  evidence  from  both
        families.


   199. In relation to Nuri Kaci,  there  is  within  the  bundle  a  press
        article dated  27th  April  2011  from  the  Municipality  of  Lura
        recording that the Debar police arrested Ersjon Hoti, 19, the  main
        suspect for the murder of 32 year old Nuir Kaci:


          "The event occurred in the Debat Lura, two days ago after a  fight
   occurred in the              forests of lures.  19 years old  accused  of
   crime committed in conjunction with other           citizen  Faslli  Hoti
   and other persons.


          Police announced yesterday that two people were escorted by police
   officers Bishop.  It         was originally cast doubt that the murder of
   Kaci is performed by 30 year-old, Faslli      Hoti,  while  the  latter's
   injury  was  interpreted  as  the  event  happened  by  the   victim   or
   veteplagosje


          Yesterday, the investigative group has laid strong suspicion  that
   other people are        involved in the murder of 32 years old.  Reserved
   information sources claim this was        followed at dawn  yesterday  R.
   Hoti, 28, Hoti Fallsi brother and his cousin,  A,  Hoti,  26        years
   old.


          The disappearance of the crime weapon,  which  killed  Nuri  Kaci,
   raises  suspicion  that         other  people  were  involved  in   armed
   conflict.


   200. A further news article is headed "Murder in  Diber  after  conflict
        for wooden material". The article records the death  of  Nuri  Kaci
        and injuries to Fasil Hoti following a dispute that began 6  months
        earlier over the cutting of wood on the mountain and of Fasli  Hoti
        demanding payment from Nuri Kaci for the cutting of wood he claimed
        was his. A confrontation occurred during which guns were drawn  and
        Nuri Kaci killed. The police attended  and  seized  guns  and  made
        arrests.


   201. The material available does not support the claim this was a  blood
        feud killing or, as alleged by Mr Marku, a joint enterprise between
        the Burelli and Hoti clan. It is an act of criminality.


   Country information


   202. The Secretary of State also seeks to rely upon a recent publication
        entitled  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Albania:  that   was
        published in 2014 setting out guidance to caseworkers  in  relation
        to the issue of blood feuds a copy of which is to be found  in  the
        trial bundle as are other articles produced by the  Appellant,  the
        majority of which  relate  to  the  existence  of  blood  feuds  in
        Albania.


   203. This tribunal is not,  however,  intending  to  produce  a  country
        guidance case relating to the existence of blood feuds  in  Albania
        as that is not a specific issue in the appeal and the  hearing  has
        not been case managed for such purpose.  The Upper Tribunal  intend
        to produce such a  decision  in  light  of  the  reduction  in  the
        frequency  of  blood  feuds  and  improvements  in  sufficiency  of
        protection in Albania enabling it to revisit  the  findings  in  EH
        (Albania) which was decided in 2012, in due course.


   204. Within the Respondent's documents is a copy of a  letter  from  the
        British Embassy in Tirana dated  12  June  2014  in  the  following
        terms:


              The British Embassy through RALON colleagues based in  Tirana,
   routinely           monitor trends in the basis for asylum claims in  the
   UK.  Involvement in a blood           feud is cited  by  Albanian  asylum
   seekers in the UK in a significant number of           cases. In January,
   an  intensive  Embassy  fact  finding   a   visit   to   the   North   of
   Albania sought to assess  the  real  extent  of  the  problem,  including
   meetings with           NGO's, faith  groups,  mayors,  prefects,  police
   chiefs, and prosecutors in three              towns at the centre of  the
   regions responsible for the bulk of blood  feud  based             asylum
   claims: Shkoder, Lezhe, and Kukes.


              There are three main problems in tackling the blood feud:  (a)
   the problem of               defining what blood feud is, (b) the lack of
   objective information, and (c) the            vested interests  attaching
   themselves to the phenomena. The field  visit  team            reached  a
   number  of  conclusions  based  on  common  messages  from   nearly   all
   interlocutors, including NGOs and faith groups.


              Definition of "Kanun" based blood feud


              Definition of blood feud  is  a  problem:  the  term  is  used
   loosely in most cases.           Blood feud is a long-term process guided
   by a series of  ancient  and  written  rules            setting  out  the
   boundaries  of  'taking  blood'.   For  example  in   traditional   blood
   feud, women and children are exempt. Traditional blood feud even  allowed
   the            killer to attend his  victim's  funeral.  But  modern  day
   criminality and revenge is            just that, paying  little  heed  to
   the   principles   of   the   "Kanun",   except   for   the    fact    of
   retribution.  The definition of blood feud presents a problem exasperated
   by the              trade in so-called "blood  feud  certificates".   The
   number of asylum claimants at             UK borders citing  blood  feuds
   is far greater than would be likely from those               affected  by
   genuine  blood  feud.  Interlocutors  both  official  and  NGO   suggests
   that genuine victims of the practice would not be  able  to  leave  their
   homes, let              alone across the continent.


              Decline of "Kanun" and the establishment of rule of law


              According to local authorities,  and  faith-based  NGOs,  this
   lack of objective                information on blood feud is exacerbated
   by some NGOs with an interest in              exaggerating the extent  of
   the     problem     for      their      own      purposes,      including
   perpetuating the significance of "Kanun" in modern Albania.  Blood  feuds
   were           driven by culturally understood rules  from  15th  century
   Coda ("Kanun"), the              provisions  of  which  were  transmitted
   orally through the generations.  Blood  feud             usually  started
   with  a  dispute  between  families  which  escalates  to  a   fight   in
   which someone is killed. The victim's family then felt  that  "blood  was
   owed" and           honour could only be restored by the taking of a life
   of a member of the killer's           family. "Kanun" more generally  was
   a way  for  inhabitants  of  remote  settlements             to  organise
   themselves in the absence of a functioning state and  rule  of  law.  The
     phenomenon was stamped out during the  regime  of  the  dictator  Enver
   Hoxha,              when penalties for feuding families were  harsh.  But
   the collapse of the regime in             the early 1990s,  and  the  law
   enforcement vacuum left in remote areas of the              North by  the
   absence of a functioning  state,  left  space  for  revenge  killings  to
   reassert themselves. "Kanun" law no longer predominates. Since the  1990s
   the            state has established a  functioning  system  of  law  and
   order through local                   policing, prosecutors  and  courts.
   Modern  revenge  killings  bear  little  resemblance              to  the
   codified, almost ceremonial aspects of "Kanun" based blood feud.


              Local authority statistics


              Statistics about the number of people affected by  blood  feud
   vary greatly. At             one end of the scale are certain  NGOs  with
   vested interests in inflated numbers,              who  claim  that  more
   than  1000  families  are  affected.   At  the  other  end,  local  units
   of  the  State  Police  tend  to  estimate  the  lowest  numbers.    Most
   interlocutors,                   including from the NGO  groups  we  met,
   suggested that  the  figure  of  local                  prosecutors  were
   likely  to  be  the  most  accurate.  These  figures   are   toward   the
   lower end of the spectrum, slightly higher than police records,  but  far
   lower than               some  of  the  more  outlandish  NGO  estimates.
   Prosecutors, we were  told,  have            the  most  accurate  numbers
   because any judgment  issued  by  an  Albanian  court             can  be
   verified through  the  Prosecutor  General.   Regional  prosecutors  have
     access to this information. Indeed,  the  prosecutor  for  the  Shkoder
   district offered             to share such data with the UK agencies. The
   range of figures for each region are          as  follows:  Lezhe  region
   (mayor   and   prefect),   50-75   families   comprising   up   to    390
   people, whereas the police said the  families  were  more  likely  to  be
   involved in              "general  fighting"  rather  than  any  activity
   related to " blood feud" and that only             nine  of  those  could
   genuinely be classified as blood feud; Shkoder (prosecutor            and
   police director), 60 families comprising 145 people; in Kukes the  Deputy
          Mayor claimed only one family in the city, but the police  claimed
   zero. The Chair              of the Regional Council claimed  up  to  180
   families  across   Kukes   region.   All                    interlocutors
   suggested  that  the  incidence  of  blood  feud  is  sharply   declining
   (except  for  one  contact,  widely  suspected  of  selling  blood   feud
   certificates, and            with a political  interest  in  exaggerating
   crime levels).


              Local authority support


              Despite the declining trend,  local  authorities  are  active.
   Police  and  criminal                    justice  system  representatives
   monitor, record, and provide  a  degree  of                protection  to
   affected  families.  The   authorities   also   prosecute   perpetrators.
      Municipalities,  while  facing  budgetary  constraints,  offer  social
   service  support,              home  schooling  and   medical/psychiatric
   assistance  to  victims  of  blood  feud.                 Faith   groups,
   especially the  Catholic  Church  and  local  mosques,  cooperate  inter-
   denominationally in an effort to address the problem with work to support
                  affected families, and reconciling conflicts.


              Vested interests


              Vested interests and criminality play a key role in  inflating
   the sense of the scale           of the phenomenon. The  Albanian  press,
   hungry for sensation, report murders as            blood  feud,  even  in
   cases    of    straightforward    gangland    murders.     Some     local
   journalists have reportedly accepted money to report a murder as a  blood
   feud in             order that family members might then use the invented
   blood feud in an asylum               bid.  Others have simply invented a
   story, without a dispute having taken place,           for the benefit of
   two   families'   immigration   plans.    Corrupt    NGOs    and    local
   officials also blur definitions.   Fake  "blood  feud"  certificates  are
   easily available              for  a  price  from  both  NGOs  and  local
   officials.  The  Albanian  government  no              longer  recognises
   blood    feud    "certificates"    from    NGOs,    police    or    local
   government offices.  In discussions other NGOs advised us not  to  extend
   asylum              to claimants as this would, in  genuine  cases,  only
   exacerbate the situation for              relatives remaining in Albania.
   The only real solution is reconciliation of  the              parties  in
   Albania.


              Actions to mitigate false blood feud claims


              There are a number of  future  possible  actions  to  mitigate
   false blood feud claims.
              Any Albanian  court  judgment  can  be  verified  through  the
   Prosecutor General's             office in Tirana as  the  most  reliable
   way of determining a claim. RALON in               Tirana is  also  in  a
   position    to    respond    to    queries    from    the    UK    asylum
   caseworkers via a newly  introduced  referral  process.  In  cases  where
   claimants           are not subject to state persecution (as would be the
   case in all " blood feud"             claims)  local  checks  can  verify
   names and ages of claimants, thereby mitigating             another trend
   of false claims coupled with false identities.


              Declining trend


              The  visit  confirmed  a  generally  declining  trend  in  the
   incidence of genuine blood            feud in Albania. Modern blood  feud
   is very limited, and a few cases can really  be               defined  as
   such, many either being fraudulently  invented  cases,  or  simply  cases
     of common  criminality  and  revenge.  Conversations  with  almost  all
   interlocutors            highlighted  that  reference   to   blood   feud
   "certificates" either produced by NGOs             or by local  officials
   was largely pointless. Other embassies in Tirana take the            same
   view.


              Recent government action


              Since the field visit, the government, which came to office in
   September 2013, has              further stepped  up  efforts  to  tackle
   blood feud, including issuing  revised                   instructions  to
   local police services  and  further  toughening  sentences  to  offenders
   through amendments to the Albanian Criminal Code.  The Albanian  Criminal
          Code was reinforced during 2014 to provide for  stiffer  penalties
   for those               convicted of blood feud  killings  of  up  to  30
   years imprisonment.  The                      government has  also  taken
   steps    to    tackle    the    problem    of     fake     blood     feud
   certificates and documentation. A number  of  arrests  have  taken  place
   during              2014.


              Note of earlier Country Information Guidance


              Previous country information guidance on blood feud in Albania
   cited a 2002            NGO report in which it was claimed that "most  of
   the houses in Northern                Albania look like fortresses  built
   of stone, with  small  apertures  serving  as                    windows.
   Even  to  date  many  Albanians  shut  themselves  inside  their   houses
   where they remain isolated  for  life  in  order  to  escape  from  blood
   vengeance".             This is simply not  true.  Embassy  staff  travel
   widely to all parts of Albania. Most          towns in  Northern  Albania
   are  bustling  provincial  centres  with  no  sign  that            "many
   Albanians shut themselves in for life".  The passage bears no relation to
              reality and is misleading. There remain a small number of such
   towers, but these            are historical relics.


   Country guidance case law


   205. The current applicable country guidance case is that of  EH  (blood
        feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC)  in  which  the  Tribunal
        held:


              (i)      While there remain a number of active blood feuds  in
   Albania, they                are few and declining.  There  are  a  small
   number of deaths annually                 arising from those feuds and  a
   small number  of  adults  and  children                 living  in  self-
   confinement  for  protection.  Government   programs                   to
   educate  self-confined  children  exist  but  very   few   children   are
   involved in them;


              (ii)     The  existence  of  a  'modern  blood  feud'  is  not
   established: Kanun               blood feuds have always allowed for  the
   possibility of pre-emptive                killing by a dominant clan;


              (iii)    The Albanian state has taken steps to  improve  state
   protection, but  in                areas  where  Kanun  law  predominates
   (particularly in northern                     Albania) those steps do not
   yet provide sufficiency of protection                  from Kanun-related
   blood-taking if an  active  feud  exists  and  affects                the
   individual claimant. Internal relocation  to  an  area  of  Albania  less
      dependent  on   the   Kanun   may   provide   sufficient   protection,
     depending on  the  reach,  influence,  and  commitment  to  prosecution
     of the feud by the aggressor clan


               (iv)       International   protection   under   the   Refugee
   Convention, Qualification                 Directive or Articles 2  and  3
   ECHR is not available to an appellant                  who is willing and
   intends to commit a  revenge  killing  on  return  to                 his
   country of origin, by reference to that intention


              (v)      Where there is an active feud affecting an individual
   and self-                    confinement is the only option, that  person
   will normally qualify for                 Refugee status


              (vi)     In determining whether an active blood  feud  exists,
   the  fact-finding                  Tribunal  should  consider:  (a)   the
   history  of  the  alleged   feud,                         including   the
   notoriety   of   the   original    killings,    the    numbers    killed,
   and  the  degree  of  commitment  by  the  aggressor  clan   toward   the
   prosecution of the feud;(b) the length of time since the last  death  and
          the relationship of the last person killed  to  the  appellant;(c)
   the                     ability of  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  to
   locate the appellant if                   returned  to  another  part  of
   Albania; and(d) the past and likely future                   attitude  of
   the  police  and   other   authorities   towards   the   feud   and   the
   protection of the family of the person claiming to be at risk,  including
              any past attempts  to  seek  prosecution  of  members  of  the
   aggressor               clan, or to seek  protection  from  the  Albanian
   authorities;


              (vii)    In order to establish that there is an  active  blood
   feud affecting him               personally, an  appellant  must  produce
   satisfactory individual                       evidence of  its  existence
   in relation to him.  In  particular,  the                       appellant
   must  establish:  (a)  his  profile  as  a  potential   target   of   the
   feud identified and which family carried out  the  most  recent  killing;
          and(b) whether the appellant has been, or  other  members  of  his
              family have been, or are currently, in self-confinement within
                       Albania;


              (viii)  Attestation  letters  from  Albanian  non-governmental
   organisations                 should  not  in  general  be  regarded   as
   reliable evidence of the                      existence of a feud;


              (ix)      Documents  originating  from  the  Albanian  courts,
   police or                    prosecution service, if genuine, may  assist
   in establishing the                       existence of a  blood  feud  at
   the date of the document relied  upon,                   subject  to  the
   test  of  reliability  set  out   in   A   v   SSHD   (Pakistan)   [2002]
   UKIAT 00439, [2002] Imm A R 318 (Tanveer Ahmed)


              (x) Unless factual,  prompt  and  consistent,  Albanian  press
   reports will                  add  little  or  no  evidential  weight  in
   considering whether a feud exist;


              (xi)     Whether the feud continues and what the  attitude  of
   the aggressor                clan to  its  pursuit  may  be  will  remain
   questions of fact to be                        determined  by  the  fact-
   finding Tribunal.


   206. Four reports written by Antonia  Young  have  been  considered.  Dr
        Young did not give oral evidence to the Tribunal  having  indicated
        in an e-mail dated 23rd July 2013 that she was having  to  withdraw
        from the case indefinitely due to health and  family  reasons.  Her
        evidence has therefore not been tested through cross-examination.


   207. The first report dated 24th May 2013 sets  out  background  country
        information relating to Albania from 1990  to  the  present,  blood
        feuds and the law, CNR Mr Marku and  reconciliation  organisations,
        and the police and healthcare which are not  specifically  relevant
        to the issues under consideration. It is not disputed  there  is  a
        history of blood feuds in Albania and the personal defence of  Gjin
        Marku by Antonio Young is not the purpose of the report. It is also
        the case that  these  reports,  dated  18th  September  2011,  26th
        November 2011, 24th May 2013 and May 2007  have  not  been  written
        with the expert  having  the  benefit  of  the  more  comprehensive
        evidence that has been made available to this Tribunal.


   208. We accept that weight may be placed upon such reports  in  relation
        to the historical aspects of blood feuds but not in relation to the
        current situation or the specific  issue  of  whether  there  is  a
        genuine subsisting blood feud between the Kaci and Burelli or  Hoti
        families or the circumstances in which Pellumb Kaci died.


   209. The report by Robert Chenciner refers to the Appellant having  told
        his solicitors that his bother Pellumb was severely  wounded  in  a
        feud and is currently hospitalised in Albania which is contrary  to
        Mr Kaci's evidence  that  he  did  not  know  about  his  brother's
        situation. It is also illustrative  of  the  incorrect  information
        provided by Mr Kaci in relation to his matter which some may see as
        an attempted manipulation of the evidence to support the blood feud
        claim. This report is dated 6th October 2010  and  again  has  been
        written without reference to all available material.



Discussion



   210. This is not an appeal in which there is any agreement  between  the
        parties in relation to the key issue of  whether  there  exists  in
        Albania an active blood feud in relation to which the blood debt is
        against the Kaci family which will result in a  real  risk  to  the
        appellant of ill treatment  or  his  being  killed  in  Albania  if
        deported.  The issue is not the existence of blood feuds per se  in
        Albania or the risk arising from the same but the specific  claimed
        threat sufficient to engage Article 3.


   211. It is not a requirement  for  blood  to  be  spilt  in  every  case
        involving the Kanun, even though Mr Marku makes reference  to  this
        on more than one  occasion,  as  any  dispute  can  be  settled  by
        reconciliation according  to  the  same  code  hence  removing  any
        obligation to 'take blood'.


   212.  Mr  Pretzel  referred  in  his   submissions   to   the   previous
        determinations  of  Judge's  Cox  and  Andrew  and  the  persuasive
        findings arsing from the  same  although,  as  stated  above,  such
        determinations  are  not  binding  upon  us  under  the  Devaseelan
        principles.


   213. Adjudicator Mrs C Lloyd on 3rd August 2004 found the  Appellant  to
        be capable of deceit on a large scale but accepted the  account  of
        his sister's death and her husband's subsequent death at the  hands
        of his family members. It was not found, however,  that  any  other
        person in the family had been killed and found on the basis of  the
        country information that the UN Convention was not engaged and that
        if risk did exist there was an internal  relocation  option  and  a
        sufficiency  of  protection  available  from  the  authorities   in
        Albania.


   214. Professor John Ritson in a determination dated 4th February 2004 of
        the Appellant's sister Mimosa Bajrami (AKA: Mimosa Kaci) found  her
        to be "quite unscrupulously  prepared  to  lie  to  an  Immigration
        Officer, to a medical practitioner, with the result that I  do  not
        consider that she would have any scruples about lying at the appeal
        hearing.  I  had  not  the  slightest  confidence  in  any  of  her
        evidence".  Mimosa Bajrami had originally made a false asylum claim
        as a Kosovan, which she later changed to being an Albanian,  having
        given a Dr Brown an account that was entirely untrue but in such  a
        convincing manner the doctor produced a report suggesting  she  was
        suffering from PTSD, and claiming to be at  risk  on  return  as  a
        result of her political activities as  a  member  of  her  Legality
        Movement Party, which was without merit, and a claim to be at  risk
        as a result of a blood feud. In paragraph 7  of  his  determination
        Professor Ritson found:


              "The appellant claims that she fears a return to  Albania  due
   to the existence of a            blood feud. Her evidence in this  regard
   is extremely confused. She states that this            blood  feud  began
   in  1995  when  her  sister  was  killed  by  her   husband.   She   then
   states that she does not know why her sister was killed by  her  husband.
   She            alleges but here is  not  evidence  in  support  that  her
   father's brother subsequently             paid someone to kill  the  dead
   sister's husband that she and her children would             be  targeted
   if returned to Albania as part of the blood  feud.   Her  three  brothers
     could not be targeted she says as one of them is in prison,  the  other
   is in the           United Kingdom and the third has whereabouts unknown.
    Since the appellant              had  no  explanation  for  the  initial
   killing and no  evidence  of  her  being  targeted,               has  no
   explanation for her father who  is  still  alive  in  Albania  not  being
   targeted, I             do not believe the evidence in  this  regard.   I
   could not exclude the possibility  that              she  had  introduced
   this evidence into her appeal for self-serving reasons."


   215. The material now available suggests the cause  of  death  of  Teuta
        Kaci, who was killed in 1995, was known to the family,  that  there
        was no evidence of Mimosa being targeted, and that Lurjan Kaci  was
        known to have carried out the killing as he was  convicted  in  his
        absence in 2001 and arrested in 2002  together  with  Lindita.  The
        scenario is not that the killing was by someone hired by the uncle.


   216. The determination of Judge Cox, promulgated in June 2007 considered
        the appeal of this Appellant's father, Mr  Lufti  Kaci.  Judge  Cox
        noted Lufti Kaci's case as  set  out  in  his  screening  interview
        record, statement of evidence form and asylum interview record held
        on 4  November  2004  in  paragraph  9  of  his  determination.  By
        assessing the various elements of the account, which were stated to
        relate solely to Lufti Kaci, Judge Cox noted that  it  was  claimed
        before him that Lufti Kaci encountered problems in Albania  due  to
        his daughter being killed by her husband on 29 April 1995 when  she
        was shot in the neck by a weapon used for hunting.


   217. Lufti Kaci told Judge Cox that his daughter's murder  was  reported
        to the police and her husband only punished for six months and that
        such limited punishment was  given  because  he  carried  a  weapon
        illegally and that he was not punished for the  murder  because  he
        just said that he killed her accidentally. The  evidence  available
        to this Tribunal contained in the  transcript  of  the  proceedings
        before the District Court of Tirana, in  which  Lufti  Kaci  was  a
        witness for his son,  the  defendant,  shows  that  such  statement
        misrepresents the actual situation.


   218. Similarly, Judge Cox was advised by Lufti Kaci that on 22 July 2001
        Ritvan was killed although he was unaware of  who  killed  him  and
        that he was shot with a Kalashnikov. Judge  Cox  was  advised  that
        Lindita and Lurjan had been accused of Ritvan's murder but  without
        any evidence because "this is the communists they need money.  This
        is justice from the communist system". Lufti Kaci  claimed  it  was
        possible that his brothers were responsible for Ritvan's death  but
        not him or his children. This account is undermined by the evidence
        given to the District Court. Those proceedings took place  in  2003
        with judgment being delivered on 13 May 2003 which  shows  that  at
        the date the evidence was given in its written form as part of  the
        asylum claim or before Judge Cox orally, Lufti Kaci would have been
        fully aware of the cause of death, that his son was responsible for
        the killing, and that the District Court had found this was  not  a
        blood feud related killing but that of premeditated murder.


   219. The claim before Judge Cox that after the  arrest  of  Lindita  and
        Lurjan people came to Lufti's house and shot at  it  (five  or  six
        months after the arrest) although each occasion he was not at home,
        is not substantiated by reliable evidence from other sources in the
        determination.


   220. Judge Cox also  noted  in  paragraph  16  difficulty  in  terms  of
        credibility in  the  case  lying  in  certain  inconsistencies  and
        implausibilities of the appellant's  account,  including  the  fact
        that despite the conviction  of  his  son  and  daughter  and  what
        appeared to  be  an  acknowledgement  in  the  2002  reconciliation
        agreement, the constant suggestion that those accused were  wrongly
        accused and innocent. It was also noted in asylum interview that he
        claimed he had never been arrested but in a witness statement of 14
        July 2007 and in oral testimony claimed to have  been  arrested  on
        many occasions but also to have given a  fairly  vivid  account  of
        having been ill treated by the police in  custody,  which  is  also
        combined with a statement in a witness statement that  Lindita  was
        released under conditions of house arrest after 30 days due to lack
        of evidence when it emerged at the  hearing  that  her  release  to
        house arrest was in fact a means of  serving  the  balance  of  her
        eight years sentence.  Judge  Cox  also  noted  delay  in  claiming
        asylum and found that the establishment of  the  three  core  facts
        were not undermined by  such  discrepancies.  Judge  Cox  chose  to
        categorise Lufti Kaci's difficulties as representing his being in a
        form of denial.


   221.  The  next  relevant  determination  is  that  of  Judge   Andrew's
        promulgated on 13 December 2011 which  related  to  the  appeal  of
        Jetmira Kaci and Mr  Domi.  Judge  Andrew  took  into  account  the
        findings of Judge Cox and records at paragraph 41 the  evidence  of
        the appellants before her that the blood feud  continues  and  that
        they similarly would be at risk on return. It is also  recorded  at
        paragraph 42 that:


              "the first appellant claims that since her return  to  Albania
   she has been in hiding,               helped by her  father's  friend  to
   move to other addresses on frequent  occasions.               She  claims
   that it is because she has continued to move  with  this  frequency  that
     she has not become a victim of the blood feud "


   222. Jetmira Kaci is in the United Kingdom but did not come before  this
        Tribunal to give oral evidence to support her brother.  That  is  a
        matter for her, but this Tribunal can only make  a  decision  based
        upon the evidence that is made available.


   223. Although this is not an appeal against Judge Andrew's decision  the
        Upper Tribunal has received far more evidence than was available to
        the First-tier Tribunals which  cast  significant  doubt  upon  the
        credibility of the evidence that the earlier tribunals were  given.
        In relation to the claim Jetmira needed to remain  in  hiding,  set
        out in paragraph 42, Judge Andrew herself noted that this claim was
        contradicted by Jetmira's own evidence. In paragraph 3 it is  noted
        by the Judge that in her VAF of 16 December 2008  Jetmira  gave  an
        address in Albania that she claimed she had lived at for two  years
        and seven months which was inconsistent with the claim to have been
        moving around all the time for her personal protection.


   224. As stated above, Judge Andrew  found  herself  satisfied  that  the
        blood feud continued as a result of (a) the killing of Pellumb Kaci
        on 29 November 2010 and (b) the killing of  the  first  appellant's
        nephew Nuri Kaci on 25 April  2011.  We  comment  further  on  both
        issues below.


   225. The Secretary of State's position appears to have been  that  there
        may have been a blood feud between the Burelli and Kaci  clans  but
        that this did not continue past the conviction of Lurjan Kaci. That
        was a position established prior to the disclosure  for  the  first
        time in these proceedings of the transcript of the  District  Court
        judgment and other relevant evidence.


   226. No basis has been established in these proceedings to go behind the
        decision of the Judicial Panel in Albania in which Judges  of  that
        Court not only heard evidence but also were upheld on appeal. It is
        also a hearing that was ordered to take place following Lurjan Kaci
        being arrested after an  earlier  conviction  in  his  absence  was
        overturned, and in his presence.


   227. We do not accept  that  the  fact  the  transcript  refers  to  the
        prosecution raising the issue of the blood feud means that that was
        the motive for  the  killing.  The  country  material  relating  to
        Albania records changes that  have  been  made  to  that  country's
        criminal code in relation  to  killings  that  may  be  blood  feud
        related, as confirmed by Mr Marku,  which  on  conviction  carry  a
        higher sentence of imprisonment. The prosecution raised this as the
        motive for the killing upon which argument was heard but which  was
        rejected by the court. That transcript however also sheds light  on
        a number of other related matters.


   228. It is not disputed before us that in 1995 Ritvan Burelli killed his
        wife Teuta Kaci with whom he had a child. The fact such a  marriage
        between the two families occurred indicates that good relationships
        must have existed between them. The judgment notes that  the  death
        was not premeditated and what follows thereafter is relevant to the
        question of whether following the killing of Teuta  a  Kanun  blood
        feud arose. The judgment states:


              "for this reason, the defendant's family forgave  the  victim,
   Ritvan Burelli. Based            on this and in compliance with the rules
   of Article 284/1 of the Code of Penal               Procedure  (prior  to
   the amendment - Article 8813 dated 13/06/2002) it  was            decided
   to drop the charges against the victim, Ritvan Burelli


              After this incident, the friendship between the  two  families
   remained the same            level as before by visiting each  other  and
   both families maintaining normal                   relationships with the
   child"


   229. The Appellant before us together with other members of  his  family
        maintained that the killing of Teuta created a blood feud and  that
        despite Lufti Kaci wishing to seek reconciliation other members  of
        his family would not agree nor would the Burelli family.  There  is
        evidence given by members of the National Reconciliation  Committee
        of hostility being directed  towards  the  Kaci  family  by  Ritvan
        unless he was forgiven  by  Teuta's  family  which  appears  to  be
        evidence contrary to this judicial finding. It  also  appears  that
        evidence given by Lufti Kaci to Judge Cox that Ritvan only received
        a six-month period of  imprisonment  because  he  used  an  illegal
        weapon (which on its face sounds illogical) is factually  incorrect
        as he must have known based upon the facts as found and  the  court
        judgment. The reason Ritvan was released from  custody  is  because
        that was the effect of the law in  the  relevant  sections  of  the
        Penal Code in force at that  time  as  a  result  of  Ritvan  being
        forgiven by Teuta's family, based upon the  fact  the  killing  was
        accidental.


   230. Statements have been made that the fact Teuta was shot in the  neck
        with a hunting weapons suggested it was not accidental killing  but
        there is insufficient evidence to corroborate  such  claim  and  it
        appears part of a number of statements of evidence that  have  been
        made to support the claim of an ongoing existing  blood  feud  from
        the killing of Teuta for the purposes of  supporting  the  family's
        claim to be at risk from this point in time.


   231. It is also important to consider the Kanun code. The effect of  the
        forgiveness by the Kaci family  is  that  there  is  thereafter  no
        ongoing blood feud. Having considered the evidence  very  carefully
        it is our primary finding that although Ritvan Burelli killed Teuta
        Kaci this was as a result of accident for which he was forgiven  by
        the family of Teuta Kaci as a  result  of  which  criminal  charges
        against him were dropped and under the terms of the Kanun  Code  no
        blood feud arose. The matter was reconciled.


   232. It is not disputed thereafter that Ritvan  Burelli  was  killed  by
        Lurjan Kaci. The District Court was  specifically  considering  the
        motive for this killing as part of the process of ascertaining  the
        correct sentence to be passed. The fact Lurjan killed Ritvan is not
        disputed although a plea that this event arose as  a  result  of  a
        lack of capacity was rejected by the District Court.


   233. The Court transcript refers to relationships between the  Kaci  and
        Burelli families remaining as before the  killing  of  Teuta  after
        2005 until sometime in 2007 when Ritvan  remarried  and  thereafter
        started to cut contact with the Kaci family including denying  them
        the ability to see their granddaughter. The District Court recorded
        that heated exchanges would often occur as a result  of  the  child
        including threats by Ritvan Burelli to Lurjan Kaci  that  he  would
        have the same fate as his sister. Lurjan's  father  Lufti  Kaci  is
        even noted as having given evidence to  the  effect  that  on  some
        occasions the two men would fight each other.  The same  transcript
        records there being continuous provocation from Ritvan who insulted
        and constantly threatened to kill Lurjan, as a result of  which  he
        decided to commit the murder.


   234. We make a finding of fact based upon the evidence to which we  feel
        greater weight can properly be given that  the  Appellant  has  not
        substantiated his claim that the  killing  of  Ritvan  arose  as  a
        result of an ongoing blood feud. We find the killing  occurred  for
        the reasons set out in the findings section of  the  transcript  of
        the Judicial District Court of Tirana, recording  the  findings  of
        the Panel of three judges who considered all the relevant  evidence
        relating to this aspect of the claim before them.


   235. We make a finding that the claims of acts  of  retribution  by  the
        Burelli family as a result of the killing of Lurjan have  not  been
        substantiated on the evidence before us.


   236. We find the suggestion made by the Appellant and other  members  of
        his family that the killing of Pellumb arose as  a  result  of  the
        ongoing blood feud has not  be  substantiated  and  is  in  fact  a
        further example of an attempt to manipulate a  situation  that  has
        occurred for the purpose of supporting the claim  that  members  of
        the Kaci family are at risk in Albania as a result  of  an  ongoing
        blood feud.


   237. The earlier determinations and particularly that of  Judge  Andrew,
        record that it was known back in 2011 that Pellumb Kaci died on the
        29th November 2010. Attempts by  members  of  the  Kaci  family  to
        suggest this occurred as a result  of  the  blood  feud  show  that
        inaccurate/misleading evidence has been provided for  the  purposes
        of those proceedings and before us.  We also note the denial of the
        Appellant before us and others of responsibility for producing  the
        death certificate from which the cause of death had been omitted is
        implausible.  We prefer the documents provided through the  British
        Embassy in  Tirana,  including  the  copy  of  the  original  death
        certificate issued at the time of death as more  reliable  evidence
        upon which we can attach weight in relation to this element of  the
        case.


   238. It is clear that the evidence regarding Pellumb's  death  emanating
        from the Appellant has been contradictory. The information  in  the
        death certificate shows cause of death as cardiac  arrest  yet  the
        Appellant before us stated he was shot and there  is  reference  in
        the evidence we have referred to above claiming that "the gun would
        never stop shooting". According to Mr Coka, whose evidence  we  are
        asked to put substantial weight upon, he heard Pellumb was  hit  in
        the head/face with an iron bar although then made reference  to  an
        accident.  No medical evidence has been provided to corroborate the
        claim by the Kaci family regarding cause of death and there  is  no
        evidence to show that the description of the body given by Mr  Coka
        could not be as a result of the effect of death by cardiac  arrest,
        even if credible.


   239. Much has been made by the Appellant before us of the account of the
        Burelli family not swearing that they  did  not  kill  Pellumb  but
        there is no admission or oath from them to the effect that they did
        or to show they put the same degree of importance upon the swearing
        of an oath under the Kanun Code as Mr Coka and Mr Marku claim  they
        do. There is insufficient evidence before us to support  the  claim
        that Burelli or any other family were responsible for the death  of
        Pellumb. Their suggestion that  such  finding  should  be  made  by
        inference as a result of a  failure  to  swear  an  oath  does  not
        displace the far stronger and more reliable  evidence  produced  by
        the British Embassy in Tirana. We therefore make a finding of  fact
        that the Appellant has failed to corroborate his claim that Pellumb
        Kaci was killed as a result of an ongoing blood feud.  We  make  no
        such finding as it is our primary finding above that  there  is  no
        such ongoing blood  feud  and,  secondly,  because  the  weight  of
        evidence corroborates a finding that the cause of death was natural
        causes as a result of cardiac arrest.


   240. We find that what we have been presented with is a clear example of
        the type of conduct referred to in the letter from the British High
        Commission of events that have occurred  naturally  within  Albania
        being adopted by individuals in support of claims to be at risk  as
        a result of ongoing blood feuds.


   241. The evidence relating  to  Pellumb  Kaci  also  exposes  a  further
        attempt to mislead the immigration and asylum tribunals.  We  refer
        above to the determination of  Judge  Andrew  and  the  finding  of
        paragraph 42 that Jetmira Kaci  claimed  that  since  returning  to
        Albania she had remained in hiding having  to  move  frequently  to
        avoid becoming a victim of a blood feud. Judge Andrew in  paragraph
        43 noted a discrepancy in her own evidence and such a claim has now
        been shown to be totally without merit.


   242. We have set  out  above  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Albanian
        authorities regarding the procedure for  registering  a  death.  In
        relation to the death of Pellumb his sister Jetmira Kaci  is  named
        as the informant whose residential address is given as what appears
        to be the family home or at a fixed  residential  address.  Jetmira
        would have received a  copy  of  the  completed  death  certificate
        specifying cause of death and could not have been in hiding in fear
        of her life if she was openly engaging in this specific role.  This
        supports our finding that there has been an attempt to  mislead  as
        the family would clearly have been aware of  the  actual  cause  of
        death from this time.


   243. Judge Andrew refers to a further reason for finding that the  blood
        feud continued which related to the killing of a nephew of Jetmira,
        Nuri Kaci.  It is not disputed before us that this event  may  have
        occurred and we have available newspaper articles  indicating  that
        the event occurred as a result of a dispute between the  family  of
        Nuri Kaci and members of the Hoti family regarding the  removal  of
        timber from a local forest. We refer to that evidence above.


   244. The claim that such an event occurred as a  result  of  an  ongoing
        blood  feud  between  the  Kaci  family  and  Hoti  family  is  not
        substantiated. Mr Coka referred to such a feud  occurring  in  1928
        which, as a result of the lack of activity or evidence that it  was
        an ongoing feud, was accepted or  understood  not  to  be  ongoing.
        Killings  relating  to  property  disputes  occur  and  it  is  not
        indicated in the evidence as being a unique  occurrence.   This  is
        also a matter in which the police have become involved and arrested
        those  responsible  indicating  a  sufficiency  of  protection.  As
        stated, we do not find that  the  claim  this  is  evidence  of  an
        ongoing blood feud  has  been  substantiated.  It  is  an  incident
        relating  to  a  specific  course  of  events.  It  has  not   been
        established that the nature of  the  relationship  is  such  as  to
        create a risk for this Appellant on return. There  is  no  evidence
        that the taking of Nuri's life created a blood feud for  which  the
        Appellant before us will have to avenge on return although even  if
        this was the case the case law we have referred to above  makes  it
        clear that it provides no defence to him.


   245. Other conflicts in the evidence include Mr Kaci's claim an oath was
        given whereas Mr Coka stated no oath was given, as mentioned above.
        The assertion of a long-standing blood feud between  the  Kaci  and
        Burelli and Hoti families is undermined by  the marriage of  Ritvan
        and Teuta for if a feud was ongoing as alleged  it  is  not  likely
        marriage would be agreed as it is not said such  marriage  was  one
        made in settlement.


    246. Judge Cox in his determination described this as  being  a  complex
         matter which appeared to give rise to many unanswered questions and
         options.  If this was to be the  case  such  that  the  Appellant's
         claim has not been adequately substantiated it warrants a  decision
         that he has not discharged  burden  of  proof  upon  him,  although
         examination of the evidence  from  all  sources  shows  that  clear
         findings of fact may be made which we have set out above.


    247. As stated above there appears  to  have  been  an  attempt  in  the
         reports of Antonia Young to defend Mr Marku. It is clear  from  the
         evidence given that blood feuds and the organisation of which he is
         Chairman is a very important role in his life.  He  has  created  a
         role which is referred to in a number  of  international  documents
         but criticisms that have been made regarding the  evidence  he  has
         produced, which we have recorded above, give rise to genuine  cause
         for concern as to the reliability of the documentation provided  to
         us or the weight that may be placed upon the same. Our finding that
         it has not been corroborated that the alleged blood feuds exist  is
         based upon a careful consideration of all the  available  evidence.
         Our finding that weight cannot be placed upon the  evidence  of  Mr
         Marku or Mr Coka that we were invited to do during  the  course  of
         submissions arises as a result of balancing the  completing  claims
         and reliability of the information received.


    248. In relation to the core bundle, an analysis of the  data  contained
         therein by reference to the findings we have made  is  attached  as
         Annex A to this determination. We  conclude  that  these  documents
         have been created for the purposes of supporting the claim  such  a
         feud exists and accordingly that little weight may be  placed  upon
         the same as evidence of any ongoing risk for  any  member  of  this
         family. We cannot be satisfied that the documents are  accurate  or
         credible unless stated to be so.


    249.  The  alleged  risk  to  the  Appellant  from  the  uncles  is  not
         substantiated. The source of this claim  is  mainly  the  Appellant
         himself but both he and  family  members  have  been  shown  to  be
         unreliable witnesses. Insufficient evidence was received  to  allow
         us to find this element of the  claim  is  credible  or  created  a
         credible real risk.


    250. We have also noted the claim that the risk to the family  increased
         with the killing of Ritvan. This occurred in 2001 and the  evidence
         shows the Appellant's father returned to Albania in  2004  claiming
         to have attempted to reconcile but without success. The  claim  for
         protection is not based on events that  arose  from  the  death  of
         Ritvan but rather from the death of Teuta Kaci in relation  to  the
         Burelli family and from 1928 in relation to the Hoti family, and an
         ongoing blood feud which we have found not to be a credible claim.


   251. There is no evidence the Burelli family wish to kill  a  member  of
        the Kaci family as the only source of such a claim has  been  shown
        to lack credibility. As no blood feud has been shown to  exist  any
        reaction to the killing of Ritvan will be an act of criminality for
        which no Kanun obligation attaches. Our primary finding is that  no
        risk of this nature has been proved to exist but  if  such  matters
        had arisen, in light of the up  to  date  information  relating  to
        activities by the authorities, it has not been established  that  a
        sufficiency protection does not exist in Albania of which  Mr  Kaci
        could avail himself or that it would be  unreasonable  in  all  the
        circumstances for him to internally relocate  within  Albania  away
        from his home area  if  required.  His  claim  he  could  not  gain
        admission as a member of the Burelli family works at the airport is
        not substantiated or if it is fact that such would enable  such  an
        individual to be aware of  his  return  or  relocation  within  the
        country. A claim there is no place in Albania where  he  could  not
        live safely has not been substantiated.


   252. We find that the Appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proof
        upon him to the required lower standard to show  he  faces  a  real
        risk of ill treatment on return sufficient to engage Article 3 ECHR
        or any of the international protection provisions. He has failed to
        substantiate his claim there is an existing active blood feud.


   253. Article 8 was also raised and has been considered  in  detail.  The
        position in relation  to  automatic  deportation  appeals  and  the
        relevant law was recently reviewed by the Court  of  Appeal  in  YM
        (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292. In  the  lead  judgment  Lord
        Justice Aikens states at paragraphs 15 to 23:


          15. The 2012 Rules were modified by Statement of  Changes  to  the
   Immigration Rules of             10 July 2014 (HC 532)  which  were  laid
   before Parliament on 10 July 2014. I  will  call               these  the
   2014 Rules. I have set out below the relevant 2012 Rules, as  amended  by
   the            2014 Rules. I have put the new 2014 provisions  in  square
   brackets and I have crossed           through the provisions of the  2012
   Rules which are deleted by the 2014 Rules,  in  the            hope  that
   both the 2012 Rules and the 2014 Rules modifications can be plainly seen:


              A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation
      under Part 13 of these Rules,          the claim under Article 8  will
      only succeed where the requirements of these rules as at           [28
      July 2014] are met, regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to
      deport or  the              deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
      served.'
              ...
              397. A deportation order will not  be  made  if  the  person's
      removal pursuant to the order          would be contrary to  the  UK's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention or  the  Human         Rights
      Convention  .  Where  deportation  would  not  be  contrary  to  these
      obligations, it will          only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances
      that the public interest in deportation is outweighed.
              [A.398. These rules apply where:
                   (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
      his deportation would be           contrary to  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations    under    Article    8    of    the     Human     Rights
      Convention;
                   (b) a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
      made against him to be                 revoked.]
              398. Where a person claims that  their  deportation  would  be
      contrary to the UK's               obligations under Article 8 of  the
      Human Rights Convention,  and  (a)  the  deportation  of           the
      person from the UK is conducive to the public good [and in the  public
      interest]            because they have been convicted  of  an  offence
      for which they have been sentenced to       a period  of  imprisonment
      of at least four years; (b) the deportation of  the  person  from  the
      UK is conducive to the  public  good  [and  in  the  public  interest]
      because they have been        convicted of an offence for  which  they
      have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment          of less  than
      4 years but at least 12 months; or (c) the deportation of  the  person
      from the         UK is conducive to the public good [and in the public
      interest] because, in the view of the       Secretary of State,  their
      offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they   are   a   persistent
      offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,  the  Secretary
      of  State  in  assessing          that  claim  will  consider  whether
      paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will        only
      be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the   public   interest   in
      deportation will be           outweighed by other factors [the  public
      interest in deportation will only be outweighed by       other factors
      where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
      described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.]
              399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
      applies if - (a)  the  person  has         a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a child under  the  age  of  18  years  who
      is in the UK and (i) the child is a British citizen; or (ii) the child
      has lived in the UK           continuously  for  at  least  the  seven
      years immediately preceding the date of  the               immigration
      decision; and in either case (a) it would not be reasonable to  expect
      the child        to leave the UK [it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      child to live in the country  to  which  the        person  is  to  be
      deported]; and (b) there is no other family member who is able to care
      for          the child in the UK [it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
      child to remain in the UK  without  the        person  who  is  to  be
      deported];  or  (b)  the  person  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen,
      [or] settled in the UK,       or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
      humanitarian protection, and (i) the person has lived in           the
      UK with valid leave continuously for at least the 15 years immediately
      preceding the        date of the immigration decision (discounting any
      period of imprisonment) and  (ii)  there           are  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside  the  UK
      [(i)         the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
      (deportee) was in the UK lawfully      and  their  immigration  status
      was not precarious; and  (ii)  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
      partner to live in the country to which the person is to  be  deported
      because of  compelling          circumstances  over  and  above  those
      described in paragraph EX.2 of  Appendix  FM;  and           (iii)  it
      would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK without the
      person who is        to be deported].
              399A. This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
      applies if - (a) the person        has lived continuously  in  the  UK
      for at least 20 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of       the
      immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
      has no ties      (including social, cultural  or  family  )  with  the
      country to which he would have to go if         required to leave  the
      UK; or (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has  spent  at  least
      half of his life living continuously in the UK  immediately  preceding
      the date of the           immigration decision (discounting any period
      of imprisonment) and he has  no  ties              (including  social,
      cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to  go  if
          required to leave the UK.
              [(a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
      of his life; and (b) he is         socially and culturally  integrated
      in the UK; and (c) there would be very significant           obstacles
      to his integration into the country to which  it  is  proposed  he  is
      deported].
              399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be
      granted for periods not       exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be
      given subject to such conditions as the             Secretary of State
      deems appropriate. Where a person  who  has  previously  been  granted
      a period of leave under paragraph 399B  would  not  fall  for  refusal
      under paragraph           322(1C), indefinite leave to remain  may  be
      granted.
               [where  an  Article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
      successful:
              (a) in the case of a person who is in  the  UK  unlawfully  or
      whose leave to  enter  or  remain          has  been  cancelled  by  a
      deportation order, limited  leave  may  be  granted  for  periods  not
      exceeding 30 months and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of
      state considers      appropriate;
              .......]
              [399C. Where  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  previously  been
      granted a period of limited        leave under this Part  applies  for
      further  limited   leave   or   indefinite   leave   to   remain   his
      deportation remains conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public
      interest                   notwithstanding  the  previous   grant   of
      leave.]
              [339D. Where a foreign criminal has been deported  and  enters
      the  United  Kingdom  in          breach  of   a   deportation   order
      enforcement of  the  deportation  order  is  in  the  public  interest
      and  will  be  implemented   unless   there   are   very   exceptional
      circumstances].
          16. The Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 532 said,
   under the heading            "Implementation", that the changes  set  out
   in paragraphs 14 to 30 of this statement would               take  effect
   on 28 July 2014 and would apply to all ECHR Article 8 claims from foreign
              criminals which were to be decided on or after that date.  The
   changes in paragraphs 14              to 30 include the new 2014 Rules  I
   have set out above.
          17. An explanatory memorandum was attached  to  the  Statement  of
   Changes made to create           the 2012 Rules. It set out the  view  of
   the Government on the relationship between  the               2012  rules
   and Article 8. Paragraph 4.3 stated:
              "These changes to the Immigration Rules will come  into  force
      on 9 July 2012, except as          in paragraph 4.4 below.[8] However,
      if   an   application   is   made    before    9    July    and    the
      application has not been decided before that date, it will be  decided
      in  accordance  with         the  rules  in  force  on  8  July  2012,
      regardless  of  the  date   that   [the]   decision   is   made.   The
      assessment of Article 8 in deportation  proceedings  will  follow  the
      rules in place on the         date  on  which  that  consideration  is
      made, regardless of when a person was notified of the        Secretary
      of State's intention to deport them."
          18. Paragraph 7.2 stated, in part:
              "...The rules will set proportionate requirements that reflect
      the Government and            Parliament's view  on  how  individuals'
      article 8 rights should be qualified in the public        interest  to
      safeguard the economic well-being of the UK by controlling immigration
      and to       protect the public against foreign criminals.  This  will
      mean that failure to meet the               requirements of the  rules
      will normally mean failure to establish an article 8  claim  to  enter
      or remain in the UK and no grant  of  leave  on  that  basis.  Outside
      exceptional cases, it will         be proportionate  under  article  8
      for  an  applicant  who  fails  to  meet  the  requirements   of   the
      rules to be removed from the UK".
          19. An explanatory memorandum was also attached to  the  Statement
   of Changes made to           create the 2014 Rules. Paragraphs 3.4 ,  3.5
   and 4.7 provide:
              "3.4. The changes relating to family  and  private  life  will
      come into force on 28 July 2014,       in line with  the  commencement
      of section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  The  Home           Office
      regrets that it was not possible to finalise this Statement of Changes
      on a basis       that, consistent with  normal  practice,  would  have
      allowed the changes to be laid at least         21 days prior to their
      coming into force.  This  is  because  many  of  the  changes  to  the
      Immigration Rules need to coincide  with  the  coming  into  force  of
      sections 17(3) and 19 of      the Immigration  Act  2014  on  28  July
      2014.
              3.5. However, the substance of those changes which concern the
      alignment of the              Immigration Rules relating to family and
      private  life  with  sections  117B,  117C  and   117D        of   the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, inserted by  section  19
      of the 2014      Act, along  with  section  94B  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  were        extensively  debated  by
      both Houses of  Parliament  during  the  passage  of  the  Immigration
      Act.
              4.7. The changes set out  in  paragraphs  14  to  30  of  this
      statement take effect on 28 July       2014  and  apply  to  all  ECHR
      Article  8  claims  from  foreign  criminals  which  are  decided   on
      or after that date."
              Paragraphs 14 to 30 of the statement contain the amendments to
      the provisions of the         2012 Rules that I have  set  out  above,
      ie. the 2014 Rules.
          20. On 13 June  2012  the  Home  Office  had  issued  a  statement
   entitled  "Immigration  Rules  on             Family  and  Private  Life:
   Grounds   of   Compatibility   with   Article   8   of    the    European
   Convention on Human Rights". This statement said at paragraph 20 that:
              "The intention is that the rules will state  how  the  balance
      should be struck between the       public interest and private  right,
      taking into account relevant case law, and  thereby            provide
      for a consistent and faire decision-making process. Therefore, if  the
      rules are        proportionate, a decision taken  in  accordance  with
      the rules will, other than in exceptional       cases,  be  compatible
      with article 8."
          21. Paragraph 67 of the same document accepted that there could be
   cases where a                discretion might be used to grant  leave  to
   remain outside the new rules. However,  it  was                considered
   that those cases would  be  rare,  since  the  new  rules  reflected  the
          Government's view on how the balance  should  be  struck  "between
   individual rights under               article 8 and the public  interests
   in     safeguarding     the     UK's     economic      well-being      in
   controlling  immigration  and  in  protecting  the  public  from  foreign
   criminals".
          22. This document has apparently not yet been revised in the light
   of the 2014 Rules.
          23. At the time of the 2012 Rules the SSHD also issued immigration
   directorate instructions,             chapter 13 of which  is  stated  to
   explain    how    decision    makers    consider    claims    that    the
   deportation of a foreign criminal would be in breach  of  his  Article  8
   rights. The  chapter  is            entitled  "Criminality  Guidance  for
   article 8 ECHR cases". The latest version (5.0) is  dated              28
   July 2014 and is clearly intended to reflect government thinking  on  how
   the  new              sections  117A-D  and  the  2014  Rules  should  be
   interpreted by case workers when they              have  to  apply  these
   provisions.
   254. It is accepted the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  since
        2000 and has various family members here who currently have  status
        arising out of previous determinations of the First-tier  Tribunal.
        Insufficient evidence has been provided to establish the  existence
        of family life recognised by Article 8 with such family members and
        it was noted that there are also family  within  Albania  where  Mr
        Kaci spent a considerable part of his life and where  it  has  been
        found he can be safely returned.


   255. Mr Kaci has a relationship with a United Kingdom  national,  Sophie
        House, with whom he has lived for some time with whom he has a  son
        born on 18 June 2001. He have given careful  consideration  to  the
        best interests of the child in out deliberations and afforded  them
        proper status and weight.  It is not disputed Mr  Kaci  and  Sophie
        House live in  the  United  Kingdom  and  undertook  a  traditional
        marriage in 2004, although cohabitation commenced in early 2005 and
        after his release following  a  period  of  imprisonment,  although
        visits did occur whilst he was in prison.


   256. The serious nature of the offence  and  duration  of  the  sentence
        shows there is a high threshold the Appellant needs to prove he can
        cross before he is able to succeed in relation to  his  family  and
        private life in  the  United  Kingdom,  such  as  to  overcome  the
        automatic deportation order that has been made against him.


   257. It is accepted that if Sophie House wishes to remain in the  United
        Kingdom this family will  be  split  but  that  is  the  effect  of
        deportation. The  public  interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
        outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
        circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
        399A.  Having carefully examined the points made in his  favour  in
        relation to Article 8, we do not find that even if this family unit
        are separated and the Appellant removed from his son's  life,  that
        such very  compelling  circumstances  have  been  established.  The
        Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon  her  to
        show that removal, notwithstanding its  effects,  is  proportionate
        and in accordance with the law.


Decision

   258. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. His decision
        has been set aside. We remake the decision as follows. This  appeal
        is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


   259. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          We make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure           (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  no  justification  of
   making such an order has         been established on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th February 2015
















                               Appendix A


                               |Index   |Document |Page   |Observations                                      |
|        |         |No.    |                                                  |
|        |         |of     |                                                  |
|        |         |Source |                                                  |
|        |         |Bundle |                                                  |
|1       |30-12-199|1-4    |Alleged meeting of missionaries in December 1995. |
|        |5  -Teuta|       |Incomplete translation. Little evidential value.  |
|        |Kaci     |       |No explanation for why meeting called in December |
|        |         |       |when death occurred in April 1995 and matter was  |
|        |         |       |reconciled between the families unless it         |
|        |         |       |pre-dates reconciliation in which case it is of   |
|        |         |       |historical interest only. Illegible signature on  |
|        |         |       |document.                                         |
|2       |9-09-1998|5-8    |Alleged note of meeting regarding Hoti and Burelli|
|        |-        |       |families. Little evidential value as information  |
|        |Teuta    |       |limited and reference to reconciliation not       |
|        |Kaci     |       |explained in light of evidence the Burelli and    |
|        |         |       |Kaci were reconciled. Unless it pre-dates         |
|        |         |       |reconciliation in which case it is of historical  |
|        |         |       |interest only. No signature.                      |
|3       |19-09-199|9-12   |Not translated in Source Bundle. Not admissible as|
|        |8-       |       |evidence must be in English or accompanied by a   |
|        |Teuta    |       |certified translation.                            |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|4       |31-12-199|13-14  |Note of information from third party (wife of a   |
|        |8- Teuta |       |friend of alleged informant of a rumour/gossip) of|
|        |Kaci     |       |alleged difficulties in marriage between Ritvan   |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Teuta Kaci. Claim of ongoing hostility|
|        |         |       |between Kaci and Hoti family claimed but note     |
|        |         |       |alleges conversations regarding Ritvan's          |
|        |         |       |behaviours between women of Hoti and Kaci family  |
|        |         |       |indicating some interaction between them.         |
|5       |16-01-199|15-20  |Page 19 translation dated 2-02-2001. Alleged      |
|        |9        |       |record of conversation with Lindita Kaci reference|
|        |         |       |blood feud with Kaci family. Claim the family been|
|        |         |       |in confinement for six months. Representatives    |
|        |         |       |sent failed to agree. Attempted kidnap of daughter|
|        |         |       |and other family members such as Ndricm           |
|        |         |       |threatened.                                       |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as evidence shows was     |
|        |         |       |reconciliation and no active blood feud between   |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Kaci family following death of Teuta. |
|        |         |       |Claim to have been in hiding not substantiated.   |
|        |         |       |Claim this appellant (Ndricm) threatened at this  |
|        |         |       |time not substantiated as he entered the UK on 6th|
|        |         |       |July 2000 and made the false claim for asylum in  |
|        |         |       |another name. He was not in Albania at this time. |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Page 20 - 9-02-2001 document. Translation of      |
|        |         |       |letter allegedly from Lindita claiming no         |
|        |         |       |reconciliation with Burelli family and situation  |
|        |         |       |getting worse. Attempted reconciliation failed.   |
|        |         |       |Claim that as a result of threat received Ndricm  |
|        |         |       |is not safe and had to flee to UK although they   |
|        |         |       |want to know where he is to take revenge.         |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as reliable evidence is of|
|        |         |       |successful reconciliation. Claims not             |
|        |         |       |substantiated by reliable evidence. Ndricm could  |
|        |         |       |not have fled in 2001 as a result of threats in   |
|        |         |       |Albania as he entered the UK in July 2000 as      |
|        |         |       |stated above. No reliable evidence of ongoing     |
|        |         |       |threats. Asylum claim made by Ndricm in 2000 makes|
|        |         |       |no mention of any such problem in Albania.        |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The letter is also written by Lindita whose       |
|        |         |       |evidence raised credibility issues when considered|
|        |         |       |by Judge Andrew in relation to a claim to have    |
|        |         |       |been in hiding and constantly on the move for her |
|        |         |       |own safety in addition to the credibility issues  |
|        |         |       |relating her being named in the death certificate |
|        |         |       |of her brother Pellumb Kaci and the lack of       |
|        |         |       |credibility in her denial of the same.            |
|6       |9-02-01 -|21-26  |Note dated 16-01-99 allegedly reporting on a      |
|        |Jetmira  |       |meeting with named individuals and recording great|
|        |Kaci     |       |concerns with the relationships between the Kaci  |
|        |         |       |and Hoti families and disputed within the Kaci    |
|        |         |       |family regarding the taking of blood for the death|
|        |         |       |of Teuta.                                         |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as reliable evidence      |
|        |         |       |establishes there was reconciliation between      |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Kaci families following the death of  |
|        |         |       |Teuta. There is no evidence of an active fraud    |
|        |         |       |between the Hoti and Kaci families at this time.  |
|        |         |       |Any feud that may have arisen in 1928 was not     |
|        |         |       |active.                                           |
|7       |9-02-2001|27-34  |P. 30 translation of note dated 09-02-01.Unsigned |
|(marked |-Jetmira |       |note of meeting and alleged risk of murder.       |
|8 in    |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|bundle  |         |       |P. 34 translation of note dated 10-04-01 Unsigned.|
|index)  |         |       |Note of meeting regarding alleged information     |
|        |         |       |about attempts of Burelli family to threaten Kaci |
|        |         |       |family with police has accused Kaci family of     |
|        |         |       |wanting to kidnap girl.                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The reliable evidence indicates problems between  |
|        |         |       |the Burelli and Kaci family following the         |
|        |         |       |remarriage of Ritvan in 1997 and his actions in   |
|        |         |       |preventing the Kaci family from ongoing contact to|
|        |         |       |their grandchild/niece, the daughter of Teuta. If |
|        |         |       |this is a reference to this event it is not       |
|        |         |       |related to the blood feud. Ritvan was alive at    |
|        |         |       |this time not being killed until 22 July 2001.    |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Very little evidential value as support for claim |
|        |         |       |of ongoing blood feud. Evidence of attempt to     |
|        |         |       |manipulate evidence for this purpose?             |
|8       |10-04-200|31-34  |Overlap with item 7 - see above.                  |
|(marked |1 -      |       |                                                  |
|8/1 in  |Jetmira  |       |                                                  |
|bundle  |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|index   |         |       |                                                  |
|9       |09-02-200|35-38  |P38. Translation dated 9-09-01. Note of           |
|        |1        |       |information received that neighbourhood knows     |
|        |         |       |Ritvan murdered by uncles who made Lufti          |
|        |         |       |responsible.                                      |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as proof of ongoing feud. |
|        |         |       |Source that rumour not identified. Mere           |
|        |         |       |supposition. Verdict of District Court makes clear|
|        |         |       |finding regarding person responsible for Ritvan's |
|        |         |       |death.                                            |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Suspicion does not prove fact.                    |
|10      |28-11-200|39-42  |Note of meeting purportedly in relation to Kaci,  |
|        |1        |       |Burelli, Hoti families. Discussed ties between    |
|        |-Jetmira |       |Burelli and Hoti families.                        |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value in relation to proof of   |
|        |         |       |ongoing blood feud as no such feud established on |
|        |         |       |the basis of reliable evidence.                   |
|11      |21-01-200|43-46  |Note from named individual to Mr Marku. Unsigned. |
|        |2        |       |Post killing of Ritvan Burelli claiming blood feud|
|        |         |       |aggravated between Kaci family and Burelli and    |
|        |         |       |Hoti family.                                      |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |See comment above regarding reliable evidence not |
|        |         |       |establishing an ongoing blood feud between the    |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Hoti families. No basis for claiming  |
|        |         |       |ongoing feud re Kaci-Hoti as no evidence to       |
|        |         |       |substantiate the same. Of little evidential value.|
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Transcript of judgment of District Court of Tirana|
|        |         |       |regarding Lujan Kaci.                             |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |See above.                                        |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|11/2    |         |47-61  |                                                  |
|        |13-05-200|       |                                                  |
|        |3 -      |       |                                                  |
|        |Jetmira  |       |                                                  |
|        |Kaci.    |       |                                                  |
|12      |25-06-200|62-65  | Note of meeting with missionaries alleging       |
|        |3 -      |       |attempted kidnapping of Jetmira and the           |
|        |Jetmira  |       |intervention of Luzime Domi to protect her.       |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |This is the account in relation to which          |
|        |         |       |contradictory evidence has been given by Mr Coka  |
|        |         |       |who stated that only Luzime Domi was present and  |
|        |         |       |that he had never met Jetmira and Mr Marku who    |
|        |         |       |stated this is his recollection from information  |
|        |         |       |provided by Mr Coka which Mr Coka denies.  Little |
|        |         |       |evidential value in light of contradictory        |
|        |         |       |accounts. No reliable evidence Jetmira was present|
|        |         |       |at this time and place.                           |
|13      |25-06-201|66-69  |Note recording Luzime Domi very upset with neck   |
|        |3 -      |       |marks.                                            |
|        |Jetmira  |       |                                                  |
|        |Kaci     |       |Evidence of marks following events described by Mr|
|        |         |       |Coka. Not persuasive of claimed Burelli - Hoti -  |
|        |         |       |Kaci feud.                                        |
|14      |25-06-200|70-74  |Record of note of event recording Lulzime and her |
|        |3 -      |       |concerns regarding her sister Jetmira.            |
|        |Jetmira  |       |                                                  |
|        |Kaci     |       |Events regarding Lulzime as described by Mr Coka. |
|        |         |       |But see above re: key issues. No reliable evidence|
|        |         |       |Jetmira was present at 25-06-2003 event.          |
|15      |26-06-200|74-77  |Note of alleged meeting with Secretary of QPM.    |
|        |3 -      |       |Mention of "day before Lulzime and Jetmira have   |
|        |Jetmira  |       |been attacked by traffickers" and "On 25 she      |
|        |Kaci     |       |intervened to defend her sister who was being     |
|        |         |       |kidnapped for trafficking purposes and together   |
|        |         |       |they struggled with the traffickers".             |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Mr Coka in his evidence stated he had not heard   |
|        |         |       |that the women of the Kaci family were being      |
|        |         |       |targeted by traffickers.                          |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Mr Coka's evidence was that Jetmira was not       |
|        |         |       |present on the 25th event, it was only Lulzime.   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |There is no reliable evidence to support a claim  |
|        |         |       |this was an attempted abduction by traffickers for|
|        |         |       |the purposes of trafficking.                      |
|16      |28-006-20|78-81  |P. 81. Translation of a letter purportedly from   |
|        |03 -     |       |another NGO to Mr Marku. Alleging heightened risk |
|        |Jetmira  |       |from members of Kaci family. Claiming Lulzime and |
|        |Kaci     |       |Jetmira present on 25th June when they were       |
|        |         |       |attacked but stating they have additional         |
|        |         |       |protection now. Claiming serious case that been   |
|        |         |       |followed since 1995.                              |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential weight as (a) country guidance  |
|        |         |       |case and country material shows little weight can |
|        |         |       |be put on letters from NGO's due to the production|
|        |         |       |of false information/letters/certificates. No     |
|        |         |       |reliable evidence to support bona fides of Centre |
|        |         |       |of Reconciliation Missionaries in Albania in this |
|        |         |       |regard, (b) claim Jetmira was present on 25th June|
|        |         |       |is not substantiated. See above.                  |
|17      |9-07-2003|82-85  |Note, unsigned and not sourced of claim Burelli is|
|        |- Jetmira|       |continuously interested in Jetmira who has been   |
|        |Kaci     |       |continuously targeted by traffickers of KI        |
|        |         |       |Burelli.                                          |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as provenance not         |
|        |         |       |established. Claim Jetmira was targeted on 25th   |
|        |         |       |June not been shown to be true. Claims not        |
|        |         |       |supported by reliable evidence. Jetmira shown to  |
|        |         |       |be dishonest witness. Claim to have to go into    |
|        |         |       |hiding on return from UK been shown not to be     |
|        |         |       |credible by own and other reliable evidence.      |
|18      |12-09-   |86-89  |Note of meeting with named individuals. Not       |
|        |2003 -   |       |signed. Claim Hoti and Burelli families declare   |
|        |Jetmira  |       |they are going to take blood from Kaci family.    |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Claim Lulzime defended her sister Jetmira from    |
|        |         |       |traffickers.                                      |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Claim traffickers targeting Jetmira as she is     |
|        |         |       |younger and preferable to traffickers.            |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Repeat of issues raised above - see comments made.|
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Verification of blood feud letter issued by Mr    |
|        |         |       |Marku.                                            |
|18/1    |24-03-200|90-93  |                                                  |
|        |4 - Lufti|       |The letter claims the Burelli - Kaci case was     |
|        |Kaci     |       |archived at request of Lufti Kaci. Reliable       |
|        |         |       |evidence establishes no ongoing feud exists       |
|        |         |       |between these families as the matter was settled  |
|        |         |       |following the death of Teuta.                     |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Letter refers to killing of members of both       |
|        |         |       |families and the treat to the Kaci family of a    |
|        |         |       |blood feud and claims of need to abandon          |
|        |         |       |properties and settle elsewhere and that no       |
|        |         |       |reconciliation reached.                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Weight to be given to such verification letter is |
|        |         |       |an issue in light of material referred to above   |
|        |         |       |regarding the production of false letters for     |
|        |         |       |financial gain.                                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Death of Ritvan occurred in July 2001 and claims  |
|        |         |       |family in hiding not substantiated.               |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Other reliable evidence not support claims made.  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Blood feud certificate issues by the 'Headman' and|
|        |         |       |Chairman of the Municipality asserting a blood    |
|        |         |       |feud between Kaci and Burelli family back to April|
|        |         |       |1995. A claim reconciliation between the families |
|        |         |       |was not possible, that members of the family have |
|        |         |       |been in confinement and are currently in England  |
|        |         |       |for this reason.                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Weight to be given to such verification letter is |
|18/2    |26-10-200|94-97  |an issue in light of material referred to above   |
|        |2        |       |regarding the production of false letters for     |
|        |         |       |financial gain.                                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Claim blood feud Kaci - Burelli existed since 1995|
|        |         |       |not supported. Reliable evidence shown the same   |
|        |         |       |was reconciled.                                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Confinement claim not supported by other evidence.|
|        |         |       |Claim family in UK for this reason not supported  |
|        |         |       |by available evidence although if this is the case|
|        |         |       |the applications of visit visa and statement made |
|        |         |       |in support of the same must have been fraudulent  |
|        |         |       |as they had no intention of returning to Albania. |
|19      |12-03-200|98-101 |Note of meeting claiming Jetmira remains target of|
|        |5 -      |       |traffickers as before and has escaped kidnap      |
|        |Jetmira  |       |attempts on several occasions.                    |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential value as previous claims re:    |
|        |         |       |Jetmira not corroborated by the available         |
|        |         |       |evidence.                                         |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Jetmira entered the UK with a visit visa in 2004  |
|        |         |       |and in October 2004 claimed asylum which was found|
|        |         |       |not credible. She was not removed until January   |
|        |         |       |2005. It is not clear when there various attempts |
|        |         |       |were that she escaped from. The dismissal of her  |
|        |         |       |asylum claim and removal arose as it had not been |
|19/1    |20-08-200|102-109|established she faced a real risk if returned to  |
|        |5 - Lufti|       |Albania.                                          |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |P. 105 is a verification letter from Mr Marku in  |
|        |         |       |similar terms to that appearing on page 93 above  |
|        |         |       |but with the date and protocol number changed. See|
|        |         |       |above for observations.                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |P.109 is a translation of a letter from Bana      |
|        |         |       |Association another NGO claiming the blood feud   |
|        |         |       |had worsened with a new killing, that of Pellumb  |
|        |         |       |Kaci. It is in this note it is claimed a          |
|        |         |       |representative of Bena was told by the Burelli    |
|        |         |       |family that the firearm will not stop shooting    |
|        |         |       |from now on.                                      |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little evidential weight as (a) country guidance  |
|        |         |       |case and country material shows little weight can |
|        |         |       |be put on letters from NGO's due to the production|
|        |         |       |of false information/letters/certificates.        |
|        |         |       |Insufficient reliable evidence to support bona    |
|19/2    |30-11-201|106-109|fides of Bena Association in this regard. The     |
|        |0 -      |       |claim the blood feud has worsened is undermined by|
|        |Pellumb  |       |reliable evidence that there was no ongoing blood |
|        |Kaci     |       |feud and claim Pellumb was killed has been shown  |
|        |         |       |to be untrue as he died of natural causes.        |
|19/3    |23-12-201|110-113|                                                  |
|        |0 -      |       |Overlap with 19/1. See above.                     |
|        |Nikoll   |       |                                                  |
|        |Lleshi   |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |P.113. Translation of letter from NGO to Mr Marku |
|        |         |       |from Humanitarian organisation Besa 03.           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Reference in letter to enmity and aggression of   |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Hoti family and need to monitor the   |
|        |         |       |same for protection of daughters of Lufti Kaci who|
|        |         |       |were attacked by criminals after the killing of   |
|        |         |       |Ritvan.                                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |See reference above to letters from NGO's and     |
|        |         |       |weight issue.                                     |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The reference to the attack upon the daughter by  |
|        |         |       |members of the Burelli family is to the 2005      |
|        |         |       |incident that is mentioned above. No other details|
|        |         |       |of other attacks are specified in the letter.     |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The reference to the murder of Pellumb Kaci has   |
|        |         |       |been shown to be incorrect by reference to        |
|        |         |       |evidence of death by natural causes that was known|
|        |         |       |to the family as Jetmira was the informant. The   |
|        |         |       |claim it is the turn for the Kaci family to take  |
|        |         |       |blood will not provide a defence, if true,        |
|        |         |       |although the evidence does not support such a     |
|        |         |       |contention.                                       |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The claim the murders of Pellumb are being hidden |
|        |         |       |has been shown to lack credibility as he died of  |
|        |         |       |natural causes.                                   |
|20      |7-12-2010|144-119|Note to Mr Marku from Mr Coka of discussion with  |
|        |- Pellumb|       |others regarding Pellumb Kaci. Mentions Hoti clan |
|        |Kaci     |       |but little evidential value in relation to the key|
|        |         |       |issues in the appeal.                             |
|21      |20-12-201|120-123|Note lacking detail of an alleged meeting with a  |
|        |2 -      |       |cousin of Ritvan Burelli and unnamed individual.  |
|        |Pellumb  |       |                                                  |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|21/1    |30-08-201|124-127|P.127. Translation of Certified Statement issued  |
|        |2 -      |       |by Bena an NGO. See above regarding weight issues |
|        |Pellumb  |       |in relation to such evidence.                     |
|        |Kaci     |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The certificates claims the Kaci family have been |
|        |         |       |involved in a blood feud with the Kaci family     |
|        |         |       |since 1995 but reliable evidence established the  |
|        |         |       |killing of Teuta was reconciled and no such feud  |
|        |         |       |existed.                                          |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The certificate refers to the death of Ritvan and |
|        |         |       |assertions in relation to the same whereas the    |
|        |         |       |verdict of the District Court clearly established |
|        |         |       |responsibility for the killing.                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The claim Pellumb was killed in blood revenge by  |
|        |         |       |Burelli and Hoti has been shown by reliable       |
|        |         |       |evidence to be untrue as he died of natural       |
|        |         |       |causes.                                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |This document is of very little evidential value  |
|22      |21-10-201|128-131|A document from Mr Coka claiming that since the   |
|        |2 -      |       |murder of Pellumb Kaci the situation has worsened |
|        |Pellumb  |       |and the Burelli and Hoti family claim they will   |
|        |Kaci     |       |destroy the Kaci tribe.                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |By the date of this letter the cause of death was |
|        |         |       |known as natural causes. There is insufficient    |
|        |         |       |credible evidence to establish Pellumb was killed |
|        |         |       |or to support the claim of an ongoing feud.       |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |Little weight may be placed upon this document.   |
|23      |19-11-201|132-136|P 136. Translation for note purportedly from      |
|        |3 -      |       |Lulzime Kaci to Mr Marku claiming his death and   |
|        |Pellumb  |       |hospital records have been manipulated and        |
|        |Kaci     |       |claiming Pellumb did not die of a heart attack.   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The reliable evidence both in relation to cause of|
|        |         |       |death and verification of certificate and         |
|        |         |       |existence of the medical doctor undermine this    |
|        |         |       |claim. The reliable evidence shows that Pellumb   |
|        |         |       |died of a heart attack. Attempts to claim         |
|        |         |       |otherwise and to make unsubstantiated assertions  |
|        |         |       |regarding this issue have little evidential value.|
|        |         |       |They are illustrative of an attempt to discredit  |
|        |         |       |evidence deemed contrary to the claim by members  |
|        |         |       |of this family.                                   |
|24      |7-04-2014|137-143|P. 140 translation of verification document       |
|        |-Pellumb |       |provided at request of Mr Marku prepared by       |
|        |Kaci     |       |Notary.                                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The text appears to relate to a schedule of       |
|        |         |       |killings recording at number 4255 - Pellumb Kaci -|
|        |         |       |motive blood feud, date 29-11-2010, place Tirana, |
|        |         |       |damaged - Burelli family, procedure - non         |
|        |         |       |reconciliation.                                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |If this is a document created by Mr Marku and held|
|        |         |       |by the NRC this is of little evidential value as  |
|        |         |       |it fails to identify the source of the information|
|        |         |       |within the same and is contrary to reliable       |
|        |         |       |evidence establishing the cause of death as       |
|        |         |       |natural causes, which the author of the document  |
|        |         |       |appear to ignore.                                 |
|25      |1-05-2014|145-148|P. 148 is a translation of a report from Mr Marku |
|        |-Pellumb |       |explaining the sources of information regarding   |
|        |Kaci     |       |killings in Albania.                              |
|26      |06-09-200|149-152|Birth certificate of Lufti Kaci.                  |
|        |4        |       |                                                  |
|27      |Copy     |153-156|Poor copy of document.                            |
|        |passport |       |                                                  |
|        |of Luzime|       |                                                  |
|        |Domi     |       |                                                  |
|28      |27-03-201|157-160|P. 160.  Translation of Certificate issued by     |
|        |4 - Teuta|       |Republic of Albania, Ministry of Justice,         |
|        |Kaci     |       |Institute of Forensic, containing a summary of the|
|        |         |       |outcome of the autopsy report on Teuta Kaci       |
|        |         |       |carried out in 1995 which concluded cause of death|
|        |         |       |as traumatic-hemorrhagic shock.                   |
|        |         |       |                                                  |
|        |         |       |The certificate was issued upon the request of the|
|        |         |       |family.                                           |
|        |         |       |                                                  |


