
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Given orally at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th September 2014                        |On 7th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Abderrahmane Goucham

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg and Mrs Bray JP,
    sitting at Taylor House on 18th July 2014 in which by  a  determination
    dated 24th July 2014 they allowed the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State that he should be deported from  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to a conviction and a sentence of  imprisonment
    for a criminal offence.  Permission to  appeal  the  determination  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 11th August 2014.   The  granting
    judge correctly noted that the panel had fallen into error in  applying
    paragraph 364 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  provision  had  been
    deleted from the Rules from July 2012 and the relevant Rule  for  these
    purposes would have been paragraph 397.

2.   At the hearing this morning,  Mr  Tufan  represents  the  Secretary  of
    State.  There is no appearance by the claimant or any representative of
    the claimant.  As I indicated before hearing Mr Tufan's submissions,  I
    am satisfied that notice of the hearing has been sent to  the  claimant
    at his  last  recorded  address,  applying  rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I am also satisfied that it  is
    in the interests of justice to proceed with the  hearing.   I  note  in
    that regard that the claimant was in fact not present at the First-tier
    Tribunal.

3.   The facts of the matter are as follows.  As far as can be  ascertained,
    the claimant entered the United Kingdom sometime around 2011/2012.   He
    appears to have spent time in other European countries before  arriving
    in this country on the back of a lorry.  He  was  encountered  sometime
    later and served with illegal entry papers and sought asylum.   On  1st
    March 2012 he had been convicted  at  Blackfriars  Crown  Court  of  an
    offence of dishonesty in making false representations to cause gain for
    himself and loss to another.  This involved possession of  an  identity
    document.  For this offence he was sentenced to ten  months  in  prison
    and recommended for  deportation.   In  April  2012  the  claimant  was
    informed of liability to deportation.  There then  followed  an  asylum
    interview.  He was detained in July 2013  and  served  with  notice  of
    decision to make a deportation order.  A series of events  then  ensued
    as a result of which the original deportation  decision  was  withdrawn
    and a new one was served on the claimant in July 2014.

4.   The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dealt  amongst  other
    matters with the claimant's refugee claim.  In short, the panel came to
    the firm conclusion that the claimant had  failed  to  demonstrate  any
    well-founded fear of persecution  or  of  serious  harm  on  return  to
    Algeria.  That is not challenged and therefore stands.

5.   The panel then embarked upon an analysis  of  the  claimant's  position
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The panel came to the conclusion that the
    claimant  had  failed  to  show  that  his  removal  pursuant  to   the
    deportation decision would constitute a  disproportionate  interference
    with his Article 8 rights.  With respect,  that  must  be  right.   The
    claimant asserted no family life in the United Kingdom.  He appears  to
    have no private life other than  the  barest  kind  by  reason  of  his
    physical presence in this country.  At all events, that was the panel's
    view and again no challenge has been brought against it.

6.   As I have indicated, the reason why the  panel  decided  to  allow  the
    appeal is to be found in paragraph 28 of its determination.  There  the
    panel went on to consider what  they  described  as  "discretion  under
    paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules".  There they  took  account  of
    the length  of  residence,  criminal  convictions  and  other  relevant
    matters.  They decided that the  offence  did  not  involve  any  human
    victim.  It had no aggravating features.

7.   They then embarked upon a balancing  of  the  claimant's  private  life
    against the state's interests in removal but concluded that  since  the
    claimant had no previous convictions and in view of the nature  of  his
    offence they should allow the appeal under paragraph 364.  In doing  so
    the panel said this:

         "We find that the appellant has no leave to remain and it would  be
         more appropriate in  this  case  for  the  respondent  to  consider
         removal through administrative means rather than  deportation.   We
         find in conclusion exceptional circumstances in this case  referred
         to above; the public interest in deportation does not outweigh  the
         appellant's circumstances."

8.   With great respect to  the  panel,  there  is  no  rationale  for  that
    conclusion.  Even if this had been a case of removal under  section  10
    of the 1999 Act, it is quite manifest  that  the  applicant  could  not
    succeed.  He has nothing to put in the scales, whether those scales are
    viewed in terms of Article 8 or any other relevant balancing  exercise.
    On the other hand, the Secretary of State can  point  to  the  need  to
    remove somebody who has  been  convicted  of  a  criminal  offence  and
    recommended for  deportation,  quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  the
    applicant has never had any lawful reason to be in the United Kingdom.

9.   Accordingly, applying the correct Immigration Rules, it falls to me  to
    re-make the decision.  I have no hesitation in doing so  by  dismissing
    this appeal under the Rules and for good measure by  reference  to  the
    ECHR.  Accordingly  my  conclusion  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred  in  law  and  I  set  that  determination  aside  and
    substitute a fresh decision dismissing the applicant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision for the reasons I have given.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



