
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: DA/00193/2013 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Bradford         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2020               |On 29 September 2020               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                                     SS

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms L Mair of counsel, instructed  by  GM  Immigration
                    Aid Unit



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. For the purposes of this decision, in order to avoid confusion, I  will
    refer below to the appellant and the respondent as they were designated
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a Jamaican  national  with  date  of  birth  given  as
    20.6.75. He has appealed against a decision to deport him from the  UK,
    made on 15.1.13. The case was remitted by the Court of  Appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh, on the basis  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to apply the guidance in existing case law and
    failed to properly approach the issue of  whether  or  not  there  were
    exceptional circumstances outweighing the public interest in removal of
    a foreign criminal.

 3. The appeal was heard in Manchester on 26.7.19 before Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  McClure  and  reference  should  be  made  to  the
    detailed decision promulgated on 22.11.19 for the  full  facts  of  the
    case there comprehensively set out.

 4. It was common ground in the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant is a
    foreign criminal, having been sentenced in January 2010 to  a  term  of
    immediate imprisonment of  40  months  for  two  Class  A  drug-dealing
    offences, possession with intent  to  supply  both  crack  cocaine  and
    heroin in December 2018. This conviction gave rise to  the  deportation
    decision, made under s32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.  Condition  1  of
    s32(1) & (2) is satisfied, so that the appellant has to rely on one  of
    the exceptions under s33, asserting that deportation would breach  his,
    his partner's and his children's rights under article 8 ECHR.

 5. The central issue in the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing  was  the
    appellant's relationship with his children and whether, pursuant to the
    considerations under paragraphs 398 and 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and s117C of the 2002 Act, it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  qualifying
    children to remain in the UK if the appellant were to be  deported,  or
    otherwise whether there were exceptional circumstances outweighing  the
    public interest in deportation.

 6. At [103] the judge noted that there was no suggestion by the respondent
    that any of the qualifying children should accompany the  appellant  to
    Jamaica, "The test therefore being whether or not it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant."

 7. The  appellant's  immigration  history  and  family  relationships  are
    complicated but carefully set out in Judge McClure's decision.  He  has
    six children from different relationships,  two  of  whom  are  British
    citizens (K and SS). At [94] of the decision, the judge  accepted  that
    he has a family life with his  children  K  and  SS,  whose  mother  is
    Stacey, the appellant's former partner, and with his  present  partner,
    ID, and their children, including JJ and a further child, J.

 8. At [111] of the decision, the judge concluded that whilst there are  in
    total three 'qualifying' children, the appellant's removal would not be
    unduly harsh for the two children K  and  SS.  However,  Judge  McClure
    allowed the appeal on article 8 ECHR human rights grounds,  finding  at
    [113] of the decision that in respect of the qualifying child JJ  only,
    with whom the judge found the appellant  had  a  very  close  bond  and
    relationship, the appellant's removal would have such a serious  impact
    on  the  child  that,  when  combined  with  the   family's   financial
    circumstances, this would result in undue hardship.

 9. In the alternative, between [114] and  [118]  of  the  decision,  Judge
    McClure found that there were  such  exceptional  circumstances  as  to
    outweigh the strong public interest in removal and justifying  allowing
    the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

10. The Secretary of State has now appealed with permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against deportation.

11. In summary, the four grounds assert as follows:

      a. The judge made a material misdirection in law in finding  it  would
         be unduly harsh for JJ to be separated from the  appellant.  It  is
         submitted that the judge failed to apply  the  unduly  harsh  test.
         Reliance is made on the circumstances of the appellant in SSHD v PG
         (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, suggesting  that  this  appellant's
         circumstances  fall  squarely  within  those  considered   in   PG,
         including  alleged  financial  difficulties   the   partner   would
         experience by not being able to pursue her education and career.

      b. The judge made a material misdirection in law  when  finding  there
         were exceptional circumstances. Reliance is made on SS (Nigeria)  v
         SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550, as to the greater weight to  be  accorded
         to the public interest in the case of a  foreign  criminal.  It  is
         submitted that the judge gave merely lip service to the seriousness
         of  the  appellant's  offending  and  failed  to  give  any  proper
         consideration of the public interest in deporting him in the  light
         of the seriousness of the offence.

      c. The judge materially misdirected himself in law in having regard to
         the fact that the appellant had not committed further offences  and
         giving weight to  the  time  elapsed  since  his  last  conviction.
         Reliance  is  made  on  RA   (s117C:   "unduly   harsh";   offence:
         seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), which held that the fact
         than an individual has not committed further offences since release
         from  prison  is  highly  unlikely  to  have  a  material  bearing.
         Rehabilitation will  not  normally  do  more  than  show  that  the
         individual has returned to the place where society  expect  him  to
         be. "There is, in other words, no material weight which  ordinarily
         falls  to  be  given  to  rehabilitation  in  the   proportionality
         balance." It is submitted that this error  infects  the  article  8
         proportionality balancing exercise.

      d. The judge failed to provide adequate reasons on a  material  matter
         by failing to have regard  to  significant  negative  factors  when
         considering the public interest. Reliance is made on ZS (Jamaica) &
         Anor v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1639, to  the  effect  that  breach  of
         immigration law was a serious  matter  which  should  be  "accorded
         commensurate  seriousness  as  a  countervailing  factor   in   the
         balancing exercise in the assessment of the proportionality of  the
         proposed removal."

12. There has been no cross-appeal by the  appellant  against  any  of  the
    judge's findings.

13. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 9.12.19. However, when the application was renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  granted  permission  on
    27.1.20, considering it arguable that the evidence  and  reasons  could
    not result in a finding that it would be unduly harsh for the child  JJ
    to be separated from the appellant. It was  also  considered  "arguable
    that in assessing whether there are very compelling circumstances  over
    and above the exceptions that the judge had failed to properly  balance
    the public  interest."  However,  the  judge  granted  permission  also
    pointed out, "the parties will nevertheless be aware that it  may  well
    have been open to the judge to reach the findings he did in relation to
    Exception 2 and the parties will be expected to  address  this  at  the
    hearing."

14. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal was originally listed to be  heard
    in Manchester on 20.3.20,  but  the  respondent's  application  for  an
    adjournment was granted. Because of the Covid-19  pandemic,  the  Upper
    Tribunal issued further directions on 20.3.20, proposing that the error
    of law issue could be  determined  without  a  hearing,  providing  for
    submissions on the proposed course of action.

15. Submissions were  received  from  the  appellant's  representatives  on
    27.3.20, objecting to the matter  being  dealt  with  without  an  oral
    hearing, but consenting  to  a  remote  hearing  by  video.  The  Upper
    Tribunal  agreed  that  the  matter  was   not   suitable   for   paper
    consideration but anticipated that  a  face-to-face  hearing  would  be
    possible by June 2020. Eventually, the appeal was listed for a face-to-
    face hearing at Bradford on 25.9.20, with notice of  the  hearing  sent
    out on  8.9.20.  However,  by  email  dated  10.9.20,  the  appellant's
    representatives asked for the appeal to be listed as a  remote  hearing
    by video. Following consideration by an Upper Tribunal Judge, this  was
    agreed to.

16. In advance of the remote appeal hearing, I have received, only the  day
    before the  hearing,  two  skeleton  arguments  from  counsel  for  the
    appellant, together with a copy of the recent Court of Appeal  decision
    in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  I confirm that I have  taken
    these materials and submissions into consideration alongside  the  oral
    submissions made to me at the remote hearing,  as  well  as  the  other
    documents now  in  the  Tribunal's  court  file,  before  reaching  any
    decision.

17. The decision of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) bears  directly  on  a
    number of issues raised in the grounds and, in reality,  has  overtaken
    those submissions so that several of  the  points  being  made  are  no
    longer tenable.

18. The first ground of appeal addresses the Exception 2 unduly harsh  test
    but the other three grounds rather  overlap  and  address  the  judge's
    alternative conclusion that even if Exception 2 was not made  out,  the
    circumstances  taken   cumulatively   amount   to   exceptional   (very
    compelling)  circumstances  rendering   the   appellant's   deportation
    disproportionate.

19. The essence of the first ground of appeal is to assert that  the  judge
    failed to properly apply the unduly harsh test, but this ground does so
    only by directly comparing the circumstances of  the  appellant  in  PG
    with those of this appellant. The grounds assert that the facts of  the
    present case fall squarely within those highlighted  in  PG  and  which
    were found to be commonplace  consequences  insufficient  to  meet  the
    unduly harsh test. However, at paragraph [129] the Court of Appeal made
    clear that  the  Tribunal  has  to  make  its  own  evaluation  of  the
    particular circumstances:

         "I turn to the question whether, even if it was not approved in KO,
         the UT's conclusion on the  stay  scenario  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)
         should nevertheless have been treated by the UT  in  this  case  as
         having some kind of authoritative status. I agree with the Tribunal
         that it had no such status. I am not so austere as to  say  that  a
         tribunal may not sometimes find it useful to consider the  outcomes
         in other apparently similar cases as a cross-check on a  conclusion
         which it is minded to reach.  But the exercise  can  only  ever  be
         valuable up to a point. Ultimately the tribunal has to make its own
         evaluation of the particular facts before it. As the UT put  it  at
         para. 14 of its decision, in response to the same  submission  from
         Mr Bazini:

             "Although the application of a legal test to a particular  set
             of facts can sometimes shed light on the way in which the test
             falls to be applied, it is the test that matters. If this were
             not so, everything from the law of negligence to human  rights
             would become irretrievably  mired  in  a  search  for  factual
             precedents."

         "I would add that it is often difficult to be sure that  the  facts
         of two cases are in truth substantially similar.  And,  even  where
         they are, the assessment of  "undue  harshness"  is  an  evaluative
         exercise on which tribunals may reasonably differ. If this kind  of
         factual comparison were legitimate  it  might  indeed  be  deployed
         against RA, since in KO Exception 2 was held not to apply on  facts
         that were at least as close to those of his case as  those  in  MK:
         see para. 83 above."

20. This approach of Lord Justice Underhill was endorsed by  that  of  Lord
    Justice Peter Jackson at [158] and [161],  referring  to  the  "limited
    value of cross-checking outcomes in more or  less  similar  cases.  The
    task of the decision-maker in this respect is to consider the effect of
    this deportation on this  child."At  [58]  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision Lord Justice Underhill also referred to the risks of  treating
    KO as a touchstone of whether the degree of harshness goes beyond  that
    ordinary expected by the deportation of a parent.

21. In the circumstances, I find no error of law is disclosed by the  first
    ground of appeal. It is evident from a reading  of  the  decision  that
    Judge McClure made a careful and detailed assessment  of  all  relevant
    circumstances,  correctly  self-directed  himself  on  the  meaning  of
    'unduly harsh' by reference to MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223
    (IAC). A different judge may have reached a  different  assessment  and
    conclusion, but it cannot be said that it was not open to Judge McClure
    to reach the conclusion he did that it would be unduly harsh for JJ  to
    be separated for the appellant, justified by the cogent reasons open on
    the evidence and as set out in the decision.

22. Ms Mair submitted that  given  the  way  in  which  the  judge  phrased
    paragraph [111] the judge was also finding  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the other two qualifying children to be  separated  from  the
    appellant. In  this  regard,  she  pointed  to  the  phrase  "save  for
    considerations  of  their  relationship  with  their  half   siblings."
    However, I am satisfied that if Judge McClure intended to make  such  a
    finding in respect of K and SS, that would  have  been  made  clear  at
    [113] of the decision. In the circumstances, I reject that submission.

23. Given that the other grounds address the alternative  finding  of  very
    compelling/exceptional circumstances, and I  have  rejected  the  first
    ground  of  appeal,  it  follows  that  whatever  the  outcome  of   my
    consideration of grounds 2-4, the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  must
    fail. However, for completion I go on to address those grounds.

24. In reality all three of the remaining grounds  overlap  each  other  in
    addressing the strength of the public interest of deporting  a  foreign
    criminal  balanced,  in  part,  against  the  judge's   assessment   of
    rehabilitation or risk of future offending. Mr  Diwnycz  accepted  that
    the third ground was the weakest, particularly  in  the  light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in RA (Iraq).

25. The second ground argues that the judge gave mere lip  service  to  the
    seriousness of the  appellant's  offence,  pointing  to  [115]  of  the
    decision. It is suggested that little was said about the seriousness of
    the offence, a drug-dealing offence. Whilst the judge there referred to
    taking into account the circumstances of the offence and  the  sentence
    received, he also noted that "Drugs cause damage not only to  the  user
    but to their families  and  to  the  community."  I  confess  to  being
    initially  concerns  about  the  brevity  of  the  entire   exceptional
    circumstances proportionality assessment, amounting to less than a page
    between [114] and [118] of the decision. However, I  accept  Ms  Mair's
    submission that one has to consider  what  is  there  set  out  in  the
    context of the decision as a whole,  which  reveals  that  these  brief
    paragraphs are but a summary of a detailed consideration earlier in the
    18-page decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Mair  also  pointed  to
    the fact that the judge made repeated reference to the  seriousness  of
    the offences, including at [106] where the judge stated,  "Clearly  the
    criminal offence committed by the  appellant  is  a  serious   criminal
    offence  for   which   he   has   received   a   substantial  custodial
    sentence." The judge also set out a lengthy extract from the sentencing
    remarks. In the premises, the argument that the judge  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the public interest cannot be made out.

26. The third ground argues that in  the  light  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in RA, cited above, the judge was in error to have  regard  to
    the fact that the appellant had not committed further offences  and  to
    the time elapsed since his last conviction. Whilst RA does not seem  to
    have been drawn to the Court of Appeal's attention in RA (Iraq), it did
    consider other similar cases but between [141] and [143] concluded that
    rehabilitation could not be excluded from consideration in the  overall
    proportionality assessment:

         "141.    What those authorities seem to me to establish is that the
         fact that a potential  deportee  has  shown  positive  evidence  of
         rehabilitation, and thus of a reduced risk of re- offending, cannot
         be  excluded  from  the  overall  proportionality   exercise.   The
         authorities say so, and it must be right in principle  in  view  of
         the holistic nature of that exercise. Where a tribunal is  able  to
         make an assessment that the foreign criminal  is  unlikely  to  re-
         offend, that is a factor which can carry some weight in the balance
         when considering very compelling circumstances. The weight which it
         will bear will vary from case to case, but it  will  rarely  be  of
         great weight bearing in mind that, as Moore- Bick LJ says in Danso,
         the public interest in the deportation of criminals  is  not  based
         only on the need to protect the public from  further  offending  by
         the  foreign  criminal  in  question  but  also  on  wider   policy
         considerations of deterrence and public concern. I would  add  that
         tribunals will properly be cautious about  their  ability  to  make
         findings on the risk of re-offending, and will usually be unable to
         do so with any confidence based on no more than the undertaking  of
         prison courses or mere assertions of reform by the offender or  the
         absence of subsequent  offending  for  what  will  typically  be  a
         relatively short period.

         142. That summary may come to much the same thing  in  practice  as
         the UT's proposition that "no material weight ... ordinarily  falls
         to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality balance";  but
         I think, with respect, that it is more accurately expressed, and  I
         cannot in any event adopt its reasoning that  "rehabilitation  will
         ... normally do no more than show that the individual has  returned
         to the place where society expects him ... to be",  notwithstanding
         its endorsement (not, I think, as a matter of ratio) in Binbuga.  I
         do  not  think  that  it   properly   reflects   the   reason   why
         rehabilitation is in principle relevant in this context,  which  is
         that it goes to reduce (one element in) the weight  of  the  public
         interest in deportation which forms one side of the proportionality
         balance. It is not generally to do  with  being  given  credit  for
         being a law-abiding citizen: as the UT says, that  is  expected  of
         everybody, but the fact that that is so is not a  good  reason  for
         denying to an appellant such weight  as  his  rehabilitation  would
         otherwise carry.

         143. RA's case on rehabilitation amounts simply to the fact that he
         has not committed any further offence and there  is  no  reason  to
         believe that he is likely to. The UT did  not  expressly  put  that
         factor into the proportionality balance. I  think  it  should  have
         done, but it follows from  what  I  have  said  above  that  it  is
         unlikely that it would carry great weight, and I am far from saying
         that it would necessarily have made a decisive  difference  to  the
         outcome."

27. It is evident from the above that whilst it  cannot  be  excluded  from
    consideration,  it  may  well  have  limited  weight  in  the   overall
    proportionality assessment, for the reasons the Court of  Appeal  gave.
    However, HA (Iraq) disposes of the third ground  of  appeal  suggesting
    that the judge was not entitled to give any weight to rehabilitation or
    length of time since the offences. Further, as Ms Mair pointed  out  in
    her submissions, at [146] of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 Lord Kerr
    stated:

         "The strength of the public interest in favour of deportation  must
         depend on such  matters  as  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
           crime,   the   risk   of   re-offending,  and  the   success   of
         rehabilitation, etc. These factors are relevant to an assessment of
         the extent to which deportation of  a  particular  individual  will
         further the legitimate aim of preventing crime  and  disorder,  and
         thus, as pointed out by Lord Reed at para 26, inform  the  strength
         of the public interest in deportation. I do not have  trouble  with
         the suggestion that there may  generally   be   a   strong   public
         interest  in  the   deportation   of   foreign  criminals   but   a
         claim  that  this  has  a  fixed  quality,  in   the   sense   that
         its importance is unchanging whatever the circumstances,  seems  to
         me to be plainly  wrong  in  principle,  and  contrary   to   ECtHR
         jurisprudence"..."

28. In the premises, no error of law is disclosed by the  third  ground  of
    appeal.

29. The factual basis of the fourth ground is flawed. It is submitted  that
    the judge failed to have due regard to the significant negative factors
    when considering  the  public  interest  and  the  balancing  exercise.
    Reliance is made  on  the  appellant's  poor  immigration  history,  in
    respect of which it is suggested that he  had  been  working  illegally
    since 2003, which would "constitute a serious countervailing factor  in
    favour of removal." However, the appellant did have valid leave and was
    working legally between 2007 and the making of the deportation order in
    2017. Having read the impugned decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
    am satisfied  that  the  judge  set  out  in  considerable  detail  the
    appellant's immigration history, extending to over  two  pages  of  the
    decision, and it is not arguable that this was ignored in  the  overall
    proportionality balancing exercise. It follows that no error of law  is
    disclosed by this ground of appeal.

      1) Summarising the position overall, I am satisfied that having made a
         careful and detailed evaluative assessment of the circumstances  of
         the appellant and  his  family  members,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         reached a carefully balanced conclusion that in relation to one  of
         the three qualifying children, JJ, the  factors  to  be  considered
         were  sufficient  to  render  that  child's  separation  from   the
         appellant unduly harsh. In reaching that view, I  take  account  of
         the Court of Appeal recent recasting of the meaning of that  phrase
         in HA (Iraq) and it's deprecation of  an  expectation  that  to  be
         unduly harsh, the harshness must be beyond that  ordinarily  to  be
         expected. The Court of Appeal identified  that  the  threshold  lay
         higher  than  merely  undesirable  but   below   'very   compelling
         circumstances'. At [53] of that decision,  Lord  Justice  Underhill
         stated, [53]

             "Observations of that kind are,  I  hope,  helpful,  but  they
             cannot identify an  objectively  measurable  standard.  It  is
             inherent in the nature of an exercise of the kind required  by
             section 117C  (5)  that  Parliament  intended  that  tribunals
             should in each case make an informed evaluative assessment  of
             whether the effect of the deportation of the parent or partner
             on their child or partner  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  in  the
             context of the strong public interest in  the  deportation  of
             foreign criminals; and further exposition of that phrase  will
             never be of more than limited value."

30. I am satisfied that an informed evaluative assessment was made in  this
    case as to whether the effects of deportation were unduly harsh on each
    of the qualifying children, with the judge distinguishing with  reasons
    JJ from the other two qualifying children. I am also satisfied that the
    judge was  entitled  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  in  the  overall
    proportionality  assessment  the   circumstances   amounted   to   very
    compelling/exceptional  circumstances  so  as  to  render   deportation
    disproportionate. Whilst a different judge may have reached a different
    conclusion on the same evidence, the grounds do  not  demonstrate  that
    this judge was entitled to reach this conclusion, justified  by  cogent
    reasoning.

31. It follows that I find no material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appellant's
    appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
Date:    25 September 2020



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
Date:    25 September 2020
