
[pic]

IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  DA/00057/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2014                   |On 18 November 2014                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     WZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold (instructed by Everich Lawyers Limited)

For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy,(Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By determination promulgated on 15 July 2014 the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    (FTT) comprising Judge S Taylor and  Mr  P  Bompas  allowed  an  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 31  December  2013
    to deport the appellant.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals  against
    that decision.

 2. We will refer to the appellant in these proceedings as the Secretary of
    State and the respondent as the appellant as he was in the  proceedings
    before the FTT.

 3. The appellant is a 31 year old citizen of China.  He  is  married  with
    two children now aged seven and  five.   His  partner  originates  from
    China but is a naturalised UK  citizen.   The  children  are  also  now
    British citizens.  The appellant has been in this country  since  March
    1998.  He originally claimed asylum but that was  refused.   An  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed on 10 August 1999.  In 2010 he was
    granted Indefinite Leave to  Remain  exceptionally  outside  the  Rules
    along with his partner and two children born un the UK.

 4. On 25 May 2012 the appellant was convicted at Taunton  Crown  Court  of
    being involved in the production of cannabis, a class B drug,  and  was
    sentenced to two years imprisonment.  He was released on 23 May 2013.

 5. In terms of section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  the  Secretary  of
    State is required to  make  a  deportation  order  unless  one  of  the
    exceptions in section 33 apply.  The appellant relies on Exception 1  -
    that his deportation would be in breach of his  convention  rights  and
    specifically  article  8.   The  circumstances  which  apply  to   this
    appellant fall  within  the  provisions  of  paragraph  398(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly paragraphs 399 and 399A  apply  to  the
    determination. (It should be noted that since the Secretary of  State's
    decision and the First Tier Tribunal's determination there has  been  a
    change in the Immigration Rules in consequence  of  the  bringing  into
    force of the Immigration Act 2014.  In dealing with the question as  to
    whether or not there has been a material error of law we are  concerned
    with the rules in operation at the time of the FTT's determination.)

 6. The FTT concluded  at  paragraph  20  of  its  determination  that  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  rules.   It  noted  that
    although the appellant's partner had struggled while he was  in  prison
    she could care for the children.  The appellant had not been in the  UK
    with leave for  15  years.   The  FTT  accepted  that  there  might  be
    difficulties returning to China after such a long time  away  and  that
    there was the added difficulty of China's one  child  policy.   However
    both the appellant and his partner are from China and speak Chinese  as
    their first language.  The FTT  concluded  "while  we  acknowledge  the
    difficulties  we  find  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  parties
    retuning to China".

 7. The FTT then went on to consider the proportionality test  outside  the
    rules as provided for in MF(Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  The starting
    point they said was the Razgar (Razgar [2004] UKHL 27) test.   The  FTT
    found that article 8 was engaged but that the appellant's  removal  was
    in accordance  with  the  law  and  for  a  legitimate  purpose.   They
    considered that the Zambrano   principle (Zambrano v Office of National
    de l'emploi - C-34/09) applied and that the appellant was a  persistent
    offender nor involved in the implication of significant  quantities  of
    class A drugs.  The case of  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  applied  "as
    required by  section  55  of  the  2009  Act".   This,  the  FTT  said,
    underlined that it is in a child's interest to be brought  up  by  both
    parties.  The FTT noted that this was a  first  offence  and  that  the
    OASys report assessed the appellant as  low  risk.   It  further  noted
    positive references from  prison  officers.   The  FTT  concluded  "the
    Tribunal is satisfied that the family could not be expected  to  return
    to China and to remove the appellant alone would not  be  in  the  best
    interests of the children.  Finally they concluded at paragraph 22 that
    it would be disproportionate to the needs of  the  public  interest  to
    remove the appellant.  The FTT allowed the appeal.


Submissions for Secretary of State

 8. Mr Duffy, the Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He submitted that having concluded at paragraph 20 that  there
    were no insurmountable difficulties to the appellant's return to  China
    the FTT  could  not  then  go  on  to  effectively  reach  a  different
    conclusion by  stepping  outside  the  rules.   The  appellant  had  to
    demonstrate that there was something above and beyond the circumstances
    enumerated in the rules that made his case exceptional.   The  FTT  had
    failed to identify why the appellant's circumstances  are  exceptional.
    Any separation was as a result of his own actions and choices  made  by
    the family.  The Zambrano principle  did  not  apply  since  there  was
    another family member able to care for the child in the UK;  there  was
    no derivative right of residence.  The FTT had failed to give  adequate
    consideration to the Secretary of  State's  public  interest  policies.
    Even if the appellant was  a  low  risk  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to say in appropriate circumstances that  the  removal  of  an
    offender from the country was in the public interest.


Submissions for appellant

 9. Mr Mold for the appellant submitted that all that this appeal was about
    was simply a disagreement with the findings of the FTT.   The  FTT  had
    correctly applied the test under reference  to  MF  (Nigeria)  and  the
    Immigration Rules.  They considered the best interests of the  children
    as they were required to do.  The appellant was a  first  offender  and
    the judge in his sentencing remarks had accepted that he did  not  have
    the leading role.  He was a low risk.  Mr Mold referred to SS (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 in which Laws LJ had affirmed  that  ZH  (Tanzania)
    demonstrated that the interests  of  a  child  affected  by  a  removal
    decision are a matter of substantial public interest.





Decision on appeal

10. The FTT found that  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    parties returning to China yet then found that the family could not  be
    expected to return to China and to remove the appellant alone would not
    be in the best interests of the children.  In our view these  seemingly
    contradictory findings have not been explained or reasoned by the  FTT.
    We agree with the  submissions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  in
    considering whether there are exceptional circumstances it is necessary
    to look beyond the factors set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  Section
    55 of the 2009 Act and ZH (Tanzania) are cited for the proposition that
    it is in the best interests of the child  to  be  brought  up  by  both
    parents.  No attempt has been made however to apply this to  the  facts
    of this case or consider it against the considerable public interest in
    the deportation of foreign criminals.  We are satisfied that the  FTT's
    failure  to  properly  analyse  and  give  reasons  for  its   decision
    constitute a material error of law.  We therefore allow the appeal.


New decision

11. The decision falls to be remade.  Mr  Mold  submitted  that  we  should
    appoint the case to a re-hearing either before the FTT or the  UT.   He
    submitted that the decision would require to be made under reference to
    the changes brought about by the Immigration Act 2014.  However Mr Mold
    was unable to advise us as to what further evidence he  might  wish  to
    lead.  Accordingly we decided that we should  proceed  to  re-determine
    the appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

12. In reaching our decision we have had the same bundle  that  was  before
    the FTT,  their  decision  which  incorporates  their  summary  of  the
    evidence led at the FTT as well as the submission of counsel.

13. The appellant is 42 years old.  As noted above he is a citizen of China
    and has been in the UK since 1998.  The  immigration  history  is  more
    fully set out in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter  of  31
    December 2013.  The appellant has  been  in  a  relationship  with  his
    present partner, DL, since  2006.   They  were  married  in  a  Chinese
    wedding ceremony in 2007.  They have two children, a boy L who  is  now
    aged seven and a girl  S  who  is  four.   Both  children  are  British
    citizens.  DL was naturalised as a UK citizen on 19 October 2011.

14. The appellant worked as a chef for ten years but has not recently  been
    in full time work.  His wife works as a waitress.  Her hours  are  11am
    to 11pm with a break.  The job is low paid.  The family are in  receipt
    of benefits.  Since his release from  prison  the  appellant  has  been
    looking after the children taking them to school, preparing  meals  and
    putting them to bed as well as doing the general housework.

Submissions for Secretary of State

15. Mr Duffy relied on the reasons given by the Secretary of State  in  her
    refusal letter of 31 December 2013.  It was clear that  the  appellant
    did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules.  These  constituted  a
    complete code; MF (Nigeria).   Unless  the  appellant  could  point  to
    exceptional features he must fail.  There were no exceptional  features
    and accordingly the appeal should be dismissed.

16. If however we consider that we should consider proportionality we would
    need to follow the Razgar test.  The first four points were  met.   The
    remaining fifth test was whether the interference was proportionate  to
    the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  In  determining  that
    issue we required to  follow  the  provisions  of  section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  There was a qualifying child but it could not be
    said that the effect of a deportation on them would  be  unduly  harsh.
    The appellant had committed a crime for which he was sentenced  to  two
    years imprisonment.  The statute said that he had to be deported and in
    SS (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal said that must be heavily against him.
     While the risk of reoffending was said to be low public revulsion  and
    the  requirement  for  a  deterrent  against  foreign  criminals   were
    important public interest considerations which had  to  be  given  full
    effect.


Submissions for appellant

17. Mr Mold submitted that the starting point were the  Immigration  Rules.
    In considering whether the effects on the qualifying children would  be
    unduly harsh it was right to consider whether  a  family  member  could
    care for the children.  It was accepted  that  the  mother  could  look
    after the children  but  the  question  was  the  level  of  care.   At
    paragraph 20 of its determination the FTT found that  the  appellant's
    partner had struggled while he was in prison.  She  worked  long  hours
    and had two children to care for.  Were the appellant  to  be  deported
    this would be a long term struggle.  He continued that if we  were  not
    with him on this matter we required to look  at  the  public  interest.
    While section 32 of the Act required the Secretary of State to  make  a
    deportation order unless one the exceptions in section 33 was made  out
    the public interest in  this  case  was  diminished  by  the  level  of
    offending and outweighed by the interest of the children.

18. Mr Mold submitted that the judge had said  in  his  sentencing  remarks
    that the appellant had not  gained  financially  and  did  not  have  a
    leading role in what was happening.  The offence was the cultivation of
    a class B drug and not class A.  He was a first offender.  While it was
    accepted that there was an interest in a deterrent effect he was not  a
    persistent offender.  Accordingly the public interest  was  lower  than
    what might be thought.  The appellant had been in this country  for  16
    years.  He was a full time carer for his children allowing his  partner
    to work long hours.  His wife and children were now UK  citizens.   The
    eldest child had been here for seven years - all his life.  There would
    be difficulties if the children had to go back to China.  They  are  in
    education in this country.  If the appellant went back leaving his wife
    and children here she would have to give up work and rely on  benefits.
    Accordingly there was an economic benefit to the appellant remaining in
    this country.  The test in section 117C of the 2002 Act was met.

Decision

19. The decision falls to be remade in the light of the new rules following
    the passing of the UK Immigration Act 2014.  Since  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to a period less than four years but more than 12 months  the
    provisions of paragraph 399 apply:

         "(a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


             (i)  the child is a British citizen; or


             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case (a)  it would  be
                  unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which
                  the person is to be deported; and (b)  it would be  unduly
                  harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person
                  who is to be deported; or


         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and


             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and


             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and


             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported."


    No submission was made to us  that  paragraph  (b)  was  engaged.   The
    appellant's wife is a UK citizen.  However the relationship was  formed
    at a time when the appellant was not in the  UK  lawfully;  his  appeal
    against his asylum claim was refused in 1999.   Moreover  he  absconded
    from his reporting requirements between 2006 and 2009.


20. Turning to (a) there is a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
    child who is  a  British  citizen.   Both  the  children  are  British.
    Accordingly the issue is whether it would be unduly harsh for either of
    the children to live in China or for the children to remain in  the  UK
    without the appellant.

21. The test  in  the  rules  is  "unduly  harsh".   In  our  opinion  this
    recognises that such decisions may have inherently harsh  consequences.
    However  the  decision  maker  is  required  to   look   beyond   these
    consequences to the particular facts of the case and ask whether  there
    may be factors which go beyond those that might ordinarily be  expected
    as a result of a decision to deport and which impact in a  particularly
    harsh manner on the qualifying person.

22. The decision maker must also find that it would be unduly harsh for the
    children to live in the country to which the deportee is  deported  and
    it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without  the
    deportee.  Accordingly if it were found that it was  unduly  harsh  for
    the child to remain in the UK without the deportee that  would  not  be
    sufficient unless it was also harsh  for  the  child  to  live  in  the
    country to which the person was deported.

23. A decision that obliges children  to  move  with  their  parents  to  a
    foreign country may be seen as harsh although many people migrate for a
    variety of reasons taking their children with them.   More  importantly
    unless the separation is in the interests  of  the  child  an  enforced
    separation of a child from one of their  parents  may  be  regarded  as
    harsh.  In this context however it is well to remember  that  interests
    of public policy may well require decisions to be taken that have harsh
    consequences on others.  The most  obvious  and  pertinent  example  is
    imprisonment which separates the prisoner from his family for a  period
    of time.

24. In carrying out an assessment the decision maker must also look to  the
    provisions of section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009 and  to  the  leading  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania).   The  children's
    interests are a primary consideration.

25. The children are British.  They were born here and have spent all their
    lives here.  They are in education although S will still be in nursery.
     If the children were to go to China they would require to enter a  new
    educational system.  The language of instruction would be  Chinese  and
    not English.  They would be in a new social and  cultural  environment.
    They would lose old friends and require to find new ones.

26. On the other hand they are both relatively young.   They  come  from  a
    Chinese background.  Although their mother  is  a  UK  citizen  she  is
    Chinese by origin.  Her English  language  skills  are  such  that  she
    required to give evidence to the FTT through an interpreter as did  the
    appellant.  It is assumed that the children speak Chinese at home.   If
    the children were to go to China with the appellant they would have the
    support of both their parents in integrating into a new environment.

27. The FTT considered the possible impact of the one child  policy.   They
    did not consider that that was an important factor  in  their  decision
    and while it may have implications for the parents it is  difficult  to
    see how it would impact on the children themselves.

28. Taking account of all these matters we see no reason to depart from the
    conclusion reached by the FTT, who had  the  advantage  of  seeing  the
    appellant and his wife and assessing their evidence, that there are  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to   the   parties   returning   to   China.
    Accordingly we cannot say  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to live in China.

29. If the appellant were to be deported and the children remained  in  the
    UK then they would be deprived of  the  society  and  guidance  of  the
    appellant and all the other natural features  that  might  be  expected
    from a father.  Moreover the family is not wealthy.  Visits to China to
    see their father may be difficult and attempting to sustain a  parental
    relationship by electronic means has obvious limitations.  The  reality
    is that the children may face permanent separation and loss of  contact
    with their father.  We can also accept that while the appellant's  wife
    coped with the children on their own during his time in prison it is  a
    more difficult proposition on a long term basis.

30. We can accept that the circumstances may be seen as particularly harsh.
     Given that we have found that it would not be unduly harsh  to  expect
    the family to move with the appellant to China we do not need to decide
    whether it would be unduly harsh in terms of the rules for the children
    to remain in this country after the appellant is deported.

31. In terms of rule 398 if the rules 399 and 399A do not apply the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling reasons over and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

32. In MF (Nigeria) the Court of Appeal described the rules as  a  complete
    code.  The rules have changed a little since then.  In  particular  the
    words that  appeared  at  that  time  in  rule  398  were  "exceptional
    circumstances".  These have  now  been  replaced  by  "very  compelling
    circumstances".  We  do  not  consider  that  much  turns  on  the  new
    language; we note that the court said (at paragraph 43) that where rule
    399 and 399A do not apply very compelling reasons will be  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.

33.  There  is  another  alteration  to  the  effect  that  the  compelling
    circumstances are over and above those described in rule 399 and  399A.
    We simply take this to mean that having failed to succeed on the  rules
    the appellant cannot then succeed on the second part of the test on the
    same facts.

34. In our opinion there are no  factors  outwith  the  rules  which  would
    entitle us to conduct a separate and free assessment of the appellant's
    article 8 claim.   We  noted  that  the  FTT  in  their  assessment  of
    proportionality referred to the fact that this  was  a  first  offence,
    that the appellant was  assessed  as  low  risk  and  that  there  were
    positive references from prison officers.  That is all  no  doubt  true
    but we do not consider that these factors outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in the deportation of what Parliament has classed  as  foreign
    criminals.

35. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  such
    that the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to deport him is dismissed.

36. As children are involved we shall make an anonymity order.




                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                      Date: 14 November 2014
