
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00023/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2020                  |On 12 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

                            MAHAMUD SINAG ISMAIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant (Respondent before this Tribunal):  No representation
For the Respondent (Appellant before this Tribunal):  Mr.  P  Singh,  Senior
                                                 Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal Seelhoff ('the Judge')  promulgated  on  28  July
   2019 in which he allowed an appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
   deport the appellant  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations 2016 ('the  2016  Regulations').  The  decision  is  dated  4
   January 2019.

2. The parties are referred to in this decision as they appeared before  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bristow granted permission to appeal  on
   all grounds advanced by the respondent.

Anonymity

4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and the  parties  did  not
   request that I make one.

Background

5. The appellant is a Norwegian citizen and is aged  23.  He  is  of  Somali
   heritage. His mother was recognised as an asylum seeker by the  Norwegian
   authorities and became a Norwegian citizen in 1996. The family  moved  to
   the United Kingdom in 2002, when the  appellant  was  aged  5/6  and  his
   entire education was undertaken in this country.

6. The appellant was given a caution in 2012  for  possessing  cannabis.  He
   received a  suspended  8-week  custodial  sentence  in  August  2015  for
   possessing an offensive weapon in  a  public  place,  a  knife,  and  for
   possessing cannabis.

7. On 19 October 2016, at  Isleworth  Crown  Court,  he  pleaded  guilty  to
   wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm, contrary to section 20  of  the
   Offences against the Person Act 1861 and to having a bladed article in  a
   public place, contrary to section 139 of the Criminal Justice  Act  1988.
   On 27 March 2017, the appellant was sentenced by HHJ Johnson to two years
   imprisonment for the GBH offence, and to 12  months  concurrent  for  the
   bladed article offence. In his sentencing remarks, HHJ Johnson  observed,
   inter alia:

         'Stabbing someone in the neck is an extremely dangerous part of the
         body to attack. There may  have  been  some  provocation,  but  the
         pictures show that a member of the public stood between the two  of
         you and you had ample opportunity to  withdraw.  Not  content,  you
         went back to the car, you armed yourself, and you delivered a  blow
         which caused a cut to his ear and a nasty cut to his  neck,  behind
         his ear, as I said, a very vulnerable part of the body.  That  fact
         that you had a weapon with you of course makes that, together  with
         the injury, a category 1 offence ... You have a propensity to carry
         knives, and you had a  knife  on  you  that  night,  and  when  you
         perceived yourself to be provoked, you used that knife in a  wicked
         way.'

8. By her decision to deport dated 4 January 2019 the  respondent  concluded
   that the appellant posed a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
   threat to one of the fundamental interests of United Kingdom society  and
   she considered that the appellant's deportation was justified  on  ground
   of public policy, public security or public  health  in  accordance  with
   regulation 23(6)(b) of the 2016 Regulations.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

9. The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  mother  had  not  consistently
   exercised EEA Treaty rights between  2002  and  2010,  save  for  a  year
   working as a carer. She studied thereafter for a period of time  but  did
   not possess comprehensive sickness  insurance.  She  commenced  full-time
   employment as  a  carer  in  2014/2015.  Though  the  appellant  remained
   dependent on his mother after he turned 18, his mother  exercised  Treaty
   rights for less than 5 years before his conviction  and  imprisonment  in
   2017. The Judge determined that the appellant was not entitled to  higher
   levels  of  protection  against  expulsion  and  this  finding  was   not
   challenged by the appellant.

10. The Judge found that the appellant did not pose a genuine,  present  and
   sufficiently  serious   threat   to   society.   When   considering   the
   proportionality of  the  proposed  removal,  the  Judge  found  that  the
   appellant had undergone significant rehabilitation and had  been  out  of
   trouble for approaching two years.

Decision

11. Mr. Singh  was  candid  in  acknowledging  the  respondent's  difficulty
   arising from the grounds of appeal advanced. The grounds run  to  sixteen
   paragraphs, though many are discursive in nature or simply set out  facts
   arising in the appeal. In granting permission  to  appeal,  JFtT  Bristow
   primarily focused upon the challenge to  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
   appellant remained dependent on his mother.

12. Being mindful of the recent reported decision of  OK  (PTA;  alternative
   findings) Ukraine [2020] UKUT 00044 (IAC), confirming that permission  to
   appeal should not be granted on the grounds as pleaded if there is, quite
   apart from the grounds, a reason why the appeal  would  fail,  Mr.  Singh
   acknowledged that the respondent had not expressly challenged the Judge's
   finding  that  the  appellant  did  not  pose  a  genuine,  present   and
   sufficiently serious threat to society. Rather, the  grounds  focus  upon
   the Judge's assessment of proportionality, both as to his dependency upon
   his family and his integration into British society. He further  accepted
   that a reference within the grounds to the appellant having a  propensity
   to carry knives flowed from the challenge to proportionality and was  not
   a  challenge  to  the  Judge's  finding  as  to  genuine,   present   and
   sufficiently serious risk.

13. Mr. Singh accepted that a finding as  to  whether  the  conduct  of  the
   appellant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
   is a prerequisite for the adoption of an expulsion measure and it is only
   upon such a threat being established that the  issue  of  proportionality
   arises.

14. Consequent to Mr. Singh's acceptance that there was no challenge to  the
   Judge's finding that the appellant does not represent a genuine,  present
   and sufficiently serious threat I dismissed the  respondent's  appeal  at
   the conclusion of the hearing.

15. It is appropriate  to  observe  that  the  appellant  confirmed  at  the
   hearing that he has recently been convicted on one  count  of  aggravated
   burglary following a Crown Court trial. He is due to be  sentenced  later
   in March 2020 and expects a  custodial  sentence.  From  the  information
   provided orally by the appellant at the  hearing,  the  offence  and  his
   subsequent arrest occurred a short while after the Judge's  decision  was
   promulgated and so does not fall to be considered at  the  error  of  law
   hearing. The appellant indicated his awareness that his recent conviction
   is likely to result in the respondent seeking to renew efforts to  deport
   him.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of
   an error on a point of law.

17. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 2 March 2020

