
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00166/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2013                           |On 28 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

          LORD BANNATYNE, SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Abdullah Hashim Mahamodhossen
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Gokhool, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This matter came before us as an appeal on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State against a determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  ("Tribunal")
    promulgated on 23 May 2013.

2.   Permission to appeal against the determination was granted on  13  June
    2013.

3.   The Tribunal heard an appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 8 January 2013 to make a deportation  order  by  virtue  of
    Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The Tribunal decided: (1)
    to dismiss the appeal in terms of the  Immigration  Rules  and  (2)  to
    allow the appeal in terms of Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.
    It was  against  the  second  decision  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    appealed.

Background

4.   The respondent is a citizen of Mauritius born on 26 December 1994.   He
    is a single man with no dependants.  The respondent first came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 31 March 2004 when he was 9  years  old.   He  was  a
    dependent of his mother and was granted six months leave along with his
    father and younger sister.  Further leave was granted to  him  in  this
    category up to and including an application made on 29  November  2010.
    The respondent's family's application was  refused  on  17  March  2011
    owing to issues about maintenance/funding.  The family's appeal  rights
    were  exhausted  on  26  February  2013.   They  submitted  a   further
    application for leave to remain on 15 May 2013, which  application  had
    not been dealt with at the time of the hearing before the Tribunal.

5.   Since his arrival in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  respondent  has  only
    visited Mauritius on one occasion.  He was taken to Mauritius  in  2007
    by his father.  The reason for this visit was that he had been  bullied
    in school and he had been taken to Mauritius to get away from things in
    the United Kingdom.  On that occasion he spent one month in Mauritius.

6.   The  respondent  has  relatives  in  Mauritius,  namely:  his  paternal
    grandmother and his paternal uncles.

7.   On 25 February 2011 the respondent was  convicted  of  violent  crimes;
    these were: attempting to cause grievous bodily harm; possession and/or
    use of an offensive  weapon  (non-firearms);  and  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm.  He was sentenced to three years and three  months'
    imprisonment.

8.   The respondent has a  number  of  previous  convictions,  beginning  in
    August 2009 which include, in addition to his recent  offences,  common
    assault, robbery, burglary, theft, using abusive  words  or  behaviour,
    possession of a controlled drug and attempted robbery.   The  sanctions
    imposed for those earlier offences ranged from  a  ten  month  referral
    order, a twelve month supervision order,  a  conditional  discharge,  a
    fine and a youth rehabilitation order.

9.   When sentencing the respondent on 25  February  2011  the  trial  judge
    noted that the respondent's criminal behaviour was escalating and  took
    into account the fact that as a youth then aged 16, he was more able if
    so inclined to change.  Beginning with a custodial sentence at the  top
    end of the range of eight years, the judge reduced the sentence  to  39
    months to reflect the fact that the most recent incident was charged as
    an attempt.  In addition, the age of the respondent and his guilty plea
    were also taken into account.

Submissions on Behalf of the Secretary of State

10.  Mr Avery on behalf of the Secretary of State opened his submissions  by
    drawing to our attention that the Tribunal had applied a two stage test
    in its consideration  of  the  case.   First,  it  had  considered  the
    respondent's case in terms of the Immigration Rules and then turned  to
    examine, separately, the respondent's case in terms of Article 8.  This
    approach, he submitted, was wrong  in  law.   In  elaboration  of  that
    contention, he argued,  that  paragraphs  398,  399  and  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules reflect the Maslov/Boultif principles in a  way  that
    ensures consistency of assessment.  The  Rules  cover  the  key  Maslov
    factors on the  seriousness  of  the  criminality,  relationships  with
    family members such as spouses or children, and long term residence and
    private life.  In addition there is the ability to  take  into  account
    exceptional factors as set out at paragraphs 397 and 398.   Given  that
    such a comprehensive approach was  taken  in  the  relevant  Rules,  he
    submitted that it was an error of law to apply a two stage test.

11.  The second branch of his argument was to this effect: that even if  the
    proper approach to the matter was to apply a two stage test  then  when
    making the assessment in terms of Article 8,  the  Tribunal  must  give
    significant  weight  to  the  relevant  Rules.    In   advancing   that
    proposition, Mr Avery relied on the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    MF (Nigeria) (Article 8 - new rules) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).

12.  The background to MF (Nigeria) was the consideration of  the  (at  that
    time) newly promulgated Immigration Rules and their impact on Article 8
    claims, and at paragraph 43 the Upper Tribunal observed regarding these
    new Rules:

         "Whereas previously it has been  open  to  judges,  within  certain
         limits, to reach their own view of what the public interest is  and
         the weight to be attached to it, the scope for doing so is now more
         limited."

13.  At paragraph 48 of its determination,  the  Upper  Tribunal  reinforced
    the foregoing observation when it said this:

         The new Rules have: "enhanced judicial understanding of the  public
             interest."

14.  Mr Avery contended that the Rules were now a clear  expression  of  the
    public interest and the weight attached  to  it,  as  set  out  by  the
    Secretary of State  and  endorsed  by  Parliament.   The  Tribunal,  he
    submitted, must have regard to the nature and  weight  of  that  public
    interest as expressed in the Rules when assessing a claim under Article
    8.  He again found support for his position  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and  in
    particular from the observations of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph  70
    where it said this:

         "That (the appellant) has failed to meet the  requirements  of  the
         new rules is a very significant consideration and the  reasons  why
         he has been found to fail are also  relevant  when  conducting  our
         proportionality assessment."

15.  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  on  a  proper  reading  of  the  Tribunal's
    determination it had failed to consider the Rules and  the  appellant's
    failure  to  meet  the  requirements  thereof  in  the  course  of  its
    assessment of the Article 8  claim  and  thus,  having  regard  to  the
    guidance in MF (Nigeria), had erred in law.

16.  The third leg of the argument on behalf of the Secretary of  State  was
    this: At paragraph  32,  the  Tribunal  had  found  that  it  would  be
    speculative to come to a conclusion about the future enjoyment  of  the
    respondent's family life in Mauritius whilst his parents and  siblings'
    immigration status was unconfirmed.  It was Mr  Avery's  position  that
    the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  provide  adequate   reasons   why   the
    respondent's  family's  immigration  status  was  not  relevant.    The
    Tribunal were aware that the respondent's family  had  exhausted  their
    appeal rights as of 26 February 2013, and whilst they had submitted  an
    application for leave to remain on 15 May 2013, the Tribunal had failed
    to provide adequate reasons as to why this application would  have  had
    any prospect of success given that  they  had  so  recently  had  their
    previous appeal dismissed by the Tribunal.

17.  He submitted that in  these  circumstances  the  respondent's  family's
    immigration status was entirely relevant, and given  their  immigration
    status was uncertain, he submitted that his family was likely  to  have
    to return to Mauritius to continue their family life and therefore  the
    respondent would have family support in Mauritius.

18.  In any event, even if his family did remain  in  the  UK,  it  was  his
    position  that  the  respondent  had  spent  his  formative  years   in
    Mauritius, had family members there who he could turn  to  for  support
    and had visited Mauritius.  In those circumstances he submitted that he
    did have ties to Mauritius.  The respondent was an adult and there  was
    no evidence of any dependency upon  his  parents  or  siblings,  beyond
    normal  emotional  ties,  and  moreover  his  parents  could  send  him
    financial support from the UK, if they did not return with him.

19.  Lastly, he directed our attention to paragraph  38  of  the  Tribunal's
    determination where it was found that the respondent had been  assessed
    as posing a high risk of harm to  the  public  and  a  medium  risk  of
    reoffending in the Pre-Sentence report.  He submitted that the Tribunal
    had failed, in light of the said finding, to provide any reasons as  to
    their own findings of his risk of harm and reoffending.   Additionally,
    given that the assessment stated  that  the  respondent  would  require
    family support to reduce these  risks  and  to  remain  drug-free,  the
    Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons as to his risk  if  his
    family were removed to Mauritius, which given their immigration history
    was likely, and which would thus increase his risks.

20.  It was submitted that each  of  the  foregoing  errors  amounted  to  a
    material error of law and that in any event, when taken together,  they
    amounted to a material error of law, and he moved that we should  grant
    the appeal.

Reply on Behalf of the Respondent

21.  Mr Gokhool commenced his submissions by contending  that  the  Tribunal
    had properly addressed the Immigration Rules and that the two-step test
    which it had adopted was correct.

22.  He submitted that as regards family life  the  Tribunal  had  correctly
    analysed this (see: paragraph 32 of the determination).

23.  Under reference to paragraph 29  of  the  determination,  he  contended
    that the Tribunal had analysed  the  position  regarding  his  ties  to
    Mauritius and correctly held that he had no ties thereto.

24.  His position was that the Tribunal had properly analysed the  issue  of
    risk of reoffending.  It started its consideration at paragraph  39  by
    accepting the seriousness of the offence with which the respondent  had
    been convicted and his very poor record  of  offending.   However,  the
    Tribunal had then  accepted  the  respondent's  position  that  he  had
    changed and that his family  was  willing  to  support  him.   He  laid
    particular emphasis on  the  last  sentence  in  paragraph  39  of  the
    determination:

         "He (the respondent) is still a very young man who  if  removed  at
         present would lose the practical and emotional support which  comes
         from living with his family that  he  needs  to  keep  him  out  of
         trouble."

25.  He submitted that overall the Tribunal had  properly  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise when considering the issue of proportionality.

Discussion

26.  As regards the first branch of the Secretary of  State's  argument,  we
    have no difficulty in rejecting this.  MF (Nigeria) and Izuazu  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) make it clear that the correct approach,  in  such
    circumstances, is a  two  step  one:  first,  a  consideration  of  the
    Immigration Rules and secondly a separate consideration of Article 8.

27.  However, it appears to us that there is considerably more force in  the
    second branch of Mr Avery's argument.  It is clear  from  MF  (Nigeria)
    that when conducting the proportionality assessment in terms of Article
    8 a decision maker must have regard to the nature  and  weight  of  the
    public interest as expressed in the Immigration Rules.

28.  The Tribunal's discussion of the Article 8 issue is between  paragraphs
    31 and 40 of the determination.  When these paragraphs are  considered,
    we are unable to  identify  any  point  at  which  the  Tribunal,  when
    conducting  its  proportionality  assessment,   has   regard   to   the
    Immigration Rules, the respondent's failure to meet the requirements of
    the Rules, and the reasons for  his  failure.   These  are  significant
    considerations and the failure to  engage  with  these  issues  in  our
    judgment amounts to a material error of law.

29.  Turning to the third leg of Mr Avery's argument, we believe that  there
    is substantial merit in this submission.

30.  The Tribunal at paragraph 32 fails to engage  with  the  issue  of  the
    immigration status of the respondent's family.  This issue  is  clearly
    of  relevance.   It  is  of   relevance   in   the   consideration   of
    proportionality in that, if the expectation or likelihood is  that  the
    respondent's family will be returned to Mauritius then the respondent's
    family life would not be likely to be interfered with to  any  material
    extent were he to be deported to Mauritius.

31.  Given that the respondent's family had exhausted  their  appeal  rights
    as of 26 February 2013 then on balance, the  likelihood  is  that  they
    would be returned to Mauritius.  Accordingly, it appears to us that  it
    would not have been "speculation" as asserted by the Tribunal "to  come
    to  a  conclusion  about  the  future  enjoyment  of  family  life   in
    Mauritius".

32.  At paragraph 39 of their determination the Tribunal says this:

         "He is still a very young man who if removed at present would  lose
         the practical and emotional support which comes  from  living  with
         his family that he needs to keep him out of trouble."

33.  This finding highlights the relevance of the immigration status of  the
    respondent's family, in that if they were not  in  the  United  Kingdom
    then they could not offer support  to  the  respondent  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is clear in looking at the Tribunal's whole  reasoning  on
    the Article 8 issue, and particularly when the above passage is  looked
    at, that the Tribunal has assumed the respondent's family  will  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  For this conclusion there is no  basis  in  the
    evidence.

34.  For these reasons we believe that the foregoing amounts  to  a  further
    material error of law.

35.  Turning to the last chapter in Mr Avery's submissions, we observe  that
    at paragraph 29 the Tribunal  notes  that  in  a  Pre  Sentence  report
    prepared regarding him the respondent was said to be:

         "assessed as posing a high risk of harm to the public, medium  risk
         of reoffending."

36.  It is implicit in the Tribunal's determination that it  has  downgraded
    these findings and arrived at its  own  conclusion  as  to  risk  (see:
    paragraph 39 of the determination).

37.  In arriving at its own view as to risk,  the  Tribunal  has  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons.  The factors to which the Tribunal refers  at
    paragraph 39, in  reaching  its  said  decision,  are  almost  entirely
    factors which were had  regard  to  in  the  Pre  Sentence  report  and
    therefore do  not  justify  any  downgrading  of  the  risk  which  the
    respondent poses.

38.  In addition in paragraph 39 no consideration is given to  the  prospect
    of the respondent not having the support of  his  family.   His  having
    their support  is  a  critical  factor  in  the  Tribunal's  Article  8
    assessment.  We have, earlier in this determination, opined as  to  the
    likelihood of their being in the United Kingdom given their immigration
    status.  Accordingly in its Article 8 assessment the  Tribunal  had  to
    have regard to this factor.  It did not do so.

39.  When taken cumulatively, these errors of law go  to  the  core  of  the
    reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  in  reaching   its   decision   regarding
    proportionality and are clearly therefore material errors of  law.   In
    these circumstances the decision of the Tribunal must be set aside.

40.  Having orally advised parties that we had  concluded  that  there  were
    material errors of law, we moved on to hear submissions  regarding  the
    remaking of the decision.

Remaking of the Decision

41.  Mr Gokhool made the following submissions.  He  reminded  us  that  the
    respondent had arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of  9  and  had
    completed his primary education here and had had all of  his  secondary
    education in this country.  It was his position that the respondent had
    changed since  serving  his  prison  sentence.   He  had  committed  no
    offences since his release.  He had been to Mauritius only  once  since
    he had come to this country.  He had  built  a  private  life  in  this
    country.  He had a family life here and was particularly dependent upon
    his parents.  He reminded us that the respondent was  only  fifteen  to
    sixteen when the offences earlier noted had  been  committed.   He  had
    been part of a gang.  He had paid the consequences for his offences.

Reply for the Secretary of State

42.  Mr Avery relied on the terms  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter.   In  addition  he  relied  on  his  earlier  submissions  made
    regarding the  issue  of  error  of  law.   He  pointed  out  that  the
    respondent had always  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  a  temporary
    capacity and must accordingly always have thought that he was returning
    to Mauritius.  The expectation  was,  given  his  family's  immigration
    status, that they would also be returning to Mauritius.

43.  He submitted that considerable weight must be placed on the nature  and
    seriousness of the  offence  last  committed  by  the  respondent,  his
    history of offending and his risk to the public.  He submitted,  having
    regard to these factors, that there was a clear public interest in  his
    removal.

Discussion

44.  As a starting point, we have had regard to the guidance provided in  MF
    (Nigeria) and have had regard when assessing this claim under Article 8
    to the nature and weight of the public interest  as  expressed  in  the
    Immigration Rules.

45.  Secondly, in making our Article 8 assessment, we  have  had  regard  to
    the observations of the ECHR in  Maslov  v  Austria  [2008]  ECHR  (GC)
    1638/03, namely:

         "Although  Article  8  provides  no  absolute  protection   against
         expulsion for any category of aliens, including those who were born
         in the host country or moved here in  their  early  childhood,  the
         court has already found that regard is to be  had  to  the  special
         situation of aliens who have spent  most,  if  not  all,  of  their
         childhood in the host country, or brought  up  there  and  received
         their education there.


         In short, the court considers that for a settled  migrant  who  has
         lawfully spent all or the major part of his or  her  childhood  and
         youth in the host country, very serious  reasons  are  required  to
         justify expulsion.  This is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
         concerned committed the offences underlying the  expulsion  measure
         as a juvenile."

46.  In considering the impact of  Maslov  in  the  instant  case  we  would
    observe that the respondent  could  not  be  described  as  a  "settled
    migrant" given that his status in this country  was  always  temporary,
    being dependent upon his mother who was making a series of applications
    based on her status as a student.  However, despite this we accept that
    in the whole circumstances of  this  case,  very  serious  reasons  are
    required to justify the expulsion of the respondent.

47.  In considering whether such very serious  reasons  exist  we  have  had
    regard to the following factors:

    (i)  Seriousness of the  index  offences.   The  circumstances  of  the
         offences as set out in the sentencing  judge's  sentencing  remarks
         are these:


             "The circumstances of those offences are that on  the  day  in
             question there had been an argument  between  your  girlfriend
             ... and Ms ..., a schoolgirl then  aged  15,  during  which  a
             physical altercation took place.


             After that had taken place your girlfriend shouted to  Ms  ...
             that she was dead, and she then called you to  come  and  sort
             her out, which you did.
             As a result of that call  you  armed  yourself  with  a  large
             kitchen knife and then went to the  area  where  the  incident
             occurred.


             You saw Ms ... walking along the road with a friend as she was
             making her way to a recreation centre.  You chased her  across
             the road and then deliberately tripped her up, causing her  to
             suffer the injuries which I have seen on the photographs  that
             have been handed up to me.


             She had a serious abrasion, bruising to  her  left  elbow  and
             bruising to her torso and her legs.


             Having caused her to fall to the ground, you then took out the
             knife that you had taken with you, holding it  in  your  right
             gloved hand, and interestingly you did not  have  a  glove  on
             your left hand, you then attempted to stab her with the knife.


             Fortunately for her she is a lot taller than you so  was  able
             to use her legs to kick out as  you  repeatedly  attempted  to
             stab her.  But as a result of her kicking  out  she  prevented
             you from being able to achieve your objective.


             You were eventually stopped by a passerby ... who  shouted  at
             you to stop, confronted  you  and  at  which  stage  you  then
             brandished the knife at him."


    (ii) The respondent's record of offending.


    (iii)    The escalation in gravity of this offending, as noted  by  the
         Tribunal at paragraph 33 of its determination.


    (iv) The risk the respondent poses, which is set out at paragraph 38 of
         the Tribunal's determination:


             "He was assessed as posing high risk of harm  to  the  public,
             medium risk of reoffending."


48.  The forgoing factors in our view  form  an  extremely  pressing  public
    interest case for the appellant's deportation.  These factors raise  in
    the starkest terms the need to protect the public  from  serious  crime
    and its effects.  We remind ourselves of the observations in  DS  India
    [2009] EWCA Civ 544  and  JO  (Uganda)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10  that  in
    deportation cases greater weight can be placed on criminal activity and
    its effect in the balancing exercise than in other types of cases (see:
    Rix LJ at paragraph 30 of DS and Richards LJ at paragraph 29 of JO).

49.  Moreover, in our view there is a further aspect of public  interest  as
    explained by Aikens LJ in RU (Bangladesh) v the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  651  at  paragraph  43  where  he
    observes:
        "The point about "deterrence" is not whether the deportation  of  a
        particular "foreign criminal" may  or  may  not  have  a  deterrent
        effect on other prospective offenders.  It  concerns  a  much  more
        fundamental concept which is explained by Judge LJ at [83]  of  his
        judgement in N (Kenya).  The UK operates an immigration  system  by
        which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter  and
        remain in the UK.  The operation of that system must  take  account
        of broad issues of social cohesion in the UK.  Moreover the  public
        has to have confidence in its operation.   These  requirements  are
        for the "public good" or are in the "public interest".  For both of
        these requirements to be fulfilled the operation of the system must
        contain an element of deterrence to non-British  citizens  who  are
        either already in the UK ... or are thinking of coming to  the  UK"
        so as to ensure that they clearly  understand  that,  whatever  the
        circumstances,  one  of  the  consequences   of   crime   will   be
        deportation."


    It seems to us that this is a further factor  in  the  public  interest
    favouring deportation.


50.  When taken in cumulo, we consider that these  factors  amount  to  very
    serious reasons in terms of the decision in Maslov v Austria.

51.  Further, we observe that in relation to the respondent's  family  life,
    the expectation is, given his family lack of status  in  this  country,
    they will not remain here and will return to  Mauritius.   Accordingly,
    the respondent would be able to continue his family life and  have  the
    support of his family in Mauritius.

52.  Assuming the above is wrong and the respondent's family remains in  the
    United Kingdom, we do not believe that  the  breaching  of  his  family
    relations to the extent that he was in Mauritius and they were  in  the
    United Kingdom would be sufficient to prevail over what we have earlier
    described as the extremely pressing public interest in the respondent's
    deportation.

53.  We would observe in relation to such disruption as there would be  that
    his family could keep in contact with him, and he could keep in contact
    with them through modern means of communication.  His family could,  if
    they so wished, support him financially in Mauritius.  They could visit
    him in Mauritius.  We note that his father took him to Mauritius for  a
    month in 2007 (see: paragraph  29  of  the  Tribunal's  determination).
    Given the nature of his immigration status in this country, as we  have
    earlier described it, this is not a case where he must  have  formed  a
    view that he was to remain in this country, rather  the  view  that  he
    would have formed must have been that he would return to  Mauritius  at
    some point.

54.  In their determination at paragraph 29, the Tribunal says this:

         "He (the respondent) has no family  there  (in  Mauritius)  on  his
         mother's side; his paternal grandmother is 85 and it was plain from
         comments made during the hearing that he has little  time  for  his
         paternal uncles and has no relationship with them.   As  stated  in
         the recent case of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria  (2013)
         UKUT 45 (IAC) the word 'ties'  involves  there  being  a  continued
         connection to life in that country and involves something more than
         merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed
         deportation or  removal.   We  are  therefore  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has no ties to Mauritius."

55.  We note what is said in Ogundimu.  However, given the basis upon  which
    the respondent was in this country, namely a temporary basis  based  on
    his mother's applications as a student, and given that his father  took
    him to Mauritius, at a time when he was  having  difficulties  in  this
    country (see: paragraph 29 of the Tribunal's determination), when taken
    together with his having a grandmother and uncles  on  the  island,  we
    believe that applying the guidance in Ogundimu the respondent still has
    ties to Mauritius.

56.  In conclusion, having considered all of the factors, we do not  believe
    it is disproportionate for the respondent to be removed.


Signed                                  Date


Lord Bannatyne, Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
