
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00603/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 September 2013                           |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   m f m s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker
For the Respondent:    Mr C Physsas


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but we will refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 23  September  1977,
    as the appellant herein.

2.   It appears that the appellant had visited the United  Kingdom  in  2008
    with an entry clearance visa.  However he then returned to  Sri  Lanka.
    He re-entered the United Kingdom on 21 October 2011 at Heathrow Airport
    with a false Malaysian passport.  He was stopped on 26th  October  2011
    at Holyhead travelling to Ireland and  gave  police  a  forged  driving
    licence as proof of his identity.  He was then arrested for providing a
    false document and taken to Holyhead Police Station.   He  was  charged
    and subsequently pleaded guilty to the charge  relating  to  the  false
    driving licence.  He was sentenced at Mold Crown Court on  12  December
    2011 to eight months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.

3.   There was a complex history which it is not necessary to rehearse  here
    involving judicial  review  proceedings  the  upshot  of  which  was  a
    decision by the respondent on 20 March 2013 to deport the appellant and
    the appellant appealed that decision on 21  March  2013  and  then  was
    released from immigration detention.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before a panel on  22  May  2013  when  the
    appellant was represented by Ms Physsas, as he was before us.

5.   The appellant claimed that  he  had  been  imprisoned  because  it  was
    suspected he had been  funding  the  LTTE  but  he  had  been  actually
    donating money to an orphanage which  had  been  situated  in  an  area
    controlled by the LTTE.  He had made donations between 2005 and  August
    2008 and had not had problems with the authorities prior to that  time.
    He had been to the  United  Kingdom  in  2008  having  been  granted  a
    business visa and on return had been asked what he had  been  doing  in
    London and then he had been accused of money-laundering for  the  LTTE.
    He was then allowed to go home but the following day  police  had  come
    and searched his house and had taken all his documents.   He  had  been
    detained at the local police station and ill-treated and  interrogated.
    He had been detained for a year and nine  months  and  had  never  been
    taken to court.  However it had been arranged that he could be taken to
    court instead of someone else and from there he had managed  to  escape
    from a toilet window.  The following day his father  took  him  to  the
    coast and he went to India by boat.

6.   The respondent considered that his account lacked credibility and  took
    a point under Section 8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   The  respondent  considered  that   the
    appellant had claimed asylum  only  after  his  arrest  by  police  for
    providing false information.

7.   The appellant gave oral  evidence  before  the  panel  and  was  cross-
    examined.  The appellant's account was supported  by  medical  evidence
    from a Dr Keniger.

8.   The findings of the panel have been the subject of a challenge  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  and  we  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of   the
    determination as follows:

         "79. As with so many claims for asylum, the Appellant's credibility
             remains a critical factor.  In assessing  his  credibility  we
             have to have regard to section  8  of  the  2004  Act  as  the
             Respondent had.  It was suggested to  us  that  the  Appellant
             claimed asylum immediately.  Judge Hughes was much  closer  to
             events and we note his sentencing remarks (see Annex B of  the
             Respondent's bundle)  in  which  he  stated  that  he  had  to
             sentence the Appellant (and his co-accused)  for  events  that
             had happened 'in Holyhead in October' but  not  when  he  came
             into the United Kingdom illegally.  He went on  to  say  'that
             had happened some considerable time  previously'  and  he  was
             concerned with a false driving licence and not passports which
             had been used to gain entry.  But without any further evidence
             at all, such perhaps as  an  extract  from  any  interview  on
             arrest, we are not satisfied as to the extent of any delay and
             any impact upon the Appellant's credibility adversely.  It  is
             true that he did not seize the opportunity  to  claim  at  the
             Airport on arrival  but  was  seeking  to  remove  himself  to
             Ireland, having crossed England and Wales to do so.   In  all,
             however, we find that any adverse effect  on  his  credibility
             under s. 8 is relatively minimal.


         80.  Ms Ellis has sought to press upon us what she described as  an
             inherent contradiction in the Appellant, as  a  Muslim,  being
             suspected of involvement with LTTE.  She considering that  the
             background evidence shows a sustained hostility  between  that
             organisation and all Muslims.  She  referred  us  to  part  of
             section 18 of the latest full Country Report (issued in  March
             2012) concerning this issue.  We see no reason  to  doubt  the
             comments made from the  British  High  Commission  in  Colombo
             quoted at paragraph 18.19 and, in particular, the reports that
             a spokesman  for  the  Muslim  community  had  told  the  High
             Commission that in 1990 the entire Muslim community in  Jaffna
             was expelled from the peninsula by the LTTE  at  gunpoint  and
             they have lost all their property and belongings.


         81.  We were not of the  opinion,  however,  that  this  of  itself
             undermined  the  Appellant's  account.   He   has   maintained
             throughout that he thought this was a charity for orphans  and
             not a front for LTTE.  Although as a Tamil Muslim he would  be
             unlikely willing to support  LTTE  -  indeed,  very  much  the
             opposite - it is  not  impossible  he  would  be  duped  by  a
             sympathiser into donating to a front  organisation.   In  this
             context we have also considered the  background  evidence  (we
             prefer that term rather  than  'objective')  provided  by  the
             Appellant.  We did not find that this information assisted  us
             in this central issue -  the  relationship  between  LTTE  and
             Muslims.  It was, so far  as  we  can  see,  all  focussed  on
             relationships between Muslims and Buddhists and others.


         82.  The Appellant has described in some  detail  the  injuries  he
             says he has received and how he came to suffer them.   He  has
             also provided the report we have mentioned from  Dr.  Keniger.
             From her c.v. we note she appears to have  qualified  in  2010
             and to have received training from 'Medical Justice' for  whom
             she has volunteered since 2007, the year she gained her  first
             degree.  We infer  that  Dr.  Keniger  had  about  two  year's
             experience post-qualification when she wrote her report on the
             Appellant.   Dr.   Keniger   is   clear   in   outlining   her
             understanding of the Istanbul Protocol and her overriding duty
             to the Tribunal.  Nowhere does she give any information  about
             the  numbers  of  scarring  reports  she  has  written.    She
             describes herself, in her c.v., as 'a  doctor  with  a  strong
             interest in women's health  and  health  system  provision  as
             components of international development'.   Her  achievements,
             as she describes them, do not appear to feature  any  work  on
             alleged  victims  of  torture,  although   she   clearly   has
             volunteered with a charity working with asylum seekers.   This
             appears to have been pre-qualification.


         83.  We have laboured this issue because an expert has to  be  just
             that.  Nevertheless, every expert  has  to  have  written  her
             first report or series  of  reports.   We  have  regarded  Dr.
             Keniger's  report  with  respect.   We  have  approached   it,
             however, with a modicum of caution simply because Dr.  Keniger
             cannot  yet  have  gained  the  experience  valuable  to   her
             colleagues through examination of  a  considerable  number  of
             such claimants and the writing of  large  numbers  of  reports
             and, from time to time, no doubt  getting  feedback  from  the
             Tribunal.


         84.  We accept her finding that the scar on the Appellant's  middle
             finger (of the left hand) is highly consistent with a cut from
             a sharp object such as a razor blade or similar.  As  such  we
             find there is some potential corroboration that the  Appellant
             has had a botched  attempt  to  correct  the  injury  to  that
             finger.  In our judgement this does not take very much further
             the issue of the cause of that injury.


         85.  Her finding concerning the scar to the back of the Appellant's
             head is said to be consistent with his being hit on  the  head
             with an iron pole as claimed but it is important to note  that
             'consistent with' tells us that the  trauma  could  have  been
             caused as described by the Appellant 'but it  is  non-specific
             and there are many other possible causes'.


         86.  The final  injuries  described  by  Dr.  Keniger  are  on  the
             Appellant's right forearm and we see no reason  to  doubt  her
             conclusion that these are  highly  consistent  with  cigarette
             burns.  We note her comments on alternatives - including self-
             harm and accept what she says about  those  possibilities  and
             the fact of the appearance confirming that  the  injuries  are
             more than a year old.  We find it  very  likely  these  are  a
             series of cigarette burns administered by a third party.


         87.  We have reminded ourselves of the lower standard  applying  in
             claims  for  asylum.   Putting  all  the  findings  from   Dr.
             Keniger's report together, we find it corroborates his account
             of being tortured.  Nothing is inconsistent with and  much  is
             indicative of torture.


         88.  The Respondent has asked us to find that it  is  not  credible
             that the Appellant would have been tortured for three or  four
             days and then not questioned or tortured during  well  over  a
             year in detention.  We understand the comment.  We also accept
             that there were several  inconsistencies  of  account.   These
             include,  the  numbers  of  those  escaping,  who  found   the
             Appellant in prison, whether his brother was arrested  on  the
             day of his escape  or  the  following  day,  when  he  was  in
             solitary confinement and when he was  not,  how  many  escaped
             prison.  There are some surprises, if the Appellant's  account
             is true.  These include the claim that he was  not  questioned
             or tortured after his initial contact with CID and others.


         89.  Yet again, however, we remind ourselves  of  the  standard  of
             proof.  To some extent we consider that any one  who  is  ill-
             treated and manages to arrive here as  an  asylum  seeker  may
             well have some unusual facts in his  account  and  potentially
             some elements of fortune.


         90.  We consider most of the inconsistencies are  explicable.   The
             Appellant might well not know,  for  instance,  precisely  how
             many  escaped  with  him.   It  really  is  not  very  germane
             precisely when his brother was arrested.  His account has been
             throughout that he never went home but to a friend's house and
             then to the Mosque before his father arranged his departure by
             boat.  The accounts of how his [sic] found in prison  are  not
             mutually incompatible in our view for the reasons suggested to
             us by Ms. Physsas.


         91.  Broadly, however, the Appellant has given a consistent account
             throughout.  We  have  found  he  has  suffered  the  injuries
             described.   There  are  some  inconsistencies  but  we   have
             reminded ourselves that the interviews he has  given  and  his
             evidence before us were all  conducted  with  an  interpreter.
             Small  inconsistencies  can   occur   from   the   nuance   of
             interpretation - there was a suggestion of  such  an  incident
             before us.  We did not find the  Appellant's  credibility  was
             essentially disturbed.


         92.  It follows that, applying the applicable  lower  standard,  we
             accepted  the  core  of  the  Appellant's  account   and,   in
             particular that he had been detained  unlawfully  and  without
             any subsequent court process for suspected funding of LTTE and
             that he had been ill-treated as he claimed and imprisoned  for
             the period he has suggested, escaping in  the  manner  he  has
             described and, indeed, was confirmed by contemporaneous  media
             reports."

9.   In the light of the findings of fact made by the panel and the  country
    guidance then applicable (LP (Sri Lanka) [2009] UKAIT 00049) as well as
    more up-to-date country information it found that the appellant met the
    majority of the risk factors in LP.  The  appellant  was  suspected  of
    funding the LTTE, was a Muslim Tamil, and the panel  had  accepted  his
    account of why he was wanted and of his escape.   The  escape  produced
    publicity and the fact that it had been a  coordinated  escape  with  a
    number of escapees would be likely to draw the adverse attention of the
    authorities.  There  was  the  issue  of  scarring  and  the  increased
    sophistication of records identified  in  the  country  guidance.   The
    appellant had in all the circumstances  demonstrated  to  the  required
    standard that he had a well-founded fear of persecution and  the  panel
    accordingly allowed his appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 3.

10.  The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  on  14  June
    2013.  This application was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.  It was
    renewed on 11 July 2013  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted
    permission to appeal on 31 July 2013 commenting that he considered  the
    grounds of appeal are "just" arguable.  He observed that it was  argued
    that the Tribunal had not properly assessed the matters which  had  led
    the Secretary of State to consider that the appellant's credibility was
    damaged and adequate reasons had not been given for the conclusions  of
    the panel.  The appellant filed a response on 13 August 2013.

11.  Mr Walker submitted that there was  a  major  credibility  issue  which
    arose under Section 8.  This had been inadequately dealt  with  by  the
    panel.  The appellant had been arrested in October but had not made his
    asylum claim until December.  The panel had not  properly  looked  into
    this aspect.

12.  It had also been argued in the grounds that the Tribunal had  erred  in
    finding that inconsistencies in the appellant's asylum claim  could  be
    attributed to interpretation issues.  This had never been raised  as  a
    problem.

13.   In  relation  to  the  medical  evidence,  the  panel  had  not  given
    satisfactory reasons why it had found that it was likely the  cigarette
    burns had been administered by a  third-party  to  cause  harm  to  the
    appellant rather than to bolster his case.  The absence  of  an  arrest
    warrant indicated that the appellant was not of interest.

14.  In reply Ms Physsas submitted that the appellant's  case  was  that  he
    had claimed asylum immediately.  It was recorded in paragraph 67 of the
    determination that he had claimed on arrest.  That was the way in which
    he had put matters in his witness statement.  The panel had  considered
    the remarks of the sentencing judge.  There was nothing  to  show  that
    the date on which the respondent had claimed the asylum application had
    been made was the accurate date.  It was accepted  that  the  appellant
    had not claimed asylum on arrival.  Any adverse effect  on  credibility
    was minimal.  Paragraph 79 might have been better worded  but  was  not
    evidence of a flawed approach.  It was  possible  that  the  sentencing
    judge had made a mistake but  at  that  stage  the  appellant  had  not
    provided a certified copy of his passport to show that he had  been  in
    the United Kingdom lawfully in 2008.

15.  Interpretation issues had arisen at the  hearing  as  was  apparent  at
    paragraph 53 of the determination.  Mistakes could happen when evidence
    was  being  interpreted.   The  panel  had  set  out  very  clearly  at
    paragraphs  88  to  91  their  consideration  of  the  inconsistencies.
    Adequate reasons had been given for the conclusions of the panel.   The
    panel had made an overall credibility assessment.

16.  Counsel submitted that the  medical  evidence  entitled  the  panel  to
    conclude as it had done.  Dr Keniger had considered alternative ways in
    which the injuries might have been inflicted.   Counsel  noted  in  the
    response that a point had been taken that the original application  for
    permission to appeal had been out of time on 14 June 2013.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions  we  reserved  our  decision.   We
    have carefully considered the points that have been made on both sides.
     We remind ourselves that we can only interfere with  the  decision  of
    the panel if it was materially flawed in law.  Before dealing with  the
    points made by the Secretary of State we also remind ourselves that the
    panel had the benefit of hearing oral evidence from the  appellant  who
    was cross-examined, it appears, at some length.

18.  We turn to the point based on Section  8  first.   It  is  accepted  by
    Counsel that paragraph 79 is not as clear as it might  be.   The  panel
    note the suggestion that the appellant claimed asylum immediately.   In
    referring to the sentencing remarks it may be that the  panel  confused
    itself because it appears that at the time of  sentencing  it  had  not
    been appreciated that the appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  in
    2008 on the basis of a business visa.  This had not been accepted until
    a certified copy of  his  passport  had  been  produced.   It  was  the
    appellant's case that he had claimed asylum on arrest.  It is  accepted
    that he did not claim asylum at Heathrow Airport.

19.  While we find, as we have said, that paragraph 79 is not  as  clear  as
    it might be it is apparent that the panel did have regard to the  issue
    of delay.  It was open to  the  panel  to  conclude  that  in  all  the
    circumstances of this case there was not a significant impact upon  the
    appellant's credibility.  We do not  find  that  the  panel  materially
    misdirected itself when making its observations in paragraph 79.

20.   In  relation  to  the  medical  evidence  the   panel   gave   careful
    consideration to the qualifications of Dr Keniger as is  apparent  from
    the extracts from the determination which we have reproduced above.  It
    probed the issue with due care.  It considered whether the injuries  to
    the appellant's arm had been self-inflicted and noted the  comments  of
    the doctor.  The age of the scarring was noted.  The panel in paragraph
    87 reminds itself of the lower standard of proof that applies in claims
    of this nature.  The panel was not obliged to give reasons for reasons.
     When paragraphs 86 and 87 are read together and in the context of  the
    findings of the panel as  a  whole  we  do  not  find  that  the  panel
    inadequately reasoned  its  decision  and  again  it  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the medical report corroborated the  appellant's  account
    of being ill-treated.

21.  As Counsel points out it is clear from  paragraphs  88  to  91  of  the
    determination that the panel did not overlook  the  various  challenges
    that the respondent had made to the appellant's credibility.   It  took
    into account the challenge that the account had been inconsistent.   It
    sets out the various inconsistencies relied upon.  The panel considered
    the background and the finding it had made about the ill-treatment  the
    appellant had  suffered.   It  further  considered  that  most  of  the
    inconsistencies were explicable.  The panel had to resolve the  matters
    in the light of  the  low  standard  of  proof  and  the  concern  that
    inconsistencies might arise through interpretation.  Counsel reminds us
    that there had been a small problem at the hearing.

22.  The Secretary of State argues that there is an  inadequacy  of  reasons
    in the determination but we do not find that  the  panel  neglected  to
    reason its findings appropriately in the circumstances.  It may be that
    not every First-tier Judge or  First-tier  panel  would  have  resolved
    matters in favour of the appellant and another panel  might  have  been
    more  impressed  with  the  effect  of  the  inconsistencies   on   the
    appellant's general credibility.  However, as we have said, we can only
    set aside the determination on  a  point  of  law  and  not  a  factual
    disagreement.  We do  not  find,  as  we  have  said,  that  the  panel
    misdirected itself in relation to the Section  8  issue.   It  properly
    probed  the  evidence  before  it,  including  the  medical  report   -
    approaching it with a modicum of caution as is said  in  paragraph  83.
    The evidence was properly probed and sifted and we are unable to accept
    that the positive assessment made by the panel is flawed as contended.

23.  In the circumstances we do not need to deal with the point made in  the
    appellant's response that  the  grounds  of  appeal  from  the  panel's
    decision were out of time on 14 June 2013.  The  First-tier  Judge  who
    determined the matter on 26 June 2013 in fact expressly said they  were
    in-time in paragraph 1 of her decision.  The point  was  not  developed
    before us.  We say no more about it.

24.  For the reasons we have  given  the  decision  of  the  panel  was  not
    materially flawed in law and we direct that it shall stand.

Anonymity Direction

25.  The panel made an anonymity direction in this case and we confirm  that
    that direction continues.






Signed                                  Date 20 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
