
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00427/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 8th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AYUB AHMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C. Warren, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and  there  has
    been no application by either party for such an order  or  any  grounds
    advanced as to why such an order is necessary.

 3. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pooler)  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on the 16th February 2017 allowed his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against
    him under the provisions of Regulation 19(3) (b) and Regulation  21  of
    the   (EEA) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the  2006
    Regulations"). It  is  common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 were applicable to this appeal  (see
    paragraph 2 of the determination).

 4. Whilst this is the Secretary of State's appeal, I intend  to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    reference.

 5. The Appellant claims that he first arrived in the United  Kingdom  with
    his parents and siblings in July 2005 when he was eight years  of  age.
    He had continued to live in the United Kingdom and had  not  sought  to
    leave.

 6. The Appellant's offending history can be summarised as follows. He  was
    cautioned theft of the vehicle in March 2014. His first conviction  was
    on 9 October 2015 for theft and he was sentenced to  detention  for  12
    weeks, which was suspended for 18 months with an unpaid  work  activity
    and curfew requirements. On 26 November 2015 he was convicted of  using
    threatening or abusive words or behaviour and was fined �80.

 7.  On 4 March 2016 the Appellant was convicted  by  the  Crown  Court  of
    aggravated vehicle taking  and  using  a  vehicle  whilst  insured  and
    without a licence and was sentenced on 11 March to 46 weeks in a  Young
    Offenders Institution and disqualified from driving for two  years.  As
    he was in breach of a suspended sentence he was  also  sentenced  to  a
    period of six weeks to be served consecutively making  a  total  of  52
    weeks. The judge set out  the  sentence  remarks  of  the  Recorder  at
    paragraph 20 in full.  In July 2016, for  an  offence  of  robbery  and
    theft from a person, he was sentenced to 6 weeks  imprisonment  to  run
    consecutively with the sentence given for the offence  in  March  2016.
    There were no details given  by  the  Secretary  of  State  about  that
    offence in the papers before the First-tier Tribunal and  the  decision
    letter refers to the sentence to run "concurrently".

 8. As a consequence of that sentence of imprisonment,  the  Appellant  was
    notified of his liability to be deported on the 29th March 2016 and  on
    the 5th July 2016 the Secretary of State made a decision to deport him,
    having first taken into consideration the provisions of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 under  Regulation  19(3)  (b)
    and Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.

 9. The relevant decision taken by the Respondent  made  reference  to  his
    convictions and that the Secretary of State had considered the offences
    for which he had been convicted and his  conduct,  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations.

10. It is recorded that the Appellant did not  reply  within  20  days  and
    therefore the deportation order was served on 5 July 2016.  However  he
    lodged an out of time appeal against the decision which resulted  in  a
    supplementary decision letter of 18 November 2016.

11. As to his residence, the Respondent did not accept that  the  Appellant
    had been resident in the UK for a continuous period of  five  years  or
    more in accordance with the 2006 Regulations and that whilst he  stated
    that he had resided in the United Kingdom for over 10  years  with  his
    family, he had provided no evidence of  when  he  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and the supporting evidence was limited.

12. The decision set out that the Secretary of State was satisfied that  he
    would pose a genuine, present and sufficiently threat to the  interests
    of public policy if he were to be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that his deportation was justified under Regulation 21. The
    decision also made reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

13. The full reasons for that decision are set  out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent dated the 18th November 2016.

14. As a consequence of the  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant,  he  was
    removed from the United Kingdom on 20 September  2016.  As  he  had  no
    family in the Netherlands he had been taken to Germany  as  he  had  an
    aunt who was present in that jurisdiction  (see  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination).

15.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler)
    on the 8th February 2017.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  16th
    February 2017 his appeal was allowed. The judge had  the  advantage  of
    hearing members of the  appellant's  family,  his  mother  and  sister,
    although did not hear any oral evidence from  the  appellant,  who  was
    overseas. He also had the documentary evidence submitted on  behalf  of
    the appellant. The judge was satisfied on the evidence before him  that
    the appellant had entered the United Kingdom in July  2005  along  with
    his parents and siblings when he was 8 years of age (see paragraphs 9 -
    11). At paragraphs 12 onwards, he set out his findings of fact relating
    to the appellant's circumstances both in the United Kingdom and in  the
    Netherlands  which  included  at  paragraphs  19  to  22  his  criminal
    offending. Having set out the relevant law under the Regulations and by
    reference to the case law (see paragraph 26), the judge considered that
    notwithstanding his length of residence, the  appellant's  sentence  of
    detention broke his continuity of residence, subject to Regulation 3(4)
    which he had previously set out at paragraph 26. The judges conclusions
    at paragraphs 28 to 30 were based on the unchallenged evidence and  the
    findings of  fact  that  he  had  made  in  the  earlier  part  of  the
    determination and having made an overall assessment of the  appellant's
    situation found that his continuity of residence  was  not  broken  and
    that "accordingly the appellant was entitled to the  highest  level  of
    protection against deportation"(see paragraph 30).

16. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    the 18th May 2017 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  granted
    permission.

17. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Bates,  appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State. Miss Warren, who appeared before  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeared on behalf of the Appellant.

18. Mr Bates sought to rely only on  the  second  ground  (in  the  written
    grounds) that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons as  to  why
    Appellant had integrated into society and that residence alone was  not
    evidence of integration. The written grounds  make  reference  to  the"
    Appellant's persistent offending demonstrates that he failed to respect
    the values of society this had not demonstrated that he had  integrated
    into society".

19. He expanded on that in his oral submissions by stating that  the  judge
    had erred in law by failing to adequately factor in all the issues that
    needed to be assessed.  In  this  context  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons as to why the criminal offending  and  the  nature  of
    those offences had not broken the integrating links. In particular,  he
    had not had regard to the nature of the offending and  the  Appellant's
    "antisocial behaviour". The judge had wrongly  focused  on  the  prison
    sentence and had ignored the key facts that had led him  to  offending.
    He conceded that the case on behalf of the Secretary of State  was  set
    out at paragraph 31, namely that the presenting officer did not advance
    any submissions to the effect that, if the Appellant had  acquired  the
    highest level of protection, there were imperative  grounds  of  public
    security such as to justify deportation. However he submitted that  the
    judge did not give adequate reasons as to the issue of integration.

20. Mr Bates did not  seek  to  rely  on  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  v Franco Vomero [2016] UKSC
    49 or make any reference to that decision. The primary question  before
    the Supreme Court related to that set  out  at  paragraph  25.  As  the
    decision demonstrates the majority of the Supreme  Court  favoured  the
    view that possession of a right of permanent residence was  not  needed
    in order to enjoy enhanced protection under  Article  28(3)(a)  of  the
    Directive. However a minority regarded the position  as  being  unclear
    and thus the court referred the question to the CJEU. It was not argued
    before the First-tier Tribunal that there the appellant was required to
    achieve permanent residence in order to avail himself of the imperative
    level of protection. It is right to observe that the Supreme Court  did
    refer a further question to the Court of Justice at (3) as to what  the
    true relationship is between the 10 year residence test and the overall
    assessment of an integrative link.

21. Miss Warren on behalf of the Appellant relied on the Rule  24  response
    which set out that the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion  that
    he did on the particular facts of this case and the  findings  that  he
    had made within the determination. She  was  critical  of  the  written
    grounds which she submitted did not demonstrate any arguable  error  of
    law and failed to take account of the findings  of  fact  made  by  the
    judge.

22. She further submitted that the judge was required to  make  an  overall
    assessment by taking into account all the relevant factors and that the
    judge, in this particular case, clearly had  regard  to  the  offending
    history and did not dispute the seriousness of the offences. However he
    was entitled to consider the level of integration in the United Kingdom
    which he did, but also whether there were any  links  with  the  former
    Member State. In this case the Appellant  came  as  child  and  had  no
    connection  to  the  Netherlands.  The  judge  set  out  the  issue  of
    integration at paragraph 28 - 30 and did so in  the  light  of  the  EU
    principles of integration (see paragraphs 35 and 36 of the ECJ decision
    in MG). Thus she submitted the decision reached  by  the  judge  was  a
    sustainable one and did not demonstrate any arguable error of law

Discussion:

23. I am satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law. I shall  set  out  my
    reasons for  reaching  that  decision.  The  issue  arises  as  to  the
    Appellant's length of residence in the UK and what level of  protection
    should be applied to his case by the Secretary of State.

24. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v MG  (Case  no  c-400/12
    CJEU) (second chamber) it was held that unlike the requisite period for
    acquiring a right of permanent residence which began  when  the  person
    concerned commenced lawful residence in the post Member State,  the  10
    year period of residence  necessary  for  the  grant  of  the  enhanced
    protection provided for in Article 28(3)  (a)  must  be  calculated  by
    counting back from the date of  the  decision  ordering  that  person's
    expulsion. All relevant factors  should  be  taken  into  account  when
    considering the  calculation  of  the  10  year  period  including  the
    duration of each period of absence from  the  host  Member  State,  the
    cumulative  duration  and  the  frequency  of  absences.  A  period  of
    imprisonment  was  in  principle  capable  both  of  interrupting   the
    continuity of the period of  residence  needed  and  of  affecting  the
    decision regarding the grant  of  enhanced  protection  provided  there
    under, even where the person concerned had resided in the  host  member
    state for 10 years prior to imprisonment albeit that the fact that  the
    person had been in the member state 10 years prior to imprisonment  was
    a factor to be taken into account.

25. In MG (prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive)  Portugal  [2014]
    UKUT 392 it was held that (I) Article 28(3)(a) of Directive  2004/38/EC
    contained the requirement that for those who had resided  in  the  host
    member state for the previous 10  years,  an  expulsion  decision  made
    against them must be based upon imperative grounds of public  security;
    (ii) there was a tension in the judgment of the Court of Justice of the
    European Communities in Case  C-400/12  Secretary  of  State  v  MG  in
    respect of the meaning of  the  "enhanced  protection"  provision;  and
    (iii) the judgment should be understood as meaning  that  a  period  of
    imprisonment during those 10 years did not necessarily prevent a person
    from qualifying for enhanced protection if that person was sufficiently
    integrated. However, according  to  the  same  judgment,  a  period  of
    imprisonment must have a negative impact  in  so  far  as  establishing
    integration was concerned.

26. In the decision of Warsame [2016] EWCA Civ  16  it  was  held  that  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  MG  (Portugal)  (Case  C-
    400/12) it was  established  that  the  ten-year  period  of  residence
    required to benefit from the enhanced protection of imperative  grounds
    must in principle be continuous and be calculated by counting back from
    the date of the deportation decision.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European  Union  ("CJEU")  found  that,  in   principle,   periods   of
    imprisonment interrupted the continuity of periods of residence for the
    purposes of granting the enhanced protection. However,  the  CJEU  also
    held that applicants could still qualify  for  enhanced  protection  if
    they could show that they had resided in the UK during  the  ten  years
    prior to imprisonment, but that depended on an  overall  assessment  of
    whether integrating links previously forged with the host Member  State
    had been broken.  On  the  facts,  because  of  an  earlier  period  of
    imprisonment which also broke continuity, this Appellant was not one of
    those in the narrow  "maybe"  category  of  cases  contemplated  in  MG
    (Portugal) where a person has resided in the host state during the  ten
    years prior to imprisonment,  for  which  a  more  detailed  individual
    assessment of links to the host and home state would be required.

27. The Court of Appeal appears to have accepted at [9]  that  there  is  a
    "maybe" category of cases where a person has resided in the host  state
    for the  10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  depending  on  an  overall
    assessment of whether integrating links have been broken, and  that  in
    such cases it might be relevant to determine the degree of  integration
    in the host state and the extent  to  which  links  with  the  original
    member state have been broken.

28.  This issue therefore arises in this case as to whether  the  Appellant
    falls into this "maybe" category. The exercise  required  the  counting
    back from the date of the deportation decision and assessing the extent
    of links forged in the  UK  and  whether  they  had  been  broken.  The
    submission made by Mr Bates is that the judge failed to adequately take
    into account the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  offending  history.  He
    submits that the decision at paragraph 29 only considered the length of
    the sentence and that was insufficient. The  judge  should  have  taken
    into account the  nature  of  the  offences  and  that  whilst  he  had
    identified them at [20] this was insufficient in all the circumstances.
    He submitted that the offences showed as strong "antisocial nature" and
    he had not indicated that he was rehabilitated which was  pertinent  to
    whether he had broken links with the  UK  society.  Thus  he  submitted
    there was a failure  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion at [30].

29. I have considered the determination of the  judge.  It  is  plain  from
    reading the determination at paragraphs 17 - 22 that the judge set  out
    the Appellant's offending history. At  paragraph  20  he  set  out  the
    sentencing remarks of the Recorder in full.

30.  Consequently the judge did make reference to the  Appellant's  serious
    offending carried out in the UK and this is relevant to  the  issue  of
    integration as a person who  is  integrated  will  want  to  ensure  he
    respects the laws of the United Kingdom, which acts of  criminality  do
    not demonstrate. At paragraph 29, the judge properly  took  account  of
    the effect of the sentence of imprisonment. Whilst it is submitted that
    it is the nature of the offences that were relevant,  it  must  be  the
    case that the effect of the sentence and the length of such a  sentence
    is also of importance. The  longer  the  length  of  the  sentence  the
    greater is the absence from the community  and  thus  relevant  to  the
    issue of "overall integration". This is what the judge had regard to at
    paragraph 29. He properly applied the case law which he had  previously
    set out at  paragraph  26  that  made  it  clear  that  in  reaching  a
    conclusion an "overall assessment of that personal  situation  on  each
    occasion at the precise time when the  question  of  expulsion  arises"
    (see paragraph 35 of SSHD v MG)  and  that  "as  part  of  the  overall
    assessment required  for  determining  whether  the  integrating  links
    previously forged with the host member state  have  been  broken"  (see
    paragraph 36).

31. The question for the judge was whether the Appellant  was  sufficiently
    integrated in the UK by taking his circumstances as a whole.  Whilst  a
    period of imprisonment may break continuity this cannot  mean  that  an
    Appellant loses the benefit of any  earlier  integration.  It  is  fact
    sensitive and must be seen in the light of the evidence.

32. The judge's findings demonstrate that the judge properly had regard  to
    the relevant circumstances when reaching a conclusion  on  this  issue.
    They can be summarised as follows:

               1) As regards his degree of integration in  the  host  member
                  state, the judge considered his length of  residence.  The
                  judge found that he had entered the UK  with  his  parents
                  and siblings in July 2005 when he was 8 years of  age.  He
                  took into account the documentary evidence at [10] and the
                  oral evidence of the family members which he found  to  be
                  both credible and consistent (see paragraph 11 and 12). He
                  also recorded  at  paragraph  [12]  that  the  Appellant's
                  sister had  given  unchallenged  evidence  concerning  the
                  length  of  residence  but  also  had  given  unchallenged
                  evidence as to the nature of that residence which included
                  having been educated in  the  United  Kingdom  and  having
                  passed through the state education system and having  gone
                  to college.

               2) The judge also found that the Appellant  had  offered  his
                  time and commitment as a young leader  to  help  challenge
                  the lifestyle of local young  people  (paragraph  13)  and
                  that he had also been  employed  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                  which again was unchallenged (paragraph 13).

               3) The judge found that all of his close family members  were
                  in the United Kingdom.

               4) As regards the extent to which  links  with  the  original
                  member state been broken (in this case  the  Netherlands),
                  the judge found that he  had  no  family  members  in  the
                  Netherlands (this was the unchallenged  evidence  of  both
                  witnesses at paragraph 15).

               5) He found that this was consistent with the evidence of the
                  Appellant's sister relating to the  circumstances  of  his
                  deportation and  that  he  had  been  collected  from  the
                  airport and had been driven to Germany because in aunt was
                  present in that country (paragraph 16).

               6) He found also that the Appellant was fluent in English and
                  having lived in the UK since the age of  eight,  had  lost
                  any ability to speak Dutch.

33. Those findings were entirely open to the judge to make on the  evidence
    that was before him and the grounds of the Secretary of  State  do  not
    seek to challenge those findings of fact. I  am  satisfied  that  those
    relevant circumstances were taken into account by the judge along  with
    the Appellants offending history ( set out at  paragraphs  20-22)  when
    reaching his conclusions at paragraphs 28-30. He properly had regard by
    way of an overall assessment of the  degree  of  integration  the  host
    member state and also the extent to which the links with  the  original
    member  state  had  been  broken.  He  properly  had  regard   to   the
    jurisprudence (the decision of the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
    Communities in Case C-400/12 Secretary of State v MG and  the  decision
    of the in MG  (prison  -  Article  28(3)  (a)  of  Citizens  Directive)
    Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392,) see paragraph 26). It was  therefore  open
    to  the  judge  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  notwithstanding   his
    imprisonment and criminal offending, which had a negative impact on the
    establishment of integrative links, that his integrative links  in  the
    UK, including the length of his residence, his  education,  employment,
    family, and linguistic links and the absence of any meaningful links to
    the Netherlands was such that he did qualify for the enhanced level  of
    protection in Article 28 (3) (a). I agree with the submissions made  by
    Ms Warren that  the  decision  was  a  sustainable  one  and  does  not
    demonstrate any error of law.

34. Therefore for those reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did
    not involve the making of an error on a point of law and the appeal  is
    dismissed.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.






[pic]
Signed                              Date: 7/9/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
