

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00549/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|13 November 2013                              |25 November 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                                Lord Matthews
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman

                                   Between

                          LIVINGSTONE HOLMER MORRIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Nwokeji
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on  29  September  1971  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Jamaica.  He arrived in the UK on 8 June 1996 when he was granted leave
    to enter as a visitor for six months.  On 21 November 1996 he  made  an
    application for leave to remain as a student, which was refused  on  29
    April 1997.

2.   Following his departure from the United Kingdom he returned on 24  June
    2001 using a forged British passport.  He was refused  leave  to  enter
    and granted temporary admission.  He applied for asylum on 19 July 2001
    but this was refused on  10  December  2001.   He  withdrew  an  appeal
    against the refusal.  He applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a
    British citizen on 21 June 2002 but this was refused on 24  July  2002.
    On 22 November 2002 he submitted a human rights claim which was refused
    on 30 October 2003.

3.   The appellant was removed from the United Kingdom on 4  December  2003.
    He applied for entry clearance as a spouse on 16 December 2003 but this
    was refused on 16 February 2004.  He re-applied for entry clearance  as
    a spouse on 27 April 2004 and this was  refused  on  4  May  2004.   He
    lodged an appeal, which was allowed on 18 March 2005.  He  was  granted
    entry clearance as a spouse on 18 March 2005 and re-entered the  United
    Kingdom after that date.

4.   The appellant was arrested on 12 October 2005 and on  4  November  2005
    was convicted of being concerned in the supply  of  crack  cocaine  and
    possessing a quantity of crack cocaine with intent  to  supply.   Those
    offences resulted in a sentence of  six  years'  imprisonment  on  each
    count, to run concurrently.  The sentences were imposed on  2  December
    2005.  An appeal against these sentences was dismissed on  22  February
    2006.

5.   On 28 November 2007 the appellant  was  notified  of  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 26 November of that year, to make a deportation  order.
    He appealed that decision on 3 December 2007 but this was dismissed  on
    28 July 2008.  He applied for judicial review on 6 August 2008 but this
    was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted on 22 August 2008.

6.   On 8 September 2008 the deportation order was  signed.   The  appellant
    applied out-of-time for judicial review  but  this  was  refused  on  7
    October 2008 and he was deported on 29 October 2008.

7.   On 18 January 2012 he applied through solicitors for revocation of  the
    deportation order and certain further correspondence was  sent  on  his
    behalf on 28 June 2012.  On 11 February 2013 the respondent decided  to
    refuse the application for revocation.

8.   He appealed against that decision,  which  had  been  considered  under
    paragraph 390 and 391 of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was on  the
    basis that the decision to  refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation  order
    placed the United Kingdom in breach of  the  1950  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms,  with  particular
    reference to Article 8 thereof.

9.   The appeal was heard on 5 September 2013 when the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered both written and oral evidence and submissions made for  the
    appellant  and  respondent.   It  was  refused   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 13 September 2013.

10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  itself  now  under  appeal.
    The grounds are that the First-tier Tribunal's reasons for finding that
    the marriage between the appellant and his spouse is not genuine on the
    part of the appellant are inadequately reasoned.  It is also  submitted
    that the panel failed properly to consider the substantial  ties  which
    the appellant's spouse has in the United Kingdom  and  failed  to  take
    into account the principles derived from the cases  of  VW  (Uganda)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department and EB (Kosovo) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department.  It is also submitted that the  panel
    failed to direct itself to the relevant authorities on deportation  and
    the circumstances in which relocation would be appropriate.  The  panel
    adopted the findings of the previous Tribunal and  failed  to  consider
    afresh, or at all, the issues of the panel's low risk of  re-conviction
    and his re-categorisation in prison coupled  with  the  lapse  of  time
    since the offences were committed in 2005.  It is said that  the  panel
    failed to evaluate these factors cumulatively including the appellant's
    contention that he had obtained work in  Jamaica  and  demonstrated  an
    ability to maintain a law abiding lifestyle.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the Tribunal had  given  inadequately  reasoned  findings  on  the
    subsisting nature of the appellant's marriage and that  the  principles
    set in VW (Uganda) and EB (Kosovo) had not been considered.

12.  Before us Mr Nwokeji indicated that he  would  argue  both  grounds  of
    appeal.  In view of  the  discrete  nature  of  the  challenge  to  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal we do not consider it necessary  to
    set out their detailed findings in full.  The nub of the  challenge  is
    that the panel's decision that the marriage is  not  genuine  from  the
    appellant's point of  view  was  perverse  and  in  the  teeth  of  the
    evidence.

13.  We were  referred  in  particular  to  paragraphs  44  and  45  of  the
    determination, which are in the following terms:

        "44. There is scant evidence of contact between the  appellant  and
             his wife.  This is despite their being very familiar  with  the
             need for  such  evidence  to  support  applications  for  entry
             clearance arising from their marriage.  The appellant  and  his
             wife were also put on notice by the respondent in  the  reasons
             for refusal letter that the lack  of  documentary  evidence  of
             contact had been noted and that this called into  question  the
             extent of  contact  between  them.   The  lack  of  documentary
             evidence of contact concerns us.  Even if the appellant  is  in
             receipt of low earnings, in the five years he has  been  absent
             from the United Kingdom, we would expect him to be able to send
             at least one or two letters or cards to his wife in the  United
             Kingdom.  More particularly, we would  expect  the  appellant's
             wife to send such correspondence to her husband in Jamaica, for
             example to celebrate birthdays and anniversaries.  These  could
             have been returned to the appellant's wife for her to bring  to
             the hearing.  No such documentary evidence has been provided in
             support of the appeal.


        45.  The appellant's wife told  us  that  she  had  sent  money  on
             several occasions to the appellant in Jamaica yet she  has  not
             produced any documentary evidence of such remittances.  Bearing
             in mind her experience of being a sponsor for the appellant  in
             his applications for entry clearance as her husband,  we  would
             expect her to be aware of the importance of  such  evidence  to
             demonstrate a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
             appellant.  She is an educated woman and we would expect her to
             appreciate that such documentary evidence would be  useful  and
             supportive  of  her  husband's  claim  to  have  a   subsisting
             marriage.  When she was asked about the lack of documents,  she
             said merely that such evidence was held by Western  Union,  but
             did not provide an  explanation  as  to  why  it  had  not  bee
             provided for the hearing."


14.  The evidence showed that the parties had married on 23 March  2002  and
    before his deportation the appellant had served three years  in  prison
    for his drug offences.

15.  Mr Nwokeji submitted that the panel had failed  to  consider  the  fact
    that the marriage had lasted eleven years.  Moreover there was evidence
    that the wife had visited Jamaica regularly and a number  of  witnesses
    including his wife, his sister-in-law Angela Pitt, his  brother  Carlos
    Morris and his sister Cherie White had given  evidence  to  the  effect
    that the marriage was subsisting.  At paragraph 48 the  panel  accepted
    that the appellant's wife had visited him in Jamaica  on  a  number  of
    occasions and that these visits  were  an  indicator  of  her  wish  to
    maintain her relationship with the appellant but pointed out that their
    concern was the appellant's perception  of  the  relationship  and  his
    intentions in that regard.  They gave little weight to the evidence  of
    the appellant's brother who admitted that he had not  been  aware  that
    the appellant had used deception in the past in his dealings  with  the
    respondent.

16.  Mr Nwokeji drew our attention to paragraph  50  of  the  determination.
    That  referred  to  evidence  from  the  appellant's  wife   that   her
    grandchildren had a good relationship with  the  appellant,  that  they
    called him Grandpa and that they spoke to him on  the  telephone.   She
    admitted however that the appellant and the two  younger  grandchildren
    had not met.  The panel accepted that the two older children, now  aged
    14 and 11  had  some  memories  of  the  appellant  and  that  all  the
    grandchildren spoke to him on the telephone but pointed  out  that  the
    appellant had been in prison for three years prior to  his  deportation
    in October 2008 and they found that the appellant's  relationship  with
    him had developed largely through telephone contact.  They  found  that
    he had no responsibility for or involvement in the upbringing of any of
    the grandchildren and that their wellbeing and welfare  was  unaffected
    by his exclusion from the United Kingdom.

17.  Mr Nwokeji  however  submitted  that  the  acceptance  that  there  was
    regular telephone contact between the appellant and  his  grandchildren
    meant that the First-tier Tribunal's findings were perverse.

18.  When the findings are read it is plain that  the  panel  accepted  that
    the appellant's wife would maintain her relationship  with  him.   They
    were not satisfied that this was reciprocated and referred on a  number
    of occasions to the appellant's being deceptive.  We asked  Mr  Nwokeji
    what gave rise to this suggestion of deception and he said that it  was
    the evidence about his original crimes and his immigration history.  He
    submitted that the panel  had  effectively  taken  no  account  of  the
    history of the marriage at all.

19.  While it might be said that he had committed  a  very  serious  offence
    and that the deportation should not  on  that  account  be  revoked  Mr
    Nwokeji submitted that the evidence disclosed that  the  appellant  had
    now been re-habilitated.  Any question of a certificate of good conduct
    could be dealt with in an application for entry clearance.

Submissions for the Respondent

20.  Mr Avery submitted that the sentences imposed showed that the  offences
    were serious enough to outweigh any Article  8  considerations.   There
    also had to be factored in the  appellant's  history  of  deception  in
    dealing with the immigration authorities.  He referred to the  findings
    of  the  Tribunal  in  2008  which  refused  his  appeal  against   the
    deportation order, and paragraph 101 of its determination, where having
    set  out  a  number  of  matters  which  affected  credibility  of  the
    appellant, the panel said the following:

        "101.     ... In short we are not satisfied that this appellant has
             the intention of living permanently with his  wife  as  husband
             and wife.  We consider it much more likely  that  the  marriage
             was a further cynical attempt to remain in the UK."


21.  The panel whose determination is currently under appeal made  reference
    to that 2008 determination.  They directed themselves appropriately  in
    relation to Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial
    Effect) [2002] UKIAT 702* and their scepticism  about  the  appellant's
    intentions was based on that starting-point.

22.  Mr Avery submitted that the panel took full account of  the  visits  to
    Jamaica on the part of  the  appellant's  spouse  and  found  that  her
    intentions were genuine.  The appellant's intentions were the  problem.
    Of necessity he did not give evidence before  the  panel  in  September
    2013 but at paragraph 55 they said the following:

          "55.    We also bear in  mind  the  interests  of  the  appellant
             himself.  We are in no  doubt  that  the  appellant,  were  the
             deportation  order  to  be  revoked,  would  apply  for   entry
             clearance and that, were it granted, he would  enjoy  a  better
             quality of  life  in  the  United  Kingdom;  he  is  living  in
             impoverished circumstances in Jamaica and most  of  his  family
             live in the United Kingdom.  The panel found in 2008  that  the
             appellant was then  a  person  who  was  "well  used  to  using
             deception in order to assist his case".  We are  not  satisfied
             that the evidence we have heard is sufficient to undermine that
             finding even now: the appellant  has  produced  no  independent
             evidence as to his honesty in Jamaica.   He  has  produced  two
             letters from a former and current employer.   The  letter  from
             Tyrone Napier does not contain a statement of truth.  It  is  a
             brief letter and takes the  form  of  an  employment  reference
             rather than a statement of evidence to this tribunal: it refers
             to  the  writer  recommending  the  appellant  as   a   company
             "participant".  We are not satisfied that it  was  written  for
             these proceedings or in the knowledge that  the  issue  of  the
             appellant's honesty is at issue.  We give  this  letter  little
             evidential weight.  As  regards  the  second  letter  from  the
             appellant's current employer, this is not signed and  there  is
             no evidence as to how it was received in the UK.   Furthermore,
             for the reasons set out above, its content  is  not  consistent
             with the evidence of the appellant himself.  We therefore  give
             this second letter no evidential weight at all."

23.  The panel had earlier pointed out discrepancies in the  evidence  about
    the appellant's employment during the five years or so that he had been
    in Jamaica.  They had also made remarks about the lack of  evidence  of
    contact.  They pointed out in addition that there was  no  confirmation
    that he was now a law abiding citizen.  They bore in mind that  he  had
    made a false asylum claim in 2001, claiming that he was  gay.   He  had
    used false documents both in  Jamaica  and  in  the  UK  and  had  been
    convicted of serious offences involving Class A drugs.  He had a  long-
    standing history of using deception in his dealings with authority both
    in this country and in Jamaica.  He must have deceived his wife when he
    was involved  with  drugs  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Furthermore  the
    previous panel had found that he had given  false  information  to  the
    Sentencing Judge to the effect that he was in debt  as  the  result  of
    drug use.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found,  in  paragraph  54  of  the
    determination, that: "... We see no reason,  on  the  limited  evidence
    before us, to interfere with the findings of the panel as  regards  the
    nature and impact of the appellant's  offences  and  the  risk  of  re-
    offending."  At paragraph 57 they said the following:

        "57. In summary, having reviewed all the appellant's  evidence,  we
             are  not  satisfied  that  he  has  demonstrated  that  he   is
             remorseful as regards his  former  criminal  activity.   We  do
             accept that he regrets his conviction.  Nor  are  we  satisfied
             that he is no longer a person who uses deception with those  in
             authority; he has not evidenced  any  dealings  with  authority
             since  his  return  to  Jamaica:  for  example,  there  is   no
             documentary evidence that he pays income tax on  his  earnings.
             We are not persuaded that the appellant is a reformed man.  Nor
             are  we  persuaded,  because  of  the  appellant's  history  of
             deception, that  Mrs  Morris'  feelings  for  her  husband  are
             reciprocated such that  the  marriage  could  be  described  as
             genuine and subsisting and that  the  parties  intend  to  live
             together as husband and wife permanently.  Rather,  we  see  no
             reason to interfere with the findings of the former panel  that
             the appellant is a man whose evidence is unreliable."

24.  Mr Avery pointed out that the panel in  2005  had  actually  heard  the
    appellant.

25.  If there was no genuine relationship then the cases of VW  and  EB  did
    not come into the equation.

26.  In reply Mr Nwokeji submitted  that  the  panel  should  have  examined
    closely the circumstances of the case in 2013.   There  was  sufficient
    evidence before them that the marriage was subsisting and it  was  open
    to them to accept that there was a genuine marriage.

Findings

27.  We agree with Mr Nwokeji that there was sufficient evidence before  the
    Tribunal to entitle them to find that the marriage was subsisting.   On
    the other hand it is  plain  that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    entitle them to find that the appellant  did  not  share  his  spouse's
    feelings about the marriage.  In this regard  they  were  entitled  not
    only to have regard to the evidence which was laid before them but also
    the findings of the Tribunal in  2008.   As  we  have  indicated,  they
    directed themselves appropriately as to Devaseelan in this regard.  The
    determination of that Tribunal was promulgated on 28 July 2008.  It set
    out the immigration history  of  the  appellant  and  referred  to  his
    conviction.  It then set out the contents of the decision letter giving
    reasons for the making of the deportation  order.   There  was  a  full
    narration of the evidence laid and submissions made.  Having considered
    all these  matters  they  pointed  out  that  they  accepted  that  the
    appellant was engaged in commercial dealing in crack cocaine but  on  a
    modest scale.  They noted that the appellant gave false information  to
    the judge in that he claimed he was in debt as a result  of  drug  use.
    He claimed that that was something he was told  to  say  by  his  legal
    representatives but the panel did not accept that.  They noted that  on
    two previous occasions he had attempted to enter the UK using  a  false
    passport.  On one of those occasions he was  successful.   He  had  put
    forward a wholly false claim for  asylum  on  the  basis  that  he  was
    homosexual.  Again he claimed that he was put up to that by  his  legal
    advisers,  which  the  panel  did  not  accept.   In  relation  to  the
    committing of the offences, he claimed that he did  not  think  he  was
    entitled to work when he returned to the UK after his successful appeal
    in about August 2005.  His wife's evidence was that  he  had  told  her
    that on the days that he was supplying crack cocaine he was out looking
    for work in a factory.  Either he was lying  to  his  wife  or  to  the
    Tribunal or to both.  They did not accept that there was a low risk  of
    re-conviction and considered that he was a man who was prepared to  use
    lies and deceptions to obtain what he wanted.  He  gave  evidence  that
    the relationship with his wife only became serious after he was  caught
    coming into the country with the forged passport.  That  was  in  2001.
    His evidence was that they  started  living  together  after  they  got
    married in 2002 and after that they spent two weeks together in Jamaica
    on three occasions.  His wife's evidence was that they  started  living
    as a couple in May 2000.  The panel noted evidence from  the  appellant
    and his spouse that they were advised to get married in order to assist
    his attempt to remain in the country in 2002.  His spouse, his sponsor,
    was more than willing to get married apart from  that.   It  was  noted
    that the appellant had tried many ways of getting into and remaining in
    the country.  Within a very short period of returning  to  the  UK  the
    appellant was involved in serious  crime  which  would  inevitably,  if
    detected, have led to the separation from his partner and, as the panel
    felt sure he must have known, likely deportation.  This  did  not  show
    any commitment to the marriage.

28.  When those earlier findings are factored into the equation as  well  as
    the matters referred to in the determination currently under appeal  it
    appears to us that the panel was fully entitled to take the  view  that
    the marriage was not  a  genuine  one  so  far  as  the  appellant  was
    concerned.  We can detect no error of law in the approach which led  to
    that conclusion.

29.  We heard no detailed submissions on the application of EB  and  VW  but
    given our opinion that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination and to the nature of the marriage it does  not
    seem to us that these cases are relevant.  Article 8 is not engaged  in
    that there is no genuine  family  life  with  which  the  decision  can
    interfere.  The First-tier Tribunal found  at  paragraph  63  that  the
    appellant had no private life in the United Kingdom  and  there  is  no
    challenge to that finding.










Conclusions

30.  Since we can detect no error of law in the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal it follows that the appeal must be dismissed.







                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                      Date: 20 November 2013
