
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/00598/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 July 2017                          |  On 04 August 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 tariq tufan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant (to whom I shall refer hereafter as "the respondent",  as
    he was before the First-tier  Judge)  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the First-tier Judge allowing the appeal of the
    respondent (hereafter referred  to  as  "the  appellant")  against  the
    decision of 16 November 2016 to exclude him from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is a Dutch national.   He  did  not  attend  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Judge on 20 February 2017 as he had been  removed
    to the Netherlands on 4 January 2017 and had not exercised his right of
    entry to the United Kingdom for the purposes of  attending  the  appeal
    hearing.   There  was  no  request  for  an  adjournment  and  in   the
    circumstances the judge concluded that it was appropriate to proceed to
    determine the appeal in his absence.

3.   The judge noted the relevant provisions of the  EEA  Regulations.   The
    appellant had come to the United Kingdom aged 15 in 2012.  He  had  not
    shown that he had been exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  five
    year period and therefore did not have a permanent right to reside.

4.   On 5 August  2016  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  sixteen  months'
    imprisonment for conspiracy to intimidate a witness.   He  had  pleaded
    guilty and was sentenced to the minimum sentence applicable.  He had no
    other convictions in the United Kingdom but had received a caution on 4
    February 2016 for soliciting the services of a prostitute in  a  public
    place.

5.   The judge noted that the offence for which the appellant was  convicted
    was serious.  The appellant's co-defendant had aimed to frighten his ex-
    partner and with the appellant's assistance had poured petrol over  her
    front door.  The judge noted that the appellant had  played  an  active
    part in that enterprise.  The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    full of remorse and took account of his age, the  pre-sentence  report,
    his guilty plea and his "effective  good  character"  and  imposed  the
    minimum sentence applicable.

6.   In the appellant's representations he said he was not present when  the
    offence of dousing the door with petrol was  committed,  there  was  no
    challenge by the respondent to the appellant's claim  that  the  victim
    had confirmed in evidence that she did not see  the  appellant  at  the
    time of the  incident  and  he  had  been  indicted  and  convicted  of
    conspiracy to intimidate a witness rather than actual intimidation.  He
    claimed to have no further contact with his  co-defendant.   The  judge
    noted the  consistency  of  the  appellant's  submissions  which  found
    support in the sentencing remarks in the absence of a direct  challenge
    by the respondent, either in the  decision  letter  or  in  submissions
    before him, and the judge therefore accepted the appellant's account of
    how and to what extent he was involved in the offence for which he  was
    convicted.

7.   It was clear that  the  appellant  had  demonstrated  a  propensity  to
    offend which in itself, the judge said, raised a risk  of  reoffending.
    Witness intimidation, whatever role was played by the appellant, was  a
    serious offence and contrary to public  policy.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant did not pose  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat.  His culpability in the offence was  reflected  in  the
    sentencing judge's remarks and the minimum sentence imposed.  The judge
    had accepted  that  his  remorse  was  genuine.   He  had  no  previous
    significant offending.  He was young  and  had  taken  time  whilst  in
    custody to study.  His family were all in the United Kingdom and  prior
    to his conviction he had shared a home with  them  and  the  continuing
    existence and support from his family was a factor which weighed in his
    favour in assessing the likelihood of further  offending.   He  had  no
    immediate family in the Netherlands.  The  judge  considered  that  the
    respondent relied solely on the convictions to support a  finding  that
    the appellant had a propensity to reoffend and when weighed against the
    other evidence before him was unable to reach the same conclusion.   He
    concluded that the appellant did not pose a threat sufficient  to  meet
    the criteria for exclusion.  The appeal was allowed.

8.   In her grounds of appeal the respondent argued first that  the  judge's
    conclusion that there was a small threat of the appellant committing an
    offence which entailed that  the  risk  which  was  not  sufficient  to
    satisfy the Regulation 21(5)(c) test was misconceived in light of  what
    had been said in Bouchereau Case 30-77 where it was  concluded  that  a
    threat to public policy could exist even where there was no  propensity
    on the part of the appellant to reoffend, though it was noted that this
    finding was limited to exceptional situations.  The grounds quoted  the
    sentencing judge's remarks as to the very  frightening  nature  of  the
    experience of the victim.  It was argued that even a slight risk of the
    appellant  reoffending  could  constitute  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat.

9.   It was also argued that the judge had failed to engage with the  margin
    of appreciation that was to be afforded to Member States in the context
    of establishing their own public  policy  thresholds  which  should  be
    tailored to the particular aspects of their territories and that Member
    States were best placed to assess such a risk and as such the judge had
    failed to take into account the seriousness of the offence  or  provide
    adequate reasons as to why the appellant's deportation was justified.

10.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

11.  There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.  As noted above, he  was  removed  to  the  Netherlands  on  4
    January 2017.  Neither the Home Office nor, it seems, the Tribunal, had
    an address for him in the Netherlands.  Like the judge  at  the  First-
    tier hearing I concluded that, bearing in mind the interests of justice
    and the overriding objective it was appropriate to proceed to hear  the
    appeal.

12.  Mr  Melvin  accepted  that  perhaps  the  second  ground  was  not  the
    strongest, but founded his submissions on the first ground.  The  judge
    had found a propensity to offend and the offence was very  serious  and
    the sentencing remarks of the judge were to be noted.  If the  Tribunal
    agreed then it should remake the  decision.   There  was  no  need  for
    further submissions and it had the necessary documentation.

13.  I reserved my decision.

14.  I see no force to the second ground.  It comes close  to  arguing  that
    if the Secretary of State thinks a person ought  to  be  deported  then
    they ought to be and the Tribunal has no role to play.  The  ground  is
    perhaps confusing the extent to which the public interest is now  spelt
    out in primary legislation and Immigration Rules in the case of non-EEA
    offenders, but as regards an EEA offender such as the appellant in this
    case, the issue of removal has to be addressed in the  context  of  the
    EEA Regulations.

15.  Not without some hesitation, I have concluded that the  judge  did  not
    err in law in this case.  It is not a decision that every  judge  would
    have come to, bearing in mind the nature of the offence  and  the  fact
    that it was comparatively recent.  But the judge bore these factors  in
    mind, bore in mind what had been said by the judge  in  the  sentencing
    remarks and the appellant's family circumstances and  history  and  the
    support from his family unit and the fact that it was the only  offence
    he had committed subject to the caution on 4 February 2016.  It is not,
    as the judge noted, a question of it being appropriate to  rely  solely
    on the conviction to  support  a  finding  that  the  appellant  has  a
    propensity to reoffend.  The case is not an exceptional one of the kind
    contemplated  in  Bouchereau.   The  personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned must represent a genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   The
    judge considered all the evidence and concluded that the appellant  did
    not pose such a threat.  In my view that conclusion  was  open  to  the
    judge and as a  consequence  I  consider  that  the  challenge  to  his
    decision is not made out  and  his  decision  allowing  the  appeal  is
    maintained.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.
[pic]

Signed                                  Date 3 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

