
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00844/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |On 13 March 2014             |
|Prepared 25 February 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                              jai kumar sunwar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, of Counsel instructed by Messrs N.C.
Brothers
     & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appealed against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 16 April 2013 to deport him  under  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.   His  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    allowed but on appeal I found that there was a material error of law in
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and set that determination
    aside.  My decision was as follows:-


         "1.  The Secretary of State appeals,  with  permission,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal Ian Scott and Mr B D Yeats (Non-Legal Member)) who in
             a determination promulgated on 25 November  2013  allowed  the
             appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
             State to make a deportation order against him.


         2.   Although this is the appeal of the Secretary of State  I  will
             for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent  as  she
             was the respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will  refer
             to Mr Jai  Kumar  Sunwar  as  the  appellant  as  he  was  the
             appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born  on  17  April  1987.
             His  father  entered  Britain  in  May  2006.  In  August  the
             appellant was granted entry clearance  as  dependent  and,  on
             arrival in Britain in December 2006,   was granted  indefinite
             leave to remain.


         4.   On 7 August 2012 he was convicted at  Canterbury  Crown  Court
             for possession  of  heroin  with  intent  to  supply  and  was
             sentenced to twenty months' imprisonment.  On 3 September 2012
             he was notified of his liability to automatic deportation, the
             deportation order being made against  him  on  16  April  2013
             under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.


         5.   The Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and his  father
             and having briefly stated in paragraph 21 that it was accepted
             that the appellant could not meet the terms of the Immigration
             Rules, considered the appellant's claim that his rights  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR would be infringed by his removal solely
             in terms of the Convention.  Having noted  the  terms  of  the
             determination Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha  policy)
             [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and  the  judgment  in  the  Court  of
             Appeal in Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 the  Tribunal  set
             out the structured approach to the  issue  of  an  appellant's
             Article 8 rights as set out in the judgment of  the  House  of
             Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.


         6.   The Tribunal noted the public interest in the  deportation  of
             criminals before setting out the various issues raised in  the
             decision of the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in  Maslov
             [2008] ECHR 546.


         7.   In paragraphs 33  onwards  they  set  out  their  reasons  for
             finding  that  the  removal  of   the   appellant   would   be
             disproportionate.  They stated that it was relevant  that  the
             appellant had been sentenced as a low-level street dealer  and
             that the offence had been committed against the background  of
             the appellant's own heroin addiction.  They stated  that  they
             accepted that the appellant was no longer addicted to  heroin.
             They note that the appellant had been in  Britain  for  nearly
             seven years and then  somewhat  surprisingly  referred  to  an
             Upper Tribunal determination in Dewan,  number  DA/00039/2013,
             which was heard in August 2013.  I note that there was nothing
             to indicate that the barrister who represented  the  appellant
             was entitled to ask  them  to  take  that  determination  into
             account  -  the  requirements  of  the   Practice   Directions
             regarding the submission of unreported determinations were not
             complied with.  I note from the copy of that determination  on
             the file that it is, in fact, merely a decision in an error of
             law hearing where the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
             set aside and the appeal remitted  to  the  First-tier  for  a
             hearing de novo.   The ratio of the decision however  appeared
             to be that there was a "historic injustice" argument  relevant
             in the appeal.  It appears  the  Tribunal  decided  that  they
             would take this into consideration and in their conclusions in
             paragraphs 36 through 39 of the determination they stated:-


                  '36. We take these factors  into  account  in  this  case,
                      giving due weight to the relevant legitimate  aim  of
                      preventing disorder or crime on the one hand and  the
                      'historic injustice' on the other, without which  the
                      appellant might be a  British  citizen  by  now,  his
                      father having been discharged from the Army in  1991,
                      and thus be immune from deportation.


                  37.  In regard to the remaining Maslov criteria,  we  note
                      that the appellant's offence  occurred  comparatively
                      recently, but we take into account, for  what  it  is
                      worth, the fact that his conduct since then has  been
                      good.


                  38.   We  find  that  the  appellant  has  strong  social,
                      cultural and family ties  with  the  United  Kingdom,
                      having lived here for nearly seven  years  since  the
                      age of 19 with close family members.  By contrast, he
                      no longer has any real connection with Nepal.  He has
                      no home and no family there and has not lived in that
                      country since 2006.   Indeed,  since  coming  to  the
                      United Kingdom he has only been back on one  occasion
                      for a holiday.


                  39.  Balancing all of these factors, we have come  to  the
                      view that the public interest in deportation in  this
                      case is  outweighed  by  the  various  countervailing
                      factors, in  particular  the  appellant's  length  of
                      residence with  his  family  in  this  country  taken
                      together with the 'historic injustice'.  Accordingly,
                      we  find  that  the  appellant's  deportation   would
                      involve  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
                      Article 8 rights and those of his immediate  family'.



         8.   They therefore allowed the appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
             appealed,   arguing  that   the   Tribunal   had   misdirected
             themselves in law in that they had not taken into account  the
             clear guidance in the judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2008] EWCA Civ
             1192  and  not  accepted  that  it  was  only  in  exceptional
             circumstances that a deportation  case  should  succeed  under
             Article 8.  The grounds referred further to  the  judgment  of
             the Court of Appeal in Gurung [2012] EWCA  Civ  62  which  had
             referred to the appellant in that case as being a  "physically
             fit and intellectually sound young man who had lived in  Nepal
             in the past" and decided that deportation was a  proportionate
             response to his crime.  It was pointed out that  the  judgment
             in Gurung emphasised the weight to be placed on  the  decision
             of the Secretary of State to invoke the provisions of  Section
             32 of the Borders Act 2007.  It was claimed that the  Tribunal
             had  not  adequately  balanced  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of a convicted criminal  against  the  appellant's
             ties in the United Kingdom.


         9.   Mr Bramble relied  on  those  grounds  of  appeal.   While  he
             accepted that the hearing of the appeal had taken place before
             the judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  had  been
             issued on 8 October 2013 he stated that the determination  had
             not been promulgated until after the judgment in MF  (Nigeria)
             had been issued and therefore that the  Tribunal  should  have
             taken that into account.  He emphasised that the judgment   in
             MF set  out  the  necessity  of  there  being  compelling  and
             exceptional factors  before  an  appellant  could  succeed  in
             arguing that his rights under Article 8 would be infringed  by
             the decision.  He stated that the Tribunal had not  identified
             such factors.  He referred to the fact  that  the  appellant's
             crime was committed when he was an adult -  this  was  not  an
             appellant who had come to Britain as a child.  He stated  that
             the appellant's circumstances were  similar  to  that  of  the
             appellant  in  Gurung  in  that  he  was  physically  fit  and
             intellectually sound and there was nothing to indicate that he
             required the support of his father or indeed that  his  father
             required his support.  The Tribunal had referred to  "historic
             injustice" done to Gurkhas but there was nothing  to  indicate
             that that was relevant to the  appellant's  case.   He  stated
             there was nothing to indicate that the Tribunal had considered
             the public interest in  the  deportation  of  a  man  who  had
             committed a serious crime.


         10.  In reply Ms Stickler referred  to  her  skeleton  argument  in
             which she had set out the factors which the Tribunal had taken
             into account in  paragraph  25  of  the  determination.   They
             included the fact that the appellant had always lived with his
             family in their  family  home,  that  he  was  not  living  an
             independent life, had a close relationship  with  his  family,
             and his extended family also lived in the UK.  They had  found
             that the appellant's father could not be expected to return to
             Nepal in the light of his grant of indefinite leave to  remain
             and the presence of his wife and two daughters here.  They had
             also taken into account  that  the  appellant  was  no  longer
             addicted to heroin and was at a low risk of  re-offending  and
             that his conduct since the offence had  been  good.   Together
             with these factors they had taken into account the  fact  that
             the appellant had been resident in Britain since December 2006
             and the "historic injustice" suffered by him and  his  family.
             They had concluded the appellant had no real  connection  with
             Nepal.


         11.   She  emphasised  that  the  Tribunal  had  referred  to   the
             importance of taking into  account  the  public  interest  and
             indeed the deterrent effect of deportation but had  reached  a
             conclusion, which was open to them, that the removal  of  this
             appellant would be  disproportionate.   She  argued  that  the
             judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  not   altered   the
             fundamental balancing exercise in dealing with  the  issue  of
             deportation - it was the ratio of the judgment in MF (Nigeria)
             that the approach to the issue of the Article 8 rights  of  an
             appellant  under  the  new  Rules  as  opposed  to  under  the
             Convention was really a question merely of  form  rather  than
             substance.  The Tribunal had considered a number  of  relevant
             factors and reached a conclusion which was open to them.


         12.  By citing the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  Gurung  they
             had clearly taken into account  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of a criminal but she emphasised that the facts in
             the crime committed by the  appellant  in  Gurung  were  of  a
             completely different order from those of this appellant -  the
             appellant in Gurung had been sentenced  for  manslaughter  and
             violent disorder.


         13.  She argued that it was not the case that  the  seriousness  of
             the appellant's crime could only lead to one conclusion.   Nor
             indeed was it the case that the Tribunal had  not  been  fully
             aware of the necessity of weighing up the public  interest  of
             deporting an offender - they had fully engaged with the  issue
             of  the  public  interest.   In  the  skeleton  argument   she
             emphasised that the new Rules "did not herald a restoration of
             the exceptionality test and should be interpreted consistently
             with Strasbourg jurisprudence".


         14.  She asked me therefore to find that the Tribunal had reached a
             conclusion which was fully open to them on the evidence before
             them and therefore to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


         Discussion


         15.  I consider that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
             determination of  the  Tribunal.   While  I  accept  that  the
             judgment in MF (Nigeria) had not been issued at  the  date  of
             hearing the reality is  that  it  was  issued  seventeen  days
             before the determination was signed and,  in  any  event,   MF
             (Nigeria), while dealing with the issue of the  assessment  of
             the Article 8 rights of an appellant under the Rules, reflects
             a line of  judgments,  the  most  important  of  which  is  SS
             (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 50 which emphasise the importance of
             the public interest in deporting criminals and  the  necessity
             of there being very important factors indeed to  overturn  the
             presumption in favour of deportation set out in the 2007  Act.
             The Tribunal, although they referred to the public interest in
             the deportation of   convicted criminals, simply did not  show
             any factors which would  mean  that  the  deportation  of  the
             appellant would be disproportionate.


         16. The Tribunal appear to consider that the "historic wrong" done
             to Gurkhas was somehow a determinative   factor  to  be  taken
             into account in this case and in so doing  they  were  clearly
             wrong to place  weight on an error of law decision  which  was
             not reported. The relevant reported case is  that  of  Ghising
             and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT
             567(IAC)  the head note of which reads as follows:

                  '(1) In finding that the weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
                      historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not
                      to be regarded as less than that to be  accorded  the
                      historic wrong suffered by British Overseas citizens,
                      the Court of Appeal in Gurung and others [2013]  EWCA
                      Civ 8 did not hold that,  in  either  Gurkha  or  BOC
                      cases, the effect of the historic wrong is to reverse
                      or otherwise alter the burden of proof  that  applies
                      in Article 8 proportionality assessments.

                  (2)   When  an  Appellant  has   shown   that   there   is
                      family/private life and  the  decision  made  by  the
                      Respondent amounts to an interference  with  it,  the
                      burden lies  with  the  Respondent  to  show  that  a
                      decision  to  remove   is   proportionate   (although
                      Appellants will, in practice, bear the responsibility
                      of adducing evidence that lies within their remit and
                      about which the Respondent may be unaware).

                  (3)  What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not
                      the burden of proof but, rather, the issue of  weight
                      in a proportionality assessment. The Court held that,
                      as in the case of BOCs, the historic  wrong  suffered
                      by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be  given  substantial
                      weight.

                  (4)  Accordingly, where it is  found  that  Article  8  is
                      engaged  and,  but  for  the  historic   wrong,   the
                      Appellant would have been settled in the UK long ago,
                      this will ordinarily determine  the  outcome  of  the
                      Article   8   proportionality   assessment   in    an
                      Appellant's favour, where the matters  relied  on  by
                      the  Secretary  of  State/  entry  clearance  officer
                      consist solely of the public interest in  maintaining
                      a firm immigration policy.

                  (5)   It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha
                      (and BOC) cases will not  necessarily  succeed,  even
                      though (i) their family life  engages  Article  8(1);
                      and (ii) the evidence shows they would have  come  to
                      the United Kingdom with their  father,  but  for  the
                      injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling
                      here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters
                      over and above the public interest in  maintaining  a
                      firm immigration policy, which  argue  in  favour  of
                      removal or the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter,  these
                      matters must  be  given  appropriate  weight  in  the
                      balance in  the  Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad
                      immigration history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may
                      still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors
                      bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance'.


         17. As is clear from that decision the "historic wrong" related to
             the fact that Gurkha soldiers who had retired were not given a
             right  of  residence  here  in  line  with  those   of   other
             Commonwealth citizens who had served in the British army.  The
             "wrong"  was  righted  by  the  grant  of  residence  to  such
             soldiers.  Because of that the appellant's father was able  to
             come here and settle and to bring the appellant with him.   It
             was not somehow a licence for the appellant to come  here  and
             commit crimes or evade the consequences for committing  crimes
             here.


         18.  Moreover, the Tribunal appeared to consider that the appellant
             should benefit from the criteria set out in the European Court
             of Human Rights judgment in Maslov.  The reality, however,  in
             this case is that the appellant, who had lived in Britain  for
             a comparatively short time had, unlike the claimant in Maslov,
             not been brought up here - he had arrived here at the  age  of
             19 and the crimes which he committed were  committed  when  he
             was aged 24.


         19.  The appellant does have family here but he  is  an  adult  and
             there is nothing to indicate that he could not live in  Nepal,
             he is a physically fit and intellectually sound young man.   I
             find that the Tribunal have not identified any  factors  which
             when weighed against the public interest in the deportation of
             foreign criminals would indicate that the deportation of  this
             appellant would be disproportionate.


         20.  I therefore find that there are material errors of law in  the
             determination of the First-tier Tribunal and I set aside their
             decision.


         21.  The appeal must now proceed to a hearing afresh on all  issues
             when the relevant exercise as set out in the judgment  of  the
             Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) can be carried out."


2.   The appeal therefore came back to me for a hearing afresh.   Mr  Walker
    and Mr Howells agreed that there was no  requirement  to  hear  further
    evidence as the findings of fact the First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  in
    paragraphs 7 to 13  of  the  determination  were  accepted.   In  those
    paragraphs the First-tier Tribunal stated:-

         "EVIDENCE


        Appellant


         7.   In his  oral  evidence,  the  appellant  adopted  his  witness
             statement dated 6th September 2013.  In summary, he  was  born
             in Brunei while his father  was  serving  there  as  a  Gurkha
             soldier in the British Army.  He also lived in Hong Kong  with
             his parents before he and his mother returned to  Nepal.   His
             mother died in 2000.  In  May  2006  his  father  was  granted
             indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in
             December  of  that  year  the  appellant  came  here  as   his
             dependant.  Initially, he lived with an uncle and  aunt  until
             his father and stepmother arrived in 2007 when  went  to  live
             with them, which he has done ever since.  In  2008  they  were
             joined by the appellant's two younger sisters.  The  appellant
             has never  lived  a  separate  life.   He  has  a  very  close
             relationship with his father, stepmother and sisters  and  has
             always been a very important part of the family.


         8.   In relation to the offence for which he was  sentenced  to  20
             months' imprisonment the appellant explained that  he  was  at
             that time a heroin  addict.   He  did  not  sell  drugs  on  a
             commercial  basis.   The  drugs  which  were  found   in   his
             possession were for use in company with  a  friend.   He  only
             sold drugs to his friends in order to feed his  habit,  as  he
             had  been  sacked  from  his  job  as  a  consequence  of  his
             addiction.  He regrets the day when he started to take drugs.


         9.   The appellant said that he has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
             lawfully for the last  seven  years  and  has  an  established
             private and family life here.  This is where his home  is  and
             where his parents, siblings, extended family members,  friends
             and colleagues all are.  He has always lived with his  family,
             in Nepal and the United Kingdom.  He has nothing and no-one to
             return to in Nepal.  He has  no  home  and  no  family  there.
             Since arriving in the United Kingdom at the end  of  2006,  he
             has only been to Nepal once, in 2009, for a four-week holiday.


         10.  While in prison,  the  appellant  undertook  and  successfully
             completed several courses which helped him to  give  up  drugs
             and taught him various skills.  All of  these  courses  had  a
             positive impact on him and he wishes to continue to  live  his
             life in a positive way with his family.  He has  learned  from
             his mistakes and his family will continue to support him.


         11.   The  appellant's  statement  also  refers  to  the  "historic
             injustice" in the treatment of former Gurkha soldiers.  Had it
             not been for that, he and his father would have settled in the
             United Kingdom earlier, when the appellant was younger, and he
             would have had a full education in  the  United  Kingdom  with
             improved employment opportunities and better integration.


         Appellant's Father


         12.  The appellant's father, Mr Lal Bahadur Sunwar,  gave  evidence
             and adopted his witness statement dated  6th  September  2013.
             He confirmed that the appellant is his son and  said  that  he
             agreed  with  and  adopted  the  appellant's  statement.    He
             confirmed that the appellant  was  born  in  Brunei  while  Mr
             Sunwar was serving there in the British Army.   The  appellant
             and his mother then went to Hong Kong with  Mr  Sunwar.   They
             remained there until 1988 when they returned to Nepal.   After
             retiring from the army in 1991, Mr  Sunwar  also  returned  to
             Nepal and lived there with his family for a few months  before
             moving back to Brunei to work with the  Gurkha  Reserve  Unit.
             Some years later, the appellant's mother  was  diagnosed  with
             breast cancer.  As her condition deteriorated, she was  unable
             to look after the appellant and he had to live  in  a  hostel.
             After his mother died in August 2000, the  appellant  went  to
             Brunei to  be  with  his  father.   In  2006  he  was  granted
             indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             dependant and went to live there, being joined by  his  father
             and stepmother shortly afterwards.


         13.  Mr Sunwar said that the appellant is  his  eldest  child,  and
             only son, and has always been close to him.   They  grew  even
             closer to each  other  after  the  death  of  the  appellant's
             mother.  They are a very close-knit family.  The appellant has
             never lived a separate life.  He has always been an  important
             and integral part of the family unit.  The appellant  is  also
             very close to his sisters, who are both younger than him."


3.   Mr Howells stated that he wished to renew his application  to  rely  on
    the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Davidge in Dewan Appeal No. DA/00039/2013 in which that  Tribunal
    had considered the fact that Dewan was the son of a Gurkha  and  stated
    that the "historic wrong" in relation  to  Gurkhas  was  a  fact  which
    should be taken  into account when the deportation of the  child  of  a
    Gurkha was considered on the basis that had there not been the historic
    wrong and the potential deportee's father had been able  to  settle  in
    Britain when he had originally wished to do so, the appellant  in  that
    case would have been able to settle in Britain earlier and become  more
    integrated into British society and therefore  the  offence  might  not
    have taken place.

4.   The fact that a panel  in the Upper Tribunal  has  reached  conclusions
    on an argument put before them which was the same as  an  argument  put
    before me does not mean that I should be bound  by  the  conclusion  in
    their  determination, particularly when it is only a conclusion reached
    in a decision to remit rather than in a determination  and  is  in  any
    event not reported.   However,  Mr  Howells  emphasised  that  had  the
    appellant's father come to Britain in 1991 - it was his  evidence  that
    that is what he wished to  do,  by  the  date  of  the  conviction  the
    appellant would have been a British citizen and therefore  not  subject
    to deportation.

5.   He then turned to the determination of  the  Tribunal  in  Ghising  and
    Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC).
    It was the determination of the appeal in  Ghising  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC) once that determination had been set aside by the Court of Appeal
    insofar as it related to the  question  of  the  proportionality  under
    Article 8(2).  Paragraph (4) of the  head  note  in  the  determination
    (which I set out in full  in paragraph  16 of my  decision to set aside
     above)  reads:

         "(4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/entry clearance officer consists solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy."



6.   Mr Howells was also, of course, aware of the  fifth  paragraph  of  the
    head note which reads:-

         "5.  It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  and  BOC
             cases will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their
             family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows
             they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,
             but for the injustice that prevented the latter from  settling
             here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
             above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
             policy, which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight
             in the balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.   Thus,  a  bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side of the balance."

7.   Mr Howells went on to state that, of course, in a  case  such  as  this
    there is a public interest in the deportation of a convicted  criminal.
    He referred however to the various criteria set out in the judgment  of
    the European Court of Human  Rights  in  Maslov  emphasising  that  the
    appellant had come to Britain at a relatively young age and was  "only"
    24/25 when he committed the offence.  He stated that there was  nothing
    left for the appellant  in  Nepal  as  all  his  family  including  his
    siblings were in Britain and referred to the judgment of the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and to  paragraphs  42,  43
    and 45 of that judgment which deal with the test of exceptionality.  He
    argued that the criteria set  out  in  the  judgment  of  Maslov  could
    outweigh the public interest in deportation and that in  assessing  the
    balancing exercise I should take into account the historic  wrong  done
    to Gurkhas as well as the length of time the appellant  had  been  here
    and the fact that he had nothing to return to in his own  country.   He
    argued that the appellant's own particular circumstances outweighed the
    public interest in his deportation.

8.   In reply Mr Walker  referred  to  the  chronology  in  the  appellant's
    bundle with particular regard to the time which he had spent in  Brunei
    when his father was working there.  He emphasised  that  the  appellant
    had started taking drugs while still living with his parents  and  said
    that it could not be argued that his parents were not aware of what  he
    was doing, indeed they had agreed that he should go to rehab  in  Nepal
    in 2009.

9.   He argued therefore that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  started
    taking drugs shortly after he arrived, had gone on to lose his job  and
    had been arrested for a serious drug offence showed that it  would  not
    be disproportionate for him to be removed to Nepal.

10.  He emphasised that the appellant was not a  child:   he  had  committed
    the crimes as an adult and I should place weight on the seriousness  of
    the crimes committed and conclude that the deportation of the appellant
    was not disproportionate.

11.  In reply Mr Howells referred to the fact that  the  appellant  had  two
    younger sisters here.

Discussion

12.  Mr Howells referred to the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
    (Nigeria) and in particular  to  paragraphs  42,  43  and  45  of  that
    judgment.  I note that in paragraph 42 it is stated:-

         "42. ... In approaching  the  question  of  whether  removal  is  a
             proportionate interference  with  an  individual's  Article  8
             rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighed   in   favour   of
             deportation and  something  very  compelling  (which  will  be
             'exceptional') is required to outweigh the public interest  in
             removal.  In our view, it is no coincidence  that  the  phrase
             'exceptional circumstances' is used in the new  rules  in  the
             context  of  weighing  competing  factors  for   and   against
             deportation of foreign criminals.

         43.  The word 'exceptional' is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule.  The general rule in the present  context
             of that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paras  399
             and 399A  do  not  apply,  very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
             These compelling reasons are the 'exceptional circumstances'.

         44.  We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
             code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
             in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence.  We accordingly respectfully do not agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not 'mandated  or  directed'
             to take all the relevant Article 8 criteria into account.

         45.  Even if were wrong about that, it would be necessary to  apply
             a proportionality test outside he new rules as was done by the
             UT.  Either way the result  should  be  the  same.   In  these
             circumstances, it  is  a  sterile  question  whether  this  is
             required by the new rules or is a requirement of  the  general
             law.  What matters is that it is required to be carried out if
             paras 399 or 399A do not apply."

13.  It is accepted that paragraphs 399 and 399A do not apply in this case.

14.  It is therefore incumbent upon me to consider the relevant  factors  in
    assessing the proportionality of the deportation of the appellant.

15.  He is subject  to  automatic  deportation  following  his  having  been
    convicted of the serious crime of possession of heroin with  intent  to
    supply and having received a sentence of twenty months' imprisonment.

16.  The appellant committed that crime at the age of 24  -  he  was  not  a
    child.  At that time he had only been in Britain  for  a  comparatively
    short time in that he had entered Britain in December 2006 at  the  age
    of 19.  It appears that the crime was committed because he  had  become
    addicted to drugs and indeed his parents were so concerned  about  this
    they considered that it was appropriate that he should be sent to Nepal
    for rehabilitation - his addiction had meant that he had been unable to
    keep employment here.   I  accept  that  the  appellant's  parents  and
    younger sisters are in Britain and there is  nothing  to  believe  that
    they are anything other than a close family although, of course,  I  am
    aware that the appellant was taking drugs at a time when he was  living
    at home - his parents were unable to stop him doing so.

17.  It does not appear from the evidence that the appellant  has  built  up
    any significant private life here.  He has not  completed  any  studies
    and before his conviction had stopped working.

18.  I accept that the appellant no longer has a home in Nepal but there  is
    nothing to indicate that as a healthy young man he would not be able to
    find work there even taking into account the fact  that  his  immediate
    family all live in this country.  I note that he did  go  to  Nepal  on
    holiday in 2009.

19.  I am aware that the  appellant  undertook  various  courses  in  prison
    which related to drug awareness and there does not  appear  to  be  any
    evidence that at the present time he is still on  drugs.   I  have,  of
    course, taken into account the  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which are set out above.

20.  Mr Howells urged me to  take  into  account  the  "historic  injustice"
    which meant that Gurkha soldiers were not entitled to settle  here  and
    points to the assertion by the appellant's father that  he  would  have
    settled here on retirement in 1991 and therefore  the  appellant  would
    have been brought up in this country.  However, as  Mr  Walker  pointed
    out the appellant was born in Brunei and then lived with his father  in
    Hong Kong before returning to Nepal in  1991.   In  2001  he  moved  to
    Brunei to live with his father and it was there that he completed his O
    levels.  He did not return to Nepal until 2004  coming  to  Britain  in
    2006.  It therefore appears that the appellant spent some of  his  most
    formative adolescent years in Brunei where his father was working.

21.  The "historic injustice" done to Gurkhas was corrected when those  such
    as the appellant's father who had retired from the Gurkhas were able to
    settle here and to bring their families.  The fact that  the  appellant
    entered Britain in 2006 was, I consider the remedying  of  that  wrong.
    The remedy was to ensure that the appellant could come  to  Britain  to
    live with his parents despite the fact that he was over the age of  18.
    It was not a remedy to allow him to come to Britain and break  the  law
    here.  In finding an error of law in this case I referred to  the  head
    note in the decision in Ghising in the Upper Tribunal.  That  makes  it
    clear that where Article 8 is engaged and apart from the historic wrong
    the appellant would have been settled in Britain long  ago  that  would
    ordinarily determine the  outcome  of  the  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment, but that criminal behaviour  may  still  be  sufficient  to
    outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the appellant's  side  of  the
    balance.  In this case there is such criminal  behaviour.   I  consider
    that even placing weight on the "historic wrong" the public interest in
    the deportation of this appellant who has dealt in drugs  outweigh  the
    factors in his favour and therefore the deportation of  this  appellant
    would not be disproportionate.

22.  I therefore, having set  aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismiss this appeal  on  both  immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds.









Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

