
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00403/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2017                  |On 13 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ION DRAGOMIR
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. West (of counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent, who was born  on  12  March  1961,  is  a  national  of
    Romania. He first arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 November 1997 and
    applied for asylum. His application was refused on 14 November 1998 and
    his subsequent appeal was dismissed on 2 November 1999.

2.   On 22 June 2000, the  Respondent  married  an  Irish  citizen  and  was
    granted residence as her spouse on 30 June 2001. He  remained  here  in
    this capacity until 3 February 2004. Subsequently on 7  June  2007  was
    granted leave to enter as an EEA national but on 18  February  2010  he
    was refused an A2 registration  certificate.  Meanwhile,  he  had  been
    involved in  a  car  traffic  accident  in  2008,  which  rendered  him
    paraplegic.

3.   The Respondent was convicted of driving offences on  18  January  2000,
    14 March 2003 and 20 September 2005. He was also  convicted  of  common
    assault and theft on 15 October 2002 and soliciting on 8 November 2005.

4.   On 15 May  2015,  the  Respondent  was  convicted  of  making/supplying
    articles for use in fraud and sentenced to three  years'  imprisonment.
    The Appellant made a decision to deport him from the United Kingdom  on
    grounds of public policy and he appealed against this decision.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron allowed  his  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 June 2017 and the Respondent appealed. She was granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  on  19  July
    2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for  the  Appellant
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  their
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

DECISION

7.   The Respondent accepted that, for the purposes of Regulation 21 of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations, he had not resided in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at  least  ten  years  or
    acquired a right of permanent residence. Therefore, the  Appellant  can
    deport him from the United Kingdom on grounds of public policy,  public
    security or public health if the  principles  contained  in  Regulation
    21(5) of the EEA Regulations are properly applied.

8.   In particular, Regulation 21(5) of  the  EEA  Regulations  states  that
    where such a decision is taken it shall be taken  "in  accordance  with
    the following principles-


    (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
    (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of
         the person concerned;
    (c)  the personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;
    (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate
         to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not  justify   the
         decision;
    (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision".

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge reminded himself that in LG and  CC  (EEA
    Regs: residence; imprisonment; removal) Italy [2009]  UKAIT  00024  the
    Upper Tribunal found that "a clear distinction is required to be  drawn
    between the three levels of protection against  removal  introduced  in
    the 2006 Regulations, each level being intended to  be  more  stringent
    and narrower than the immediately lower test". The applicable level  in
    the Respondent's case was the lowest one.

10.  It was not suggested that for the purposes of Regulation 21(5)(b)  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had based his decision  on  anything  but
    the  Respondent's  personal  criminal  offending.  But  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also had  to  consider  whether,  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 21(5)(c) the Respondent's  personal  conduct  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental  interests  of  society.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    reminded himself of  this  test  but  the  issue  is  whether  he  gave
    sufficient reasoning for his findings.

11.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the decision reached  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was one which was open to him in the light of
    the evidence before him.

12.  The index offence in the Respondent's case was one count of  making  or
    supplying articles for the use in fraud. The articles in question  were
    "Lebanese loops" which were to be used  to  fraudulently  obtain  money
    from ATMs. The sentencing remarks made by a judge at Blackfriars  Crown
    Court indicated that the Respondent was convicted on the basis that  he
    had a workshop in his home where he was preparing these loops  for  use
    by another person. In particular, the evidence indicated that when  the
    police entered his home, the Respondent was sitting at  a  small  table
    with various pieces of equipment; including a soldering iron and a glue
    gun and that a number of items  were  found  which  were  used  in  ATM
    frauds. The Judge also took into account the  sophisticated  nature  of
    the offence and the significant number of items being prepared for  use
    in ATM fraud that were found in his flat.  The  sentencing  judge  also
    accepted that the Respondent had confirmed to the police on arrest that
    he had detailed knowledge of the methods used to commit fraud  at  ATMs
    and that he had been involved with these frauds over a sustained period
    of time. All of these factors led to the Judge  to  conclude  that  the
    Respondent fell into the category of higher culpability.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did refer to all of these factors in  his
    decision but when considering whether the  Respondent  was  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society and at paragraph 67 of his decision the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge also said that he was in no doubt that the index offence
    was a serious one. However, when giving reasons for allowing the appeal
    he concentrated on the content of the OASys Assessment, which  did  not
    take into account the conduct which led to the Respondent  being  found
    guilty and sentenced. For example, the Respondent told the Service that
    a friend had left a suitcase at his flat  and  the  items  involved  in
    fraud were in this suitcase. This led the assessment to  focus  on  his
    failure to be aware of his friend's fraudulent background.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did  not  address  this  in  paragraph  68  of  his
    decision when he said that he had taken into account the  OASys  report
    which had clearly scored the "Respondent"  as  being  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending or harm to the public. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  also
    failed to take into account the fact that the Assessment found that his
    lifestyle and associates indicated a risk of offending.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did note in paragraph 82 of his  decision
    that the Respondent did not accept that he had  committed  the  offence
    and that there was nothing on the evidence before him to indicate  that
    he was undertaking any rehabilitation programme. But he did  not  refer
    to this when concluding that the Respondent did  not  pose  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society in the context of the index offence  further  than
    noting that he had complied with his licence conditions  and  attending
    his probation appointments. His denial of  guilt  was  something  which
    should have been taken into account as part of  the  overall  reasoning
    exercise as this is a factor  which  may  indicate  a  future  risk  of
    offending.

15.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron  did
    make material errors of law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cameron.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 11 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


