
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00120/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 17 June 2013                                 |On 27 June 2013            |
|Prepared 18 June 2013                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             Mr Quang Tuan TRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction  in  this
    appeal, and neither have I been invited to make such a direction.

 2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam born 22 December 1973.   He  was
    issued with a Home Office Visa Promise  Letter  on  21  July  1983  and
    travelled to the United Kingdom on 10 April 1991 in order to  join  his
    father, who had earlier been granted refugee status in this country. He
    has remained in the United Kingdom since that date.

 3. On 19 December 2005 the appellant was convicted at Medway  Magistrates'
    Court of cultivating, and possession of, cannabis. On 6 February  2006,
    at Maidstone Crown Court, he was sentenced to two  years'  imprisonment
    for the former offence and six months' imprisonment to run concurrently
    for the latter offence.

 4. On 1 October 2006  the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  that  the
    Secretary of State intended to make a deportation  order  against  him.
    He appealed against this decision, but his appeal was  dismissed  in  a
    determination of promulgated on  11  May  2007,  by  Immigration  Judge
    Suchak and Mr A Cragg sitting as a panel of the Asylum and  Immigration
    Tribunal.  The  panel,  inter  alia,  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    deportation to Vietnam would not lead to a breach of his Article  3  or
    Article 8 ECHR rights.

 5. On 20 November 2007 the appellant failed to report as  required  by  a
    condition of his immigration bail.  He  was  next  encountered  by  the
    authorities on  28 March  2012.   Representations  were  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf on 4 April and 5 May 2012, but these  were  rejected
    on 5 July 2012.  A  deportation  order  was  then  signed  against  the
    appellant on 6 July 2012.   Further  representations,  treated  by  the
    Secretary of State as  an  application  to  revoke  the  aforementioned
    deportation order, were made by the appellant's representatives  on  23
    October 2012.  On 13  January  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision refusing to  revoke  the  deportation  order.   The  appellant
    appealed this decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal [a panel comprising of First-tier Tribunal Judge K.F. Walters,
    and Ms S.E. Singer (non-legal member)]  dismissed  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds in a determination promulgated on 4 March 2013.

 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  thereafter  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul by way of a decision dated 18 April 2013.
    Thus the appeal came before me.

 7. The appellant's pleaded grounds of  challenge  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination are as follows:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal's  conclusion,  at  paragraph  122  of  its
         determination, that the appellant has  not  established  a  private
         life in the United Kingdom is irrational;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal's alternative conclusion, that  deportation
         would be a proportionate interference with the appellant's  private
         life, is unlawful in that (a) it is irrational,  (b)  it  fails  to
         take into account a number  of  relevant  factors  and  (c)  it  is
         inadequately reasoned.

 8. At  the  hearing  Mr  Turner  drew  the  tribunal's  attention  to  the
    appellant's history in the United Kingdom, particularly noting that  he
    had arrived here  when  17  years  old  and  that  he  had  lived  here
    continuously for approximately 22 years.  He  observed  that  paragraph
    339A of the Immigration Rules, which came into force on  9  July  2012,
    recognises prima facie that an individual has a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom if they have remained here continuously  for  more  than
    twenty years.  Mr Turner further drew attention to a concession made by
    the Secretary of State, in  relation  to  the  appellant's  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom,  and  submitted  that  in  all  the
    circumstances of this case the First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion  that
    the appellant had not established a private life in the United  Kingdom
    [122], was perverse.  He asserted, in the alternative, that given  that
    the appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  22  years  any
    conclusion that interference with the appellant's  private  life  would
    not be of sufficient severity so as to engage  Article  8  was  equally
    perverse.

 9. Mr Turner then turned his submissions to the issue of  proportionality,
    asserting that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to take into account,
    when coming to its conclusions on this issue, (i)  the  length  of  the
    appellant's residence in the United Kingdom, (ii) the fact that he  has
    family members in the United Kingdom (iii) the fact of his poor health,
    (iv) his relationship with his wife, (v)  the  fact  that  he  has  not
    committed a criminal offence since 5 December 2005 and finally (vi) the
    fact that there is a low risk of the  appellant  reoffending;  emphasis
    being particularly placed on those matters detailed  at  (v)  and  (vi)
    above.

10. In particular relation to the appellant's  medical  condition,  it  was
    submitted that the appellant  could  not  afford  to  have  surgery  in
    Vietnam  and  that  he  would  go  blind   without   further   surgical
    intervention.

11. Mr Turner, finally, submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was perverse in light of the European Court of  Human  Rights'
    decision in a case of A.A. v  United  Kingdom  (Case  No.  8000/08),  a
    judgment given on 20 September 2011.  He  observed  that  in  A.A.  the
    applicant had remained in the United Kingdom for just eleven years  and
    had been convicted of rape, yet the European Court of Human Rights  had
    concluded that his deportation would not be proportionate on the  facts
    of that case.  He  further  observed  that  in  the  instant  case  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for  twice  as  long  as  the
    applicant in A.A. and that he had been convicted of a far less  serious
    offence than A.A.

12. In response Mr Avery reminded the Upper Tribunal  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's starting point had been the determination of the Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal in May  2007,  which  had  not  been  successfully
    challenged.  He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had been correct
    to conclude that there had not  been  any  substantial  change  in  the
    appellant's  position  since  the  determination  of  2007,   directing
    attention to the fact that the First-tier Tribunal had  concluded  that
    the appellant did not have any family life in the  United  Kingdom  and
    further that it had not been impressed with any of the  witnesses  that
    had appeared before it.

13. In relation of the medical issue, Mr Avery observed that the  substance
    of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  the  same  as  that
    which had been before Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in 2007,  i.e.  a
    medical report dated from 2006.

14. He asserted that the First-tier Tribunal had taken into account all the
    relevant evidence  and  circumstances,  including  the  length  of  the
    appellant's stay in the United Kingdom and the fact  that  he  had  not
    been convicted of any further offences since 2005.

15. As to the submissions made in relation to the case of  A.A.,  Mr  Avery
    submitted that A.A. was a decision on its own facts.

16. I now turn to consider each of the grounds  in  turn,  observing  first
    that no issue has been taken, either in the grounds  or  by  Mr  Turner
    during his oral submissions, with the First-tier Tribunal's failure  to
    engage in any  independent  consideration  of  the  appellant's  appeal
    pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

17. The first and second of the appellant's grounds seek to  challenge  the
    finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in   paragraph   122   of   its
    determination, made in relation to the appellant's private life:

       "[F]ollowing Razgar, and our findings of fact summarised herein,  we
       find that, in principle, the appellant has not persuaded us that  he
       has established that private  and  family  life  exists  within  the
       meaning of Article 8 of the 1950 ECHR which would  not  continue  in
       all essential respects,  notwithstanding  removal  from  the  United
       Kingdom."

18. Insofar as the First-tier Tribunal concluded that Article  8  ECHR  was
    not engaged by the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom, I am
    in no doubt that its decision involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law.

19. I observe that in paragraph 72  of  its  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal record a concession made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    in the following terms, "It was  conceded  that  the  appellant  had  a
    private and family life in the United Kingdom, but it was  claimed  his
    family life did not go beyond normal emotional ties."  Further,  it  is
    not in dispute that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a 17
    year old, in 1991.

20. Given the length of time the appellant has spent in the UK and his  age
    on arrival here, I find that the only conclusion open to the First-tier
    Tribunal was that the appellant has established a private  life  worthy
    of respect in this country  and  that  deportation  would  lead  to  an
    interference with that private life of sufficient  severity  so  as  to
    engage Article 8.

21. It is important, at this juncture, to  note  that  Mr  Turner  did  not
    pursue challenge to the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed family life in the United  Kingdom.
    This was for good reason. Although I have identified above a concession
    made on behalf of the Secretary of State in relation to the appellant's
    family life, it is significant that this concession was qualified using
    terminology found in the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Navaratnam
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31.  It  is  quite  clear  therefore  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative, although conceding that the appellant has a family life
    with his  various  family  members  in  the  United  Kingdom,  was  not
    conceding that this was a 'family life' within the  meaning  attributed
    to that phrase when used in the context of Article 8 ECHR.  In addition
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded,   at   paragraph   114   of   its
    determination,  that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's family members to  join  the  appellant  in  Vietnam.  This
    finding has not been challenged. As such, Mr  Turner  properly  pursued
    the appellant's case before the Upper Tribunal solely on the  basis  of
    his private life ties to this country, which, of  course,  include  the
    various relationships he has with his family members here.

22. I next turn to consider whether the error I have  identified  above  is
    such that I ought to set the First-tier Tribunal's decision  aside.   I
    conclude that it is not, given that which follows on from the passage I
    have already cited above in paragraph 122 of its determination:

         "[I]f, however, we are incorrect  in  that,  and  bearing  in  mind
         concessions made by the respondent and her  representative  at  the
         hearing before us, we  find  the  appellant  has  established  that
         private and family life exists within the meaning of Article  8  of
         the  1950  ECHR  and  potentially  engages  the  United   Kingdom's
         obligations toward him.  We find that, following the  jurisprudence
         summarised herein, the proposed removal will be an interference  by
         a public authority with the exercise of the  appellant's  right  to
         respect for his private and family life.   Such  interference  with
         the appellant's private and family life and its  consequences  will
         be of such gravity  as  potentially  to  engage  the  operation  of
         Article 8 of the 1950 ECHR.  Such  interference  is  in  accordance
         with the law; and such interference is necessary  in  a  democratic
         society, satisfying the criteria set out in  Article  8(2)  of  the
         1950 ECHR, having, among other things, the legitimate  aim  of  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control."

23.  The tribunal thereafter state at paragraph 123 of its determination:

         "The issue with which we are primarily  concerned  is  whether  any
         such interference with this appellant's right to  respect  for  his
         private and family life is proportionate to legitimate public  aims
         sought to be achieved ..."

24. It is clear to me that the First-tier Tribunal was here considering the
    alternative scenario, in  which  the  appellant  had  established  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged.  Consequently any error made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal in relation to the issue of whether Article  8  ECHR  was
    engaged by the facts of this case, was not one capable of affecting the
    outcome of the appeal.

25. To this end I turn to the  third  of  the  appellant's  grounds,  which
    brings challenge to the tribunal's conclusions and reasons on the issue
    of proportionality.

26. Mr Turner's primary submission in this regard is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in failing to take into account  a  number  of  relevant
    factors in its assessment of whether the appellant's  deportation  from
    the United Kingdom would be proportionate.

27. I observe that in paragraph 124 of  its  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal clearly states that it took into account all of  the  evidence
    before it when coming to its conclusions. This statement of  itself  is
    sufficient for me to dispose of the appellant's third ground.

28. However, if I am wrong in the above  conclusion,  I  nevertheless  find
    that the First-tier Tribunal adequately considered each of  the  issues
    referred to by Mr Turner [those issues being identified in paragraph  9
    above].

29. As to the appellant's medical problems, the tribunal dealt  with  these
    in paragraphs 126 to 132 of its determination and, although it  did  so
    ostensibly in  the  context  of  Article  3  grounds,  it  nevertheless
    referred  therein  to  the  application  of  its  conclusions  to   its
    considerations under Article 8 [132].

30. Further, in paragraph 125 of its determination the tribunal  find  that
    little of any substance had changed since the appellant  exhausted  his
    appeal rights  in  2007.  The  primary  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  his  current
    medical condition, and the impact of deportation on it,  was  a  report
    dated from 2006; this being the same report that he relied upon  before
    the  Tribunal  in  2007.   The  instant  tribunal  correctly  took  the
    determination from May 2007 as its starting point.  That  determination
    gave detailed  consideration  to  the  appellant's  medical  condition.
    Whilst there were more recent medical  records  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that were not before the tribunal in 2007, these added little
    or nothing of substance to the appellant's case, but  rather  confirmed
    that he still has type 1 diabetes.  There was no  up  to  date  medical
    report before the First-tier Tribunal setting out a prognosis  for  the
    appellant or detailing  the  severity  of  his  medical  condition,  an
    observation made by the First-tier Tribunal in  paragraph  132  of  its
    determination.

31. Looking at the determination as a whole, I conclude that the First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in failing to take proper account the  appellant's
    medical condition when coming  to  its  conclusions  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

32. As to the appellant's length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  the
    tribunal clearly had this in  mind  when  coming  to  its  conclusions,
    having set out the appellant's immigration history at  some  length  in
    numerous paragraphs within the determination.  Indeed, at paragraph 125
    of the determination  the  tribunal  again  refer  to  the  appellant's
    immigration history, albeit by reference to the fact that  it  had  set
    such history out earlier in its determination.  This in  my  conclusion
    is sufficient to demonstrate that the  tribunal  bore  the  appellant's
    history, including his length of residence, well in mind when coming to
    its conclusions.

33. I further reject the submission made in paragraph 28 of the appellant's
    grounds that the tribunal erred in  failing  to  take  account  of  his
    familial relationships when coming to its conclusions. In  doing  so  I
    note that at paragraph 114 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal
    find that it would not be unreasonable to expect the appellant's family
    members to join or visit him in Vietnam.  This is a  finding  that  has
    not been challenged before the Upper Tribunal and was, in any event,  a
    finding open to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  available  evidence.
    Reference is also made in paragraph 125 of  the  determination  to  the
    appellant's customary Vietnamese marriage in 2008.

34. In my conclusion it is clear that  the  Tribunal  had  the  appellant's
    familial relationships in mind when coming to its conclusions.

35. The core of Mr Turner's submissions before the Upper  Tribunal  related
    to the claimed failure of the First-tier Tribunal to take into  account
    (i) the fact that the appellant has not been convicted  in  the  United
    Kingdom of any offence since 2005 and (ii) that he is at  low  risk  of
    being convicted in the United Kingdom in the future.

36. Again I reject Mr Turner's submissions. I find that  the  tribunal  had
    these facts in mind when coming to its  conclusions.  It  recorded  the
    appellant's counsel's submissions in this regard at paragraph 76 of its
    determination  and,  thereafter,  correctly  directed  itself  to   the
    relevant case law, including  that  relating  to  the  effect  of  time
    elapsed since the appellant's last offence [89]. At paragraph 94 of its
    determination the tribunal record that the only conviction it found  to
    be relevant to the proceedings was that of 19 December 2005. It further
    observed at paragraph 96 of its determination that  the  appellant  had
    expressed remorse and, at paragraph 97, it correctly directed itself to
    case law relating to the relevance of the  lack  of  likelihood  of  an
    individual reoffending. At  paragraph  103  of  its  determination  the
    Tribunal make reference to the jurisprudence considered and  summarised
    between  paragraphs  89  to  102  of  its  determination  as  being  of
    application to its consideration of the appellant's appeal.

37. Further, as I have already identified above, at paragraph  124  of  its
    determination the First-tier Tribunal clear state  that  it  took  into
    account all of the evidence and facts previously  referred  to  in  the
    determination when considering the issue of proportionality. This must,
    I find, be taken to include the fact that the appellant  has  not  been
    convicted of a criminal offence since 2005.

38. Although the appellant has not been convicted  of  a  criminal  offence
    since 2005, he did fail to report as required by  a  condition  of  his
    immigration bail on 20 November 2007 and did not re-engage with the  UK
    authorities until he was encountered by the police  on  28  March  2012
    [125].  This was a factor the tribunal were also entitled to  weigh  in
    the balance [see the decisions of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Farquhrson
    (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146  (IAC)  and  Bah  [2012]
    UKUT 196 (IAC)].

39. The weight attached to the length of time the appellant  has  spent  in
    the United Kingdom, his medical circumstances, the fact that he had not
    been convicted of an offence since 2005 and his familial relationships,
    was a matter for the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  do  not  accept  its
    conclusions in this regard were perverse.

40. As to Mr Turner's reliance on the decision of the EctHR in A.A., I find
    this to be unarguable and misplaced. As the Court of Appeal  identified
    in its decision in JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast) [2010] EWCA Civ 10,
    '[T]here is only limited value in drawing comparisons with the  outcome
    in other cases. All such cases are highly  fact  sensitive'  [22].  The
    decision in A.A. was not placed before the First-tier Tribunal, and its
    facts are, in any event, distinguishable  from  those  in  the  instant
    appeal. In A.A. the applicant  committed  the  offence,  which  led  to
    deportation action being taken against him, whilst he was a minor. This
    in stark contrast to the instant appellant, who was 32 years  old  when
    he committed his offence. Further, although the instant  appellant  has
    remained free from conviction since  his  release  from  detention,  he
    absconded from the immigration authorities between  2007  and  2012,  a
    factor which was not present in the decision in A.A. These obvious, but
    by no means the only, factual differences between  applicant  A.A.  and
    the instant appellant amply demonstrate the point made by  Richards  LJ
    in JO and JT , that each case turns on its own facts.

41. Looking at the First-tier Tribunal's determination as a whole, I do not
    accept that it can be said that the  tribunal's  conclusions  were  not
    open to it on the available evidence. The inescapable reality  is  that
    since the previous determination in 2007 the  appellant  has,  for  the
    most part, been an absconder  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal was such that  it  was  open  to  it  to
    conclude that little of any substance had changed since  the  appellant
    exhausted his appeal rights in 2007.

42. For all these reasons I do not accept that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error on a point of law such that it
    ought to be set aside.

43.  The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore   remains
    standing.

Decision

For the reasons given above I find that the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal does not contain an error on a point of law such that it  ought  to
be  set  aside.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  to  remain
standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 21 June 2013




