
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00915/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th October  2013                         |On 25th October 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MR LURI DOS SANTOS

                                                    Appellant
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford (instructed Blavo & Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the  Appellant,  a  Portuguese
   national, in relation to  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   (Judge North and Dr J O De Barros) promulgated on  23rd  April  2013,  in
   which it dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
   State's decision to deport him.

2. The matter first came before me on 7th August 2013 to decide whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law and if  so  whether  and  to
   what extent the determination should be set aside.

3. I decided that the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law  in  that
   it had relied upon the content of a National Offender  Management  System
   (NOMS) report in its determination when that report had not been seen  by
   the Appellant or his representative nor indeed were  they  aware  of  its
   existence. Furthermore, that report was itself internally inconsistent. I
   therefore set aside the determination and  adjourned  the  matter  for  a
   resumed hearing before me on a later date.

4. Another ground upon which permission to appeal had been sought,  which  I
   found not to be  made  out  was  that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  not
   adjourning the hearing to allow the Appellant's mother to give  evidence.
   She was detained under the Mental Health Act at the time of  the  hearing
   before the First-tier Tribunal. Although I have not found an error of law
   in the refusal to adjourn I did indicate on 7th August that  if  she  was
   able to give evidence before me at the resumed hearing I would hear  her.
   Save for that I directed that the resumed hearing should be on the  basis
   of submissions only.

5. Thus the matter came before me. The Appellant, having  been  moved  to  a
   detention centre too far away from Nottingham  Magistrates  Court  to  be
   produced, was not present at the hearing. However, as the matter was part
   heard before me I needed to  hear  it.  Furthermore,  given  that  I  had
   previously directed that the matter should proceed by way of  submissions
   and there was to be no oral evidence from the Appellant I concluded  that
   I was able to proceed in the Appellant's absence. He was  represented  by
   Counsel, Miss Radford who indeed had represented him  before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal and before me on 7th August 2013.

6. The reason for the matter not being finalised  on  7th  August  2013  was
   that Miss Radford indicated that those instructing  her  needed  to  make
   enquiries as to any more up-to-date OASys or NOMS reports.

7. At the commencement of the hearing before me and after I decided  that  I
   would proceed Miss Radford indicated that there were no more reports.  So
   far as the Appellant's mother was concerned she remained  detained  in  a
   psychiatric unit under the Mental Health Act and was unable to attend  to
   give evidence. She indicated  that  the  Appellant's  social  worker  was
   present but having previously indicated the matter would proceed  by  way
   of submissions only and the social worker's statement being contained  in
   the bundle of evidence I declined to hear from her.

8. The Secretary of State  proposes  to  deport  this  Appellant  under  the
   provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
   as he is an EU national. He came to the  UK  in  2004.  It  was  accepted
   before the First-tier Tribunal that he has acquired a permanent right  of
   residence in the UK. He had not however, prior to his incarceration, been
   in the UK for 10 years. Therefore, in accordance with Regulation 21(3) he
   can be deported only on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
   security.

9. Regulation 21(5) provides:-
        "Where a decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
        security it shall, in addition  to  complying  with  the  preceding
        paragraphs of this Regulation, be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
        following principles-


        a.  the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;


        b. the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
           of the person concerned;
        c. the personal conduct of the person concerned  must  represent  a
           genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one
           of the fundamental interests of society;
        d. matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision;
        e. a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
           justify the decision.


10. Regulation 21(6) provides:-

             Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person links with his country of origin.


11. The provisions of Regulation 21 reflect European case  law  in  relation
   to deportation and in particular  the  principles  of  Maslov  v  Austria
   1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546 and the Boultif  criteria.

12. The circumstances of this  Appellant  are  that  he  was  born  on  27th
   December 1991. He came to the UK in 2004 with his mother and his  sister.
   His sister returned to Portugal in 2008 where  she  now  lives  with  her
   father. His mother was detained under the provisions of the Mental Health
   Act in 2008 and as a result he was placed in the care of Islington Social
   Services. The Appellant was aged 13  when  he  came  to  the  UK  and  he
   completed his education here.

13. The Appellant has amassed a considerable number of criminal  convictions
   during his time in the UK and the  Police  National  Computer  record  is
   contained in the Respondent's bundle. He was first convicted on 15th  May
   2008 when aged 16. On that occasion  he  was  convicted  of  robbery  and
   attempted robbery and a Referral Order was made for five months.

14. On 1st July 2008 he was convicted of  two  offences  of  robbery  and  a
   breach of the earlier Referral Order and so was sentenced to an 18 months
   Supervision Order.

15. On 16th January 2009, while still subject to the Supervision  Order,  he
   was convicted of one offence of theft and three of robbery. The  offences
   occurred only two months after his last conviction and he  was  sentenced
   to an 18 month Detention and Training Order.

16. On 9th June 2010 he was convicted of 3 offences of  possessing  Class  A
   controlled drugs, heroin and crack cocaine, for which he  was  given  100
   hours Community Order.

17. On 13th October 2010 for failing to  comply  with  the  requirements  of
   that Community Order an additional seven hours unpaid work were added.

18. On 9th June 2011 he was convicted of  possession  of  a  Class  B  drug,
   possession of a Class A drug with intent  to  supply  and  possessing  an
   offensive weapon in a public place.  He was sentenced to a total of three
   years in a Young Offenders Institution. That is the conviction which  led
   to the decision to deport him.

19. When the Appellant was convicted in January 2009  and  sentenced  to  18
   months Detention and Training the Secretary of State wrote to him at  the
   Young Offenders'  Institution  informing  him  that  she  had  considered
   deporting him but had decided not to do so  on  that  occasion.   He  was
   warned that any recurrence may  lead  to  a  deportation  decision.  That
   clearly did not deter the Appellant from reoffending.  The  Secretary  of
   State's letter was dated 14th September 2009 and within  six  months  the
   Appellant had reoffended.

20. I have been provided with the Judge's sentencing remarks in relation  to
   the last offences and the Judge noted  that  the  Appellant  had  pleaded
   guilty and he was  given  credit  for  that.  The  judge  said  that  the
   Appellant was an able young man and  in  many  ways  had  a  lot  on  his
   shoulders. He also thought the Appellant was  capable.  The  Judge  noted
   that the Appellant must have friends  and  associates  whose  company  he
   enjoyed and he had studied hard and was looking for work.  The Judge said
   he was hopeful that he was capable of living a good and honest life.  The
   Judge also noted however that he had unfortunately  some  less  desirable
   friends and that in the "ducking and diving world" which he inhabited, he
   had come before the courts for  serious  specified  offences.  The  Judge
   noted the robberies were serious and that he had been given  a  custodial
   sentence in relation to that.  He said that the drugs trade is  a  filthy
   trade associated with people who commit serious specified  offences.  The
   Judge noted that the Appellant had been caught after having been given  a
   chance by the courts only recently and that although  he  had  eventually
   completed the community-based order he had already offended again. He was
   in possession of Class A drugs which he intended  to  supply.  The  Judge
   was satisfied that this was not solely to fund his own habit but also for
   profit. The Judge noted that it was the Appellant's youth  that  was  his
   best mitigation and he would otherwise have received a sentence twice  as
   long. The Judge also referred to the offence of carrying a bladed article
   which similarly required a custodial sentence.

21. The Judge was aided by a Pre Sentence Report  prepared  by  a  Probation
   officer. In the offence analysis part of the report the Probation officer
   said  that  the  Appellant's  explanation   for   the   offences   lacked
   credibility. She indicated that it was unfortunate given the intervention
   from Services, particularly in relation  to  increasing  his  chances  of
   legitimate employment, as well as his apparent  potential,  that  he  had
   again chosen to offend  for  money.  She  indicates  that  his  behaviour
   indicated he had some pro-criminal attitudes and  associations  including
   in relation to the use of illicit drugs that had supported his offending.
   She  did  acknowledge  however  that  he   appeared   to   have   assumed
   responsibility  for  supporting  his  family  which  may  have   been   a
   contributory factor to the offending. As to the latter claim I will refer
   to that later as it does not accord with the facts.

22. The Probation officer noted his previous convictions for robbery at  the
   age of 16 and that at the time he was reported to have been a member of a
   gang and that he had committed offences while subject  to  a  Supervision
   Order.

23. The Probation officer referred to the fact that  when  he  was  released
   from custody on 18th September 2009 he was supervised  by  the  Islington
   Youth Offending Team who reported that his compliance was good.  However,
   he nevertheless reoffended in March 2010  prior  to  the  expiry  of  his
   licence. He also breached his Community Order once prior to  successfully
   completing it.

24.  The  Appellant  had  apparently   been   living   in   private   rented
   accommodation for the previous six months, having been placed there on  a
   temporary basis by the  Islington  Leaving  Care  Service  while  he  was
   awaiting permanent accommodation. He had been asked to leave his previous
   supported accommodation as a result of his conviction for drug offences.

25. The Probation Officer refers in the report to his  Social  Worker,  Miss
   Stewart  who  has  provided  a  separate  witness  statement  for   these
   proceedings. She described the Appellant as very bright and that  he  had
   engaged well with their Service.  He had apparently never  disclosed  any
   drugs problems or presented under  the  influence  of  drugs  and  rarely
   requested help. It was the Social Worker's view that the  Appellant  felt
   he needed to be self-sufficient and had taken responsibility for  looking
   after his family, particularly his mother.

26. The Probation Officer noted that he lacked family  support.  His  father
   was deceased  and  his  sister  returned  to  Portugal.  His  mother  had
   significant  mental  health  problems  and  spent  periods  of  time   in
   psychiatric hospital. She had supported accommodation and  the  Appellant
   apparently saw her most weekends.

27. At this stage I  would  state  that  the  Social  Worker  and  Probation
   Officer seem to have mistaken or been misinformed as to the  facts.   The
   Appellant had not lived with his mother since 2008.  He rarely  saw  her.
   He had no other family in the UK "to support".  His father  is  not  dead
   but in Portugal living with his sister.   The  reference  to  his  taking
   responsibility for his family is therefore puzzling.

28.  Finally  the  Probation  Officer  concluded  that  in   view   of   his
   preparedness to behave in the way  he  had  for  financial  gain  he  was
   assessed as posing a medium risk of harm to the public, particularly when
   in the company of negative peer influences and  under  the  influence  of
   drugs. She concluded that he was likely to remain at fairly high risk  of
   similar offending given his history of offending including while  subject
   to supervision in the form of a Supervision Order  and  on  licence.  She
   indicates that those risks are only likely to be reduced if he  addresses
   his thinking and attitudes.

29. The information from the prison includes the  NOMS  report  referred  to
   earlier. That has now been seen by Miss Radford. It is  not  without  its
   difficulties as it variously assesses the risk that he  poses  as  medium
   and high and refers at one stage to the absence of an OASys report and in
   another part refers to an OASys report. That document therefore must have
   less evidential value than it would normally be afforded.  However  there
   is no evidence adduced by the Appellant assessing his  future  risk  save
   for his assertions and the view of his Social  Worker.  Taking  the  NOMS
   report at its lowest therefore it assesses the Appellant as a medium risk
   which accords with the assessment by the Probation Officer in the PSR.

30. Looking at the statement from the Social Worker, Miss Stewart; she is  a
   Young Person's Adviser and  Social  Worker  at  Islington  Care  Leavers'
   Service and has been the Appellant's adviser since 2010.  She  says  that
   she tries to see him in person every three months and says he is "a  good
   lad who means well." She said that when his mother became very unwell  he
   tried to keep hold of their home and  look  after  her  and  his  younger
   sister but unfortunately found an easy way of making  money  to  pay  the
   rent and fell in with a bad crowd in the Holloway/Islington area.

31. She states he had made good progress when he  was  remanded  into  local
   authority care and he completed a training place  successfully  in  2010-
   2011 but when he finished he seemed to  lose  direction  and  started  to
   offend again.

32. She says that the Appellant really regrets his actions and has asked  to
   be accommodated well away from the gang in  Islington  which  caused  him
   problems before. He has asked for education and  regular  visits  to  his
   mother. She indicates that he does have some  positive  friends  and  has
   achieved many certificates while in custody and  has  progressed  towards
   getting a job. She indicates that she is  aware  that  he  has  had  four
   adjudications whilst in prison but also is  aware  that  other  prisoners
   have come  in  from  Islington  and  brought  him  trouble.  Finally  she
   indicates that if released she does not believe the Appellant will behave
   as he has in the past. He will continue to be supported by her  and  will
   be  provided  with  accommodation,  training,   health   care   including
   counselling and will be moved away from the area where  he  would  be  at
   risk of reoffending. She confirms that he will  be  supported  by  Social
   Services until he is 25.

33. The Social Worker referred to his adjudications and I was provided  with
   the details of those. The first occurred on 25th May 2011 when he is said
   to have walked towards another prisoner in  an  aggressive  manner.  When
   asked to move away the request was ignored and he had to  be  removed  by
   force. The next incident is on 17th February 2012 when  officers  carried
   out a cell search. Prior to the search the Appellant was asked if he  had
   anything unauthorised and he said he had not. However, a mobile phone was
   found taped underneath a cupboard. The Appellant  apparently  denied  the
   phone had anything to do with him despite him being the sole occupant  of
   the cell.

34. The next incident  took  place  on  20th  March  2012  when  an  officer
   witnessed the Appellant repeatedly punch another  prisoner.   Finally  on
   27th October 2012 while officers were looking for a missing Playstation 2
   they went to the Appellant's cell where the missing item was found  in  a
   kitbag. The Appellant had denied having it.

35. Miss Stewart's faith in the Appellant is, I  have  no  doubt,  genuinely
   felt if misguided. The fact is that this Appellant is now aged  21  years
   and has been offending from the age  of  16.  He  has  been  given  every
   opportunity by the criminal  justice  system  which  he  failed  to  take
   advantage of. He has been given  every  opportunity  by  Social  Services
   which he failed to take advantage of. He was warned by the  Secretary  of
   State of the possible consequences of his continuing  to  offend  and  he
   ignored the warning. Miss Radford submitted that the most recent offences
   did not  amount  to  an  escalation  of  his  offending  behaviour  being
   possession of drugs as opposed to violence. I disagree  as  it  not  only
   involved possession  with  intent  to  supply  Class  A  drugs  but  also
   possession of a bladed article. That is a strong indication  of  violence
   or the propensity to use it.  Further the most recent offences  attracted
   a three year custodial sentence - far more than he had  received  before.
   His behaviour in prison demonstrates a willingness to commit offences  of
   dishonesty and also violence. I do not accept the excuse offered  by  the
   Social Worker that persons from  Islington  have  come  into  prison  and
   caused him trouble. The Appellant is, as has been stressed by the  Social
   Worker and Probation Officer, a bright and  intelligent  young  man.   He
   thus ought to be able to withstand the influence of others,  particularly
   with the support available to him both in the community and in prison.

36. The Appellant's stated wish to look after his mother is commendable  but
   I find has been overstated for the purpose of this appeal. The  Appellant
   has not lived with his mother for many years and it is apparent that  his
   mother is seriously unwell. I was told she is  currently  detained  under
   section 3  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  which  means  that  she,  unless
   discharged earlier will remain in hospital for a  period  of  six  months
   receiving treatment which is necessary for  her  own  health  and  safety
   and/or for the protection of others. On discharge she will  be  entitled,
   by Statute, to support from psychiatric and social services and will have
   the assistance of a Care Coordinator in that respect. She  has  not  been
   looked after by her son for many years and I do not accept that she  will
   be dependent upon him for support in future.

37. I am told that the Appellant's sister returned to Portugal in  2008.  It
   therefore cannot be said that his offending thereafter was in any way  to
   support his family. His  mother  would  be  in  receipt  of  support  and
   assistance because of her Mental Health difficulties and I am  unable  to
   accept therefore that his offending was motivated by anything other  than
   his own desire for financial gain in addition to feeding his drugs habit.
   It is also telling that the Social Worker  refers to  his  not  having  a
   drugs problem when clearly  he  has  quite  a  number  of  drugs  related
   offences recorded against him.

38. Miss Radford  referred  me  to  Essa  (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)
   [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) and the importance of rehabilitation and  that  a
   person who has embarked upon a course of  rehabilitation  should  not  be
   deported if the effect of that would be to interfere with the process  of
   rehabilitation. However given this  Appellant's  demonstrable  inability/
   unwillingness to respond to support in the past and  notwithstanding  the
   courses he has undertaken in prison, his adjudications, I  am  unable  to
   find that  he  is  in  the  process  of  rehabilitation.   Similarly  his
   integration into British society is largely to  the  criminal  underworld
   rather than mainstream society.

39. Miss Radford relies heavily on Essa, the  positive  view  given  by  the
   Social Worker and her submission that his offences are not escalating.  I
   have indicated why I do not accept her submissions.

40. Miss Radford also refers to the fact that the  Appellant  left  Portugal
   as a child and his teenage years were  spent  in  the  UK.  Although  his
   father is in Portugal,  not  deceased  as  suggested  elsewhere,  he  was
   abusive to the Appellant's mother and is thus unlikely to be a source  of
   support. That is pure speculation and does not sit  well  with  the  fact
   that the Appellant's sister returned to Portugal and lives with  him.  He
   is said to be no longer in contact with his  sister.  However,  there  no
   evidence that they are particularly estranged  and  no  reason  why  they
   should not make contact  in  future.  In  any  event,  the  Appellant  is
   Portuguese. He speaks the language. It is the country of his nationality,
   culture and heritage. It may well be that he has  extended  family  there
   but in any event as an adult he does not require  the  level  of  support
   that a child would.

41. I therefore find that the conduct of the Appellant in this case  over  a
   lengthy period of time has shown a complete disregard  for  the  law  and
   society. Offences relating to drugs and violence represent a very serious
   threat to the fabric of society. There is a very real risk that  he  will
   continue his offending. Other than his criminal associates the  Appellant
   has developed very little in the way of a private  life  in  the  UK.   I
   therefore find that there are serious grounds of public policy and public
   security  to  deport  this  Appellant  and  that  his  deportation  is  a
   proportionate response.

42. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed                 Dated 23rd October 2013



C J Martin
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
