
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00465/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2014                                |On 18 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr B. Quee, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant in  these  proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.
       However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Angola, born on 8  December  1957.  He
       arrived in the UK in 1992 and was granted indefinite leave to remain
       on 23 February 2003.

    3. On 21 February 2011 the appellant was convicted  of  an  offence  of
       possession with intent to supply  cannabis.  On  that  date  he  was
       sentenced for that offence and for driving whilst  disqualified  and
       driving with no insurance. He  received  a  sentence  of  28  months
       imprisonment, with a further 8 months imprisonment  for  failing  to
       comply with the requirements of a suspended sentence order, making a
       total sentence of three years imprisonment.  A decision was made  on
       6 July 2012 to make a deportation order pursuant  to  the  automatic
       deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.

    4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was allowed by a  panel
       of the First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Herlihy and Mrs A.F. Cross De  Chavannes,  after  a  hearing  on  29
       January 2014. The Panel dismissed the appeal with reference  to  the
       immigration rules and on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds,
       but allowed it under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   Submissions

    5. Ms Everett relied on the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       She  referred  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   determination   and
       submitted that the appellant's oral evidence was not found  credible
       in  terms  of  the  asylum  aspect  of   the   claim.   There   were
       inconsistencies in his account which were not considered in terms of
       the Article 8 assessment. Although a pre-sentence report should have
       been before  the  Tribunal,  there  is  reference  at  [41]  to  the
       probation officer's views.

    6. It was submitted that  the  determination  does  not  give  adequate
       reasons for concluding that the appellant has  no  ties  to  Angola,
       given that he left at the age of 36. In addition, there was not much
       evidence adduced in relation to his social ties in the UK.

    7. Mr Quee relied on the skeleton argument and various authorities.  It
       was submitted that the risk to the public had been considered by the
       Panel.

    8. There was an assessment of risk, and there was no  evidence  to  the
       contrary. The Tribunal was entitled to form the view that it did  as
       to risk. There were various documents in relation  to  the  progress
       the appellant had made, and in relation to negative drug tests.

    9. Even if the new rules do apply, it was submitted that there  was  no
       error of law in the decision.

   My assessment

   10. The immigration decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
       deportation order is dated  6  July  2012.  The  provisions  of  the
       immigration rules under paragraphs 398-399A came  into  force  on  9
       July 2012. At first glance therefore, those provisions do not  apply
       to this appeal in the light of what was said in MF (Article 8 -  new
       rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC) on retrospectivity in relation
       to those rules, a matter on which the Court of Appeal (MF  EWCA  Civ
       1192) did not express any disagreement.

   11. However, in a supplementary decision with reasons, undated but  with
       a fax date of 11 January 2013, consideration is given to those 'new'
       deportation paragraphs of the immigration rules. It was  not  argued
       before the First-tier Tribunal, and  was  not  raised  as  an  issue
       before me on behalf of the appellant, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       was wrong to decide the appeal with reference to  those  immigration
       rules. The matter only arose at the  hearing  before  me  because  I
       raised it with the parties.

   12. In any event, section 85(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  provides,  in  summary,  that  an
       appeal against a decision shall be treated as  including  an  appeal
       against any decision in respect of which the appellant has  a  right
       of appeal. Thus, the supplementary decision was part of  the  appeal
       that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

   13. In order to put my reasons into context, it is necessary to set  out
       a little more of the background to  the  appeal,  and  some  of  the
       findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

   14. The offences which prompted the deportation decision are set out  in
       [3] above.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  at  [41]  that  the
       appellant was convicted of possession of  cannabis  with  intent  to
       supply in 2008 which resulted in the  suspended  sentence  order  in
       2009. He had a month left of this order when he committed the  index
       offences. There was reference to a conviction for  'fraud'  in  1995
       and a caution for possession of cannabis in 1997.

   15. The Panel made reference to the appellant having a son with whom  he
       has indirect contact via correspondence once a month,  at  Christmas
       and on birthdays, confirmed by a court order on  29  November  2013.
       Other than seeing his son at court in 2013,  he  had  not  seen  him
       since he was detained  following  his  arrest  in  2011.  The  Panel
       concluded that the same contact that the appellant presently  enjoys
       with his son could be maintained from Angola.

   16. It was concluded that the appellant is in a genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his partner, J, albeit that they do not  currently
       live together because of the appellant's bail  conditions.  J  takes
       care of her nephew, R, who the Panel believed was a British citizen.



   17.  It  was  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  compelling  in   the
       circumstances of the appellant's relationship with J that outweighed
       the public interest in his removal.

   18. However, it was also found that the appellant had lost all  ties  to
       Angola and is unlikely to have  any  family  or  friends  there,  or
       contacts who could meaningfully provide him with any support.

   19. So far as the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are  concerned,
       I do not consider that there is any error of law in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's assessment of the risk of the appellant  reoffending.  No
       pre-sentence report was put before the First-tier  Tribunal  by  the
       respondent, but there was evidence as to the risk of reoffending  as
       set out a [41] of the determination. That was indirect evidence from
       a probation officer as set out in the Safeguarding Assessment report
       of Ruby Adams dated 3 September 2012, the probation  officer  having
       told her that the appellant posed a low risk of harm to the  public,
       known adults and children.

   20. More to the point perhaps, in relation to the risk  of  reoffending,
       notwithstanding the appellant's convictions the First-tier  Tribunal
       took into account that he had undertaken courses and that he had not
       reoffended since completion of  his  custodial  sentence.  Whilst  a
       different Panel might have come to a different view on the  risk  of
       reoffending, I am satisfied that the conclusion  of  this  Panel  in
       relation to the risk of reoffending was one that was open to it.

   21. The grounds suggest that the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled on
       the facts to find that the appellant had been in the UK since  1992.
       However, that was a finding that was made in the context of evidence
       that was before it as to the appellant's  marriage,  his  son,  (who
       admittedly was not born until 2001), and his relationship  with  his
       partner. More importantly, it is  apparent  from  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision and letter that the  appellant  claimed  asylum  in
       1992. His length of residence is also evident from the determination
       of Special Adjudicator Beg who dealt with his original asylum appeal
       in 1997.

   22. In terms of whether the First-tier Tribunal took  into  account  the
       public interest in deterrence, as raised  at  [5]  of  the  grounds,
       again I am not satisfied that there is any error in  the  Tribunal's
       decision in that respect. It is apparent from [61],  [63]  and  [68]
       that  this  was  an  issue  that  was  specifically  addressed  with
       reference to relevant authority.

   23. It is also contended by the Secretary of State that  the  Panel  did
       not give appropriate consideration to an assessment of whether there
       are "compelling  reasons"  that  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
       deportation where a person is not able to meet the  requirements  of
       the deportation rules.

   24. The First-tier Tribunal set out in detail the  authorities  on  this
       issue, having found that the appellant was not able to bring himself
       within paragraph 399 of the immigration rules. It found at [64] that
       there was nothing "compelling" in the circumstances surrounding  the
       appellant's relationship with his partner "to  outweigh  the  public
       interest in his removal".

   25. However, the Tribunal went on at [69] to repeat that  the  appellant
       is said to represent a low risk of harm, referring to courses he has
       undertaken to address his drug habit, and found  that  the  evidence
       established that he was free of drugs, and that he had not committed
       further offences since his release. It went on to state that:

             "We find that at 56 the Appellant is likely to struggle on his
             return to Angola where he has no family support to rely  upon.
             The Appellant has now lived in the United Kingdom for over  20
             years and we find that given his low risk of harm, substantial
             period of residence in the United Kingdom during which  period
             he legitimately developed his private life  and  the  lack  of
             ties to his home country that the  decision  appealed  against
             would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of the  law  or
             its obligations under the ECHR or the Immigration Rules as  it
             is a  disproportionate  interference  with  his  rights  to  a
             private life."

   26. Although the Panel did not in that paragraph explain that these were
       its reasons for concluding that the  appellant's  deportation  would
       have "unjustifiably harsh consequences" (see Kabia (MF: para  398  -
       "exceptional circumstances") 2013 UKUT 00569 (IAC) at [17]) or  that
       therein lay "compelling reasons" as per MF in the Court of Appeal, I
       am satisfied that this is to what those findings were directed.

   27. Ms Everett specifically stated that she did  not  contend  that  the
       Panel's reasoning in  this  respect  was  perverse,  only  that  the
       reasons were inadequate.

   28. It seems to me however, that the Panel having addressed its mind  to
       the relevant legal principles, was entitled on its  finding  of  the
       facts to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  have
       "unjustifiably harsh consequences". It  considered  the  appellant's
       age, the length of time that he had been in the UK and the fact that
       on return to Angola he would have no family or other support to rely
       on. It also took into account what was said to  be  a  low  risk  of
       reoffending. Those were matters that were  legitimately  within  the
       Panel's province to make findings upon and from  which  to  conclude
       that his deportation would amount to  a  breach  of  his  Article  8
       rights. Whilst again, it may be that another Panel might  well  have
       come to a different view, and that  this  Panel's  decision  may  be
       considered to have been a rather  generous  one,  the  Secretary  of
       State's disagreement with that assessment does not translate into  a
       conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law on that issue.

   29. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of  law  in
       the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  any  of  the  respects
       contended for.

   Decision

   30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law. The  decision  to  allow  the  appeal
       therefore stands.









Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order  pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008.
Consequently, this determination identifies the appellant's child and  other
children, and the adults associated with them, including the  appellant,  by
initials only in order to preserve the anonymity of those children.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 16/07/14
