
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00332/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2013                           |On 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     dB
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr E. Wilford, Counsel instructed by D. J. Webb & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This appeal comes before us following the  appellant's  unsuccessful
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  against  a  decision  to  make  a
       deportation order under the automatic deportation provisions of  the
       UK Borders Act 2007. The Panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Thanki and Mr D. R. Bremner) heard the appeal on
       25 March 2013.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 15  August  1986  who
       arrived in the UK on 13 July 1998 when he was 12 years of  age.  The
       decision to  deport  at  him  followed  his  convictions  for  three
       offences of supplying  class  A  drugs,  namely  crack  cocaine  and
       heroin. On 25 November 2011 he received a sentence of  three  years'
       imprisonment.

    3. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  in  summary,  concern
       alleged failure to have proper regard to the best interests  of  the
       appellant's daughter, D, who was born on 28 June  2010,  failure  to
       consider the favourable evidence as to the risk of reoffending,  and
       coming  to  conclusions  contrary  to  authority  in  assessing  the
       proportionality of removal.

Submissions

    4. Mr Wilford relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It
       was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal did not take into account
       the assessment that the appellant was at low  risk  of  reoffending.
       The deterrence factor in the proportionality assessment is  affected
       by the assessment of the risk of reoffending. It was speculative for
       the Panel  to  have  stated  at  [30]  that  the  appellant  remains
       vulnerable (to reoffending) if he returns to drug abuse.

    5. The appellant had been lawfully in the UK since he was aged 11.  The
       principle in Maslov is that a cumulative approach to proportionality
       is required and very serious reasons were required before  it  could
       be  considered  proportionate  to  remove  this  appellant  in   the
       circumstances of his case.

    6. Although  the  length  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
       daughter was a factor in  that  it  had  been  of  relatively  short
       duration, his future relationship with her needed to be  considered.



    7. Mr Avery submitted that the determination proceeds  on  the  premise
       that it is in the appellant's daughter's best interests for  him  to
       remain in the UK. There was no error of law in  the  best  interests
       assessment.

    8. The offence of  itself  was  serious  enough  to  make  his  removal
       proportionate. Deterrence is a key factor and is not  reliant  on  a
       risk assessment. In any event, there  was  nothing  wrong  with  the
       Panel's assessment of the risk of reoffending, it being  noted  that
       there was a medium risk to the public.

Error of law- our assessment

    9. Grounds 1 and 2 concern the way the First-tier Tribunal  dealt  with
       the best interests of the appellant's daughter, the suggestion being
       that the panel did not make an explicit finding in terms of  whether
       the appellant's removal is in her best interests or what the  impact
       of his removal would be on her.

   10. The grounds at [7] suggest that the Panel  inaccurately  paraphrased
       the principle in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]  UKSC  4,  whereby  the  Panel
       stated at [33] that the  interests  of  D  are  a  primary  concern.
       However, this fails to take into account what the Panel said earlier
       at [31], namely  that  "the  best  interest  of  [D]  is  a  primary
       consideration"; a correct  expression  of  the  principle.  In  that
       paragraph there is express reference to ZH.

   11. We do not accept the proposition at [9]  of  the  grounds  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal failed  to  determine  whether  the  appellant's
       deportation and subsequent exclusion would be in her best interests.
       It is true  that  the  Panel  did  not  state  explicitly  that  the
       appellant's deportation would not be in her best interests, but that
       they came to the view that it was not in her best interests for  him
       to be removed is clear enough from the determination. At [31] it  is
       accepted that the appellant does spend time with his daughter as had
       been suggested. At [32] the Panel said as follows:

     "While the interest of [D] is a primary concern in  the  assessment  of
           Article 8 rights, we do not consider that  her  interests  trump
           all other factors in  relation  to  the  removal  of  a  foreign
           criminal who has committed crimes in the UK.  It  is  inevitable
           that [there] will be a severance of the relationship between the
           appellant and his child, which is inevitable when her rights are
           considered  against  the  needs  of  the  society  in  deporting
           criminals who have committed serious crimes."

   12. We consider that it is implicit in the determination that the  Panel
       did consider that D's best interests were to  the  effect  that  the
       appellant should remain in the UK and to maintain the  contact  that
       he presently has with her. Hence  the  Panel's  express  recognition
       that her best interests are not the only consideration. No doubt  it
       would have been better had the Panel  stated  explicitly  where  D's
       best interests lay, but we cannot see that there is any error of law
       in terms of any failure to determine her best interests.

   13. Similarly, we do not accept as asserted at [10] of the grounds  that
       the consideration of D's best interests is  confined  (inadequately)
       to [33] of the determination. In that paragraph the Panel  concluded
       that in the event of the appellant being deported  not  all  contact
       between him and  his  daughter  would  be  lost,  referring  to  the
       possibility of D being able to  visit  the  appellant,  albeit  that
       there may be "some hardship" involved in such a visit. In  [31]  the
       Panel  referred  to  D's  mother's  circumstances,  that   she   has
       indefinite leave to remain and works  part-time  and  calls  on  the
       appellant to bring D  to  and  fro  from  nursery.  The  Panel  also
       referred to the duration of the bond that  has  arisen  between  the
       appellant and D, given that she  was  about  1  year  old  when  the
       appellant was sentenced, that she visited him  in  prison  and  that
       since his release at the beginning of 2013 contact has been resumed.
       In the last sentence the Panel stated that it "[does]  not  minimise
       the fact that the appellant does spend time with the child." At [32]
       it is concluded that D may maintain  contact  with  the  appellant's
       family in the UK.

   14. It  is  clear  therefore,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       undertake a minimalistic assessment of where D's best interests lay;
       it considered various factors.  The  grounds  do  not  identify  any
       evidential matter that has been left out  of  consideration  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal. The criticism of the Panel's use  of  the  word
       "inevitable" in terms of whether loss of contact between them  would
       be inevitable, rather than whether it would be  "likely",  does  not
       reveal that the Panel applied "an inappropriate and unlawful  test".
       In conducting the  necessary  balancing  exercise,  the  Panel  gave
       appropriate consideration to the loss of direct contact between  the
       appellant and  his  daughter  and  reasonably  concluded  that  some
       contact could be maintained. It is plain that the Panel was aware of
       the fact that that contact would not be of the same 'quality' as  it
       would be were the appellant to remain in the UK.

   15. In relation to ground 3, it is said at [17] of the grounds that  the
       question for the Panel was whether, at  the  date  of  hearing,  the
       appellant presented a "specified risk", reference being made to [28]
       of ZH. However, that  was  not  the  question  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had to determine (putting aside the misquoted  phrase  from
       [28] of ZH). It was not necessary for the Panel to decide  that  the
       appellant presented a "specific risk to others". The proportionality
       assessment in this appeal involved an assessment of the  seriousness
       of the offences, as much as,  if  not  more  so  than  the  risk  of
       reoffending. We consider in more  detail  below  the  issue  of  the
       seriousness of the offence.

   16. As we understood the submissions made on behalf of the appellant, it
       was contended that the Panel did not  take  into  account  that  the
       appellant  was  assessed  as  being  at  low  risk  of  reoffending,
       according to  the  National  Offender  Management  Service  ("NOMS")
       report. We reject that contention. The Panel referred at [18] to the
       submissions in relation to what was described as the "prison" report
       stating that he was at low risk of reoffending, which could heighten
       if he returned to drug abuse. That is in fact a conflation  of  what
       is said in the NOMS report about his being a "medium" risk  of  harm
       which  would  be  affected  by  a  return  to  illicit   drug   use.
       Nevertheless, the Panel was referred to what was said to  be  a  low
       risk.

   17. More to the point, at [29] it is noted that  there  is  no  evidence
       that the appellant is a serial offender or that there is a record of
       previous serious offences. It is also noted that this was his  first
       custodial sentence and that he does not (the "not"  was  omitted  in
       error) have a long record  of  drug  related  crimes.  At  [30]  the
       evidence that the appellant poses a  "medium  risk  to  the  general
       public" if he returns to drug use is referred to.  It  seems  to  us
       clear that [29] was dealing with the risk of  reoffending  and  [30]
       with  the  separate  issue  of  risk  to  the  public.  Again,   the
       determination would have benefited from express reference to what is
       said in the NOMS report in terms of the risk  of  reoffending  being
       low, but  the  Panel's  assessment  of  the  risk  of  harm  and  of
       reoffending was free from any error of law.

   18. In passing we should state that there is no merit in  the  criticism
       made in submissions to  us,  of  the  Panel's  conclusion  that  the
       appellant remains vulnerable in terms of risk if he returns to  drug
       use. That vulnerability is expressly stated in the  NOMS  report  at
       paragraph 2b.

   19. In any event, the Panel was bound to consider the seriousness of the
       offences for which the appellant was convicted and it did so.  In  N
       (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 consideration was given to  the  public
       policy need to deter and  to  express  society's  revulsion  at  the
       seriousness of the criminality. At [65] it was said that the risk of
       reoffending is a factor in the balance but not  the  most  important
       public interest factor in the  case  of  very  serious  crimes.  The
       principle of deterrence expressed in N (Kenya) is  again  reiterated
       in RU (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 651 at paragraph 43 in  which  it
       was said that:

         "The point about "deterrence" is not whether the deportation  of  a
         particular "foreign criminal" may  or  may  not  have  a  deterrent
         effect on other prospective offenders.  It  concerns  a  much  more
         fundamental concept which is explained by Judge LJ at [83]  of  his
         judgment in N (Kenya). The UK operates  an  immigration  system  by
         which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter  and
         remain in the UK. The operation of that system must take account of
         broad issues of social cohesion in the UK. Moreover, the public has
         to have confidence in its operation. Those requirements are for the
         "public good" or are in the "public interest". For both of those to
         requirements to be fulfilled, the  operation  of  the  system  must
         contain an element of deterrence to non-British  citizens  who  are
         either already in the UK (even if refugees) or who are thinking  of
         coming to the UK, "so as to ensure  that  they  clearly  understand
         that, whatever  the  circumstances,  one  of  the  consequences  of
         serious crime may well be deportation".  That  element  of  "public
         interest" or "public good" is a part  of  the  legislative  policy,
         declared by Parliament in section  32(4)  of  the  UKBA,  that  the
         deportation of "foreign  criminals"  is  conducive  to  the  public
         good."

   20. In Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]
       UKUT 00048(IAC), at [48] the Upper Tribunal said this:

             "It  is  long  established  that  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
             prevention of disorder or crime does not depend on a person who
             has been convicted of  a  particularly  serious  offence  being
             likely to further threaten the public interest by re-offending.
             As the decisions of the Court of Appeal in  N  (Kenya)  and  OH
             (Serbia) demonstrate, the maintenance of respect for  the  law,
             public indignation at past conduct, the deterrence of others by
             the adoption of the supplementary  measure  of  deportation  in
             addition to the criminal sentence may  all  contribute  to  the
             legitimate  aim   and   justify   deportation   providing   the
             interference is proportionate in all the circumstances  of  the
             case. The more serious the offending, the stronger is  the case
             for deportation, but  Parliament  has  not  stated  that  every
             offence serious enough  to  merit  a  custodial  penalty  or  a
             penalty of twelve months or more imprisonment, for that  reason
             makes interference with human rights proportionate."

   21. Although the Panel did not refer to those decisions, it plainly  had
       in mind the public interest involved in the deportation  of  foreign
       criminals involved in serious crime, expressly referring  to  it  at
       [33]. When one considers [33] and [35] of the  determination  it  is
       apparent that the  Panel's  decision  on  proportionality  was  more
       concerned with the seriousness of the  offences  than  the  risk  of
       reoffending. It is expressly stated to be so at  [37]  where  it  is
       said that "The overriding factor for us has been the commission of a
       very serious offence by the appellant." We also agree with Mr  Avery
       that on the basis of the seriousness  of  the  offences  alone,  the
       Panel was entitled to come to the conclusion  that  it  did  on  the
       proportionality of the decision to deport the appellant.

   22. Our view in this respect is sufficient to dispose of ground 4  which
       contends that the Panel failed to take into account  the  fact  that
       the appellant had gained qualifications whilst in  custody  being  a
       matter said to be relevant to the risk of reoffending,  rather  than
       as a matter relevant to his ability to obtain employment in Jamaica.
       Besides which, it was a matter for the Panel to assess the relevance
       and weight to be attached to any particular aspect of the evidence.

   23. We do not accept that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  a
       cumulative assessment of whether the appellant's  removal  would  be
       disproportionate. At [35] the decision in Maslov  v  Austria  [2008]
       ECHR 546 is referred to. At [75] the Court in Maslov said  that  "In
       short, the Court considers  that  for  a  settled  migrant  who  has
       lawfully spent all or the major part of his  or  her  childhood  and
       youth in the host country  very  serious  reasons  are  required  to
       justify expulsion.  This  is  all  the  more  so  where  the  person
       concerned committed the offences underlying the expulsion measure as
       a juvenile." In this case the appellant was not a juvenile when  the
       offences were committed but nevertheless, the "very serious reasons"
       consideration remains valid.

   24. The Panel considered all relevant factors, including the  length  of
       time that the appellant has been here, his age when he  arrived  and
       his family circumstances  here  and  in  Jamaica,  as  well  as  the
       important fact of his relationship with his young daughter here. The
       grounds do not identify any matter that has been left out of account
       and we do not consider that any irrelevant  matter  was  taken  into
       account.

   25. In summary, we are not satisfied that there is any error of  law  in
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in any respect.

Decision

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.

Anonymity

Given that these proceedings involve a child, we make an order (pursuant  to
rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008).
Consequently, this determination identifies the appellant's  child  and  the
appellant by initials only in  order  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  that
child.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 6/09/13
