
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00760/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment delivered orally on |
|On 21 January 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |21 January 2014              |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 4 February 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         THE HON MR JUSTICE FOSKETT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK



                                   Between

                                 BESNIK ZIU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B. Lams, counsel instructed by J.D. Spicerzeb
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant  is  a  26-year  old  Albanian  national  subject  to  an
    automatic deportation order made following his conviction on 24th March
    2009 at Chelmsford Crown Court for possessing a false identity document
    which he had used to gain entry into the United Kingdom on  15th  March
    2009. He was sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment  thus  rendering
    him liable to automatic deportation.  We need not trouble, for  present
    purposes, with the detailed history since then  save  to  say  that  he
    claimed asylum, a claim that was rejected and  initially  certified  as
    clearly  unfounded.  However,  the  certification  was  in  due  course
    withdrawn and a decision that the automatic deportation  provisions  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applied to the  appellant,  generating  an  in-
    country right of appeal, was served upon him on 6 October 2011.

2.   He exercised his right of appeal and the appeal was   heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian and a non-legal  member  on  16  September
    2013.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appeal  for  the  reasons
    given in a determination promulgated on 4th October 2013.

3.   On 22nd November 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted  permission
    to appeal saying that the grounds of appeal drafted by Mr Barnaby  Lams
    dated 14 October 2013 were arguable.  The matter comes before us in the
    first instance to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal was guilty  of
    a material error of law.  We should say straightway that we  are  quite
    satisfied that there was a material error  of  law  that  requires  the
    remission of the original appeal to be determined by another  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Since it will be for that  Tribunal  to  make
    the material findings of fact we will restrict the  expression  of  our
    views to the minimum necessary to explain why we are taking the  course
    we propose.

4.    The  essential  submission  of  Mr  Lams  can  be  summarised  in  the
    proposition that the First-tier Tribunal made a number  of  assumptions
    and drew a number of inferences about the appellant and his  case  that
    were not evidence-based.  A  primary  factual  issue  was  and  remains
    whether the appellant  is  Roma.   His  case  is  that  he  is  and  it
    represents the basis for his argument that he should not be returned to
    Albania.

5.   Any Appellate Tribunal will be slow to interfere with the  findings  of
    fact made by the primary fact finding tribunal that has had the benefit
    eHe
of seeing and hearing from the relevant witnesses, including  the  appellant
    whose appeal is being heard.  However,  in  this  case  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  expressed  views  about  the  credibility  of  some  of   the
    assertions made by the appellant (for example, about his education  and
    work record in Albania) which appear to have  been  predicated  upon  a
    clear understanding of the way of  life  of  an  Albanian  Roma  which,
    having reviewed the material available to the First-tier  Tribunal,  we
    are not persuaded that the Tribunal had.  The determination  did  refer
    to some of the objective evidence, but made no reference at all to  the
    two expert reports relied upon  by  the  appellant  from  experts  with
    appropriate knowledge (and whose reports, we would add, were   not  the
    subject of challenge on behalf of the Secretary of State) which  placed
    a different emphasis on certain of  those  matters

6.   Those concerns would have been sufficient to conclude that  a  material
    error of law occurred because the reasoning  leading  to  the  apparent
    evidential conclusions could not be sustained.  However, there  is  one
    very fundamental error that, in our view, led the  First-tier  Tribunal
    into error and, despite Mr Wilding's valiant attempt to disentangle  it
    from other findings, we consider to be inextricably  bound  with  those
    other findings.  The beginning of the error appears in the Secretary of
    State's decision letter at  paragraph  16.   After  suggesting  in  the
    decision letter that aspects of the  appellant's  account,  aspects  we
    should add that were identified later by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    undermining his case, were not consistent with being a Roma gypsy,  the
    following was then said:

         "It is further considered that your client's appearance, with brown
         hair, brown eyes and fair skin,  does  not  give  any  evidence  to
         support his claim to be a Roma Gypsy.  It is considered  that  your
         client's appearance is typically Caucasian."

     Apart from that bald assertion there is nothing in the decision  letter
    to make good that view.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal picked up on this point  in  its  reasoning  at
    its own paragraph 16.  Again, that paragraph in its early stages  deals
    with other matters relating to the appellant's education and  his  work
    record, but the relevant passage for present purposes is as follows:

         "The respondent  considered  that  the  appellant's  appearance  is
         typically Caucasian.   There  was  no  expert  report  before  this
         tribunal  on  the  appellant's  appearance  or   about   his   Roma
         appearance.  We  would  have   thought  that  it  would  have  been
         crucial to have such a report by the appellant  as  the  allegation
         that he is a Roma gypsy is at the core of the appellant's claim."

8.   The First-tier Tribunal appeared to be saying that because  this  issue
    has been  raised by the Secretary of State  it  was  incumbent  on  the
    appellant to produce evidence to displace the  suggestion  having  been
    made  in  the  decision  letter.   Mr  Lams  says,  in  our  view  with
    justification, that since the respondent asserted this, the  burden  of
    proof on such an issue  ought  to  be  upon  the  Secretary  of  State,
    whereas, so far as we understand Mr Wilding's submission, it is to  the
    effect that it is  a  matter  upon  which  the  appellant  should  have
    produced evidence.  As already indicated,  we  are  inclined  to  agree
    that, having raised an issue such as this, the burden  of  establishing
    the matter lies upon the Secretary of State, or at least the  Secretary
    of State has an  evidential  burden  to  produce  some  material  which
    substantiates the general assertion.

9.   It would of course have been open to the appellant  to  produce  expert
    evidence to help boost his case, but we consider that the Secretary  of
    State, if she wishes to make this kind of assertion, must  do  so  with
    more than a bald assertion based upon nothing more than what  at  first
    sight at any rate appears merely to be the opinion  of  the  caseworker
    preparing the decision letter.

10.  We accept that this kind  of  issue  is  one  that  can  be  raised  in
    appropriate circumstances, but it is a very sensitive  matter  and  the
    slippery slope of false stereotyping must be avoided.

11.  In our view, we need say nothing further  for  present  purposes.   The
    reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal is, we regret to say, sufficiently
    inadequate for us to conclude that there has been a material  error  of
    law. We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  direct  that
    the appeal should be allowed and the  substantive  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State will be remitted  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing de  novo,  with  no
    credibility findings preserved.


                               DIRECTIONS

1.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before  a
    First-tier judge or Panel other than First-tier judge Andonian and non-
    legal member Mrs R.M. Bray JP

2.   An Albanian interpreter is required.

3.   The hearing is to take place on such date as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directs.

Signed                                  Date




The Honourable Mr Justice Foskett
