
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00169/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2012                           |On 21 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                            MR JUSTICE UNDERHILL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                WALTER WOODS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Rebecca Trendell


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Home  Secretary  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Mr Walter  Woods  against  a
    deportation order.  We will for convenience refer to Mr  Woods  as  the
    appellant although he is of course the respondent before us.

2.   The facts can be relatively shortly  stated.   The  appellant  is  from
    Zimbabwe. He is of mixed race. He came to this country in 1998  at  the
    age of 39 as a visitor. He was subsequently granted  further  leave  to
    remain and in 2003 indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  UK
    ancestry. His mother, who is  now  elderly,  his  four  sisters  and  a
    brother are all resident in the UK.   In  2001  he  was  diagnosed  HIV
    positive. He has in fact serious  symptoms  of  HIV  infection.  He  is
    receiving active treatment but he is in poor health. He  has  not  been
    able to work since 2005 and is on incapacity benefit.  The evidence  is
    that he is very close to all the members of his family to whom we  have
    referred. He sees them very regularly and is dependent on them not only
    for emotional support but for care during the periods of illness  which
    he has which are not infrequent as a result of his  HIV  infection.  He
    also  receives  some  financial  support  from  them.  At  some   point
    regrettably he developed a drug habit. In order to pay off  a  debt  to
    his dealer he agreed to supply drugs on the dealer's behalf. On 30 July
    2010 he was sentenced at  the  Isleworth  Crown  Court  having  pleaded
    guilty on three counts of supplying Class A  drugs,  heroin  and  crack
    cocaine.  He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. As the length of
    the sentence shows, he was regarded as a dealer only at the very lowest
    level and in relation to  very  small  amounts.  The  judge  explicitly
    accepted in his sentencing remarks that  the  appellant  had  got  into
    dealing recently and as a result of pressure supplied by his supplier.

3.   It is common ground that the  appellant's  conviction  means  the  Home
    Secretary was prima facie obliged to make  a  deportation  order  as  a
    result of the terms of section 32 of  the  United  Kingdom  Border  Act
    2007.  The only  issue  for  her  and  for  the  Tribunal  was  whether
    deportation would be in breach of the appellant's Convention rights  or
    of this country's obligations under the Refugee Convention, so that the
    case fell under one limb  or  the  other  within  exception  (1)  under
    section 33 of the Act. The  Tribunal  found  that  both  limbs  of  the
    exception applied.  We will consider its reasoning as to each in turn.

4.   As to the asylum claim, the  Tribunal  rejected  the  appellant's  case
    that he was at risk of persecution  if  he  returned  because  of  some
    political activity in the distant past. However it held, on  the  basis
    of the country guidance case of EM & Others [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC),  that
    he would be at risk if he returned to the part of Zimbabwe  from  which
    he originally came, which is  Guerru  in  the  Midlands  Province.   At
    paragraph 189 of its judgment in that case  the  Tribunal  found  that,
    leaving aside the case of past ZANU activists, returnees to these areas
    would face a real risk of persecution because of a continuing  risk  of
    being required to demonstrate loyalty. In the light of the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285 it recognised
    that it is no answer to a loyalty challenge  that  if  he  returned  he
    should be expected to mislead the enquirer as to  where  the  loyalties
    lay. The Tribunal held that the  appellant  fell  into  that  category,
    adding that the risk was greater because of his mixed race.
5.   That, however, led to the question whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate. The Tribunal  quoted  from  paragraph
    267 subparagraph (viii) of the same  decision  an  observation  to  the
    effect that relocation to Harare was "realistic" but  that  a  tribunal
    would  still  have  to  consider  whether  such  relocation  would   be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh in any particular case.   As  to  that  it
    found at paragraph 30 of its determination.


           "Here there are a number of factors that points towards it being
           unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate. The "socio  economic
           circumstances" in which the  appellant  will  find  himself  are
           likely to be unsatisfactory in the extreme.  As we have  already
           pointed out, his life is likely to be at best at  a  subsistence
           level as he will not be able to work. He will  not  be  able  to
           afford the drugs that he needs to keep alive in  the  long  term
           and he will not have any support network which is  necessary  to
           him over and above the drugs  if  he  is  to  keep  alive.    We
           conclude that it would be unduly harsh to expect  the  appellant
           to relocate. It follows that he is entitled to refugee status."

     The reference to findings already made  refers  to  earlier  paragraphs
    the details of which we need not set out here.

6.   As for the human rights claim, which was based only  on  Article  8  of
    the Convention, the Tribunal found that the appellant enjoyed a  family
    or private life in  HaHHH
this country even though he did not live with  his  mother  or  any  of  his
    siblings and that that family life would be seriously  interfered  with
    if he were to be deported "because of his health ...  bearing  in  mind
    the life that he will lead in Zimbabwe". It expressly acknowledged  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals, even those who,  as  it
    found  was  the  case  with  the  appellant,  posed  no  real  risk  of
    reoffending. It referred to the well known decision in M  (Kenya).  But
    it nevertheless held that striking the necessary  balance,  deportation
    would be disproportionate. It directed itself in  accordance  with  the
    general statements of  principle  in  Razgar  and  Huang  and  it  also
    reminded itself that a person can have  significant  Article  8  rights
    requiring protection even if he is an adult and lives alone,  referring
    to the recent decision of this Tribunal in Ghising  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAT).  It  acknowledged  that  a  balance  was  required  between  the
    appellant's interests, as it put it, and the important public  interest
    enshrined in Section 32 of the 2007 Act.

7.   As regards the former, the essential points made by the  Tribunal  were
    that the appellant had lived in this  country  lawfully,  and  latterly
    with the benefit of indefinite leave to  remain,  for  fourteen  years;
    that all his family were here; that he had a  very  close  relationship
    with them - it noted that no fewer than fourteen members of the  family
    appeared to support him at the Tribunal; and,  particularly,  that  the
    importance of that relationship to him  was  magnified  by  his  health
    needs. By contrast, if he were deported to Zimbabwe he  had  no  family
    and would have no support of any kind. We have already referred to  its
    findings in that regard in connection with the issue of relocation.

8.   As regards the public interest, as we have already said,  the  Tribunal
    correctly identified that this included not only the  need  for  public
    protection but also the wider public interest recognised in N  (Kenya).
    So far as the former is concerned, the Tribunal  noted  the  mitigating
    circumstances relating to the offences for which he was  convicted  and
    that - for all that the supply of  Class  A  drugs  is  always  a  very
    serious matter - his offending nevertheless fell at the very lowest end
    of that scale.  It found  in  terms  that  there  was  a  low  risk  of
    reoffending, noting that the appellant was  no  longer  himself  taking
    illegal drugs.  It found that in the circumstances of the present  case
    the appellant's Article 8 rights outweighed the  public interest.

9.   The Secretary of State appeals against both aspects of  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning.  So far as the asylum claim is concerned, there are  various
    criticisms  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Tribunal's  reasoning.    Those
    criticisms seem to us to have some substance, although for the  reasons
    we will shortly explain we have not heard  submissions  on  them.   But
    there is also the further problem that the Tribunal, as  we  have  seen
    relied, on the country guidance in EM (Zimbabwe)  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal has recently held should not now be relied on.

10.  If the outcome of this appeal were to turn  on  the  finding  that  the
    appellant was entitled to refugee status  we  would  have  to  consider
    quite carefully the present state of guidance in relation to  returnees
    to Zimbabwe, and the issues are not ones, it seemed  to  us,  that  the
    parties were in  a  position  to  proceed  on.   However  it  would  be
    sufficient to dispose of this appeal if the appellant's case  based  on
    Article 8 and the Tribunal's reasoning in support of that  were  sound.
    We canvassed with Miss Trendell for the appellant  whether  her  client
    would in practice be prejudiced if the appeal  were  dismissed  on  the
    basis of that ground without our attempting to decide the  question  of
    refugee status for ourselves, and she  acknowledged that there would be
    no practical prejudice to the appellant if we proceeded on that  basis.
    We accordingly will say nothing more about that limb of the  Tribunal's
    reasoning. We will focus only on the Article 8 ground.

11.  So far as that is concerned, the Secretary of State in her  grounds  of
    appeal advances two points.  The first  is  that  the  Tribunal  failed
    adequately to distinguish between the appellant's  private  and  family
    life.  The second is that it "failed adequately to reason" the relevant
    parts of its decision, which are essentially paragraphs 37 and 39 where
    it carried out the relevant proportionality assessment. The  particular
    defect to which the Secretary of State refers  is  that  "there  is  no
    mention of whether the appellant pleaded guilty or  otherwise  assisted
    the Crown nor whether the appellant has accepted responsibility for his
    crimes or displayed understanding of the problems that such  a  finding
    poses to the fabric of society".

12.  So far as the  former  point  is  concerned,  the  distinction  between
    family and private life may in some circumstances be important, but  it
    does not seem to us that it is in the present case.  The nature of  the
    appellant's relationship with his mother and siblings is clearly  of  a
    kind which would engage Article 8, particularly having  regard  to  the
    strong element of dependency as a result of his illness.  Although  the
    Tribunal did not in terms refer to  the  decision  in  Kugathas  v  the
    Secretary of State, it could well have done, as Mr Tarlow for the  Home
    Office realistically accepted.

13.  As for the latter ground, we can only say that we  do  not  agree  that
    the reasoning is inadequate. On  the  contrary,  the  Tribunal  clearly
    acknowledged and put into the balance the  strong  public  interest  in
    preventing and deterring serious criminal offences.  But it judged, for
    reasons which it gave, that in the  circumstances  of  this  case  that
    interest was outweighed by  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights.  That
    assessment cannot said to be perverse and Mr Tarlow did not attempt  to
    suggest otherwise.     The particular points which it is said that  the
    Tribunal failed expressly to mention did not seem  out  us  to  require
    specific mention in striking the balance in question. It is clear  from
    the evidence before the Tribunal and recited by it that  the  appellant
    did in fact accept responsibility for his crimes and  expressed remorse
    for them.  Whether or not he "displayed understanding of  the  problems
    that such offending posed to the fabric of society" does not seem to us
    to be a point on which an express finding was needed. What matters  was
    that the Tribunal found that he posed no real risk of reoffending.

14.  For those reasons, and on that basis, the finding of the Tribunal  that
    exception (1) under section 33 of the 2007 Act applied seems to  us  to
    be unimpeachable and the appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Underhill

