



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00645/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 26th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         MR ANDREW CHRISTOPHER BURKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Vaughan, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Andrew Christopher Burke is a citizen  of  Jamaica  born  3rd  February
    1974. Although he is the Respondent in  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal for ease of reference we shall refer to him as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent. This is the  Respondent's
    appeal against the decision of a First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cockrill
    and Mr D R Bremmer JP) allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to make a deportation order under  Section  32(5)
    UK Borders Act 2007 (Automatic deportation).

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal,  after  hearing
    submissions on a preliminary point, as  "not  in  accordance  with  the
    law".

Background

 3. The Appellant claims he arrived in the UK in June 1989 and asserts that
    he was granted indefinite leave to remain in  December  1989.  This  is
    unconfirmed as the Respondent has no evidence of this.

 4. In May 1993 the Appellant was convicted at South West Magistrates Court
    on several charges  of  obtaining  property  by  deception,  theft  and
    handling and was given a conditional discharge  of  twelve  months.  In
    June  1998  he  was  convicted  of  a  serious  drugs  related  offence
    concerning  the  importation  of  Class  A  controlled  drugs  and  was
    sentenced to ten years imprisonment.

 5. Following that conviction the Respondent issued  a  decision  making  a
    deportation order against him under Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act
    1971 (Conducive deport). That decision was dated 29th October 2001. The
    Appellant successfully appealed that decision in November 2002.

 6. Matters did not rest there however because in March 2005 the Appellant,
    whilst still on licence for the conviction gained  in  June  1998,  was
    convicted of conspiracy to import Class A controlled drugs  and  breach
    of licence. He received a sentence of fourteen years  imprisonment  for
    the drugs offence and a separate sentence of 772 days imprisonment  for
    the breach of licence; to be served consecutively to the fourteen  year
    term.

 7. The Respondent duly notified the Appellant on 26th January 2013 of  her
    decision to deport him under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2002. The
    Appellant appealed that decision and raised Article 8 ECHR grounds.

First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 8. The hearing came before the First-tier Tribunal on 26th  June  2013  at
    Kingston Crown Court. At that hearing those representing the  Appellant
    submitted a preliminary point that the Respondent's decision  to  apply
    automatic deportation proceedings under the 2007  UK  Borders  Act  was
    unlawful and accordingly the deportation order was  not  in  accordance
    with the  law.  The  Tribunal  Found  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law  by  virtue  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    (Commencement No 3 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2008 which states
    that Section 32 does not apply to a person "who has been served with  a
    notice of decision to make a deportation order under Section 5  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 before 1st August 2008".  The  Tribunal  concluded
    therefore that the first deportation order which was made  against  the
    Appellant in 2002 meant that the Secretary of State by  virtue  of  the
    application of the transitional provision, was excluded from  making  a
    further deportation order in 2008  and  thus  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal as being not in accordance with the law.

 9. In coming to their decision the First-tier Tribunal stated,

         "The issue is whether or not the deportation order that was made in
         this case is in accordance with the law. We have had our  attention
         drawn to the transitional provision which have been  quoted  above.
         It seems to us that the way in which the order is drafted at  3(ii)
         is such that there are not any qualifications at all...As a  simple
         matter of fact this Appellant was served with such a  notice  of  a
         decision to make  a  deportation  order  under  Section  5  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971 before that relevant day which was 1st  August
         2008. Therefore it would appear that the Appellant is indeed caught
         by that provision...We think it is important though to  repeat  the
         point that there are no  restrictions,  limitations,  qualification
         whether as to time or indeed any  other  aspect.  Our  duty  is  to
         interpret those provisions in a natural and  sensible  way  and  we
         make the point again that paragraph 1 to the 2008  order  does  not
         apply therefore  to  someone  such  as  this  Appellant  given  his
         particular circumstances".

The Permission Stage

10. The thrust of the grounds seeking permission  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal misinterpreted the transitional provisions  which  simply  say
    that automatic deportation does not apply to  a  person  who  has  been
    served with a notice of decision to make a deportation order as of  1st
    August 2008. The word 'has' clearly indicates  a  notice  with  ongoing
    effect. To say otherwise would offend  against  Parliament's  intention
    and the natural reading of the language of the order.

11. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nicholson  on  5th
    August 2013 in these terms;

         "The grounds contend that the Tribunal erred in its  interpretation
         of  the  transitional  provisions,  that  the  word  "has"  in  the
         provisions clearly  indicates  a  deportation  order  with  ongoing
         effect,  that  the  first  deportation  order  which  followed  the
         conviction in 1998 had no  ongoing  effect  after  the  Appellant's
         appeal against that order was allowed and that in  consequence  the
         second decision was in accordance with the law.

         The  transitional  provisions  were   intended   to   exclude   the
         application of Section 32 to deportation proceedings in process. It
         is  clearly  arguable  that  the  provisions  did  not  affect  the
         proceedings,  which  are  the  subject  of  this  appeal,  as   the
         deportation order in those proceedings had not been served  by  the
         relevant date. Permission is accordingly granted".

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal

12.  Before  us  both  representatives  made  submissions.   Mr   Wilding's
    submission  broadly  followed  the  lines  of   the   grounds   seeking
    permission. He emphasised that the word 'has'  which  is  contained  in
    paragraph 3(ii) must refer to a deportation order with  ongoing  effect
    otherwise it would lead to the  illogical  position  that  any  foreign
    criminal who had successfully argued  their  case  and  won  an  appeal
    before a Tribunal in the past, but then commits another offence is safe
    from  automatic  deportation  being  invoked.  That  cannot  have  been
    Parliament's intention. In order to add  to  his  argument  Mr  Wilding
    handed in to us a copy of the Guidance  given  to  senior  caseworkers.
    That re-emphasised the Secretary of State's position that unless  there
    is an ongoing appeal, then deportation proceedings under Section 32  is
    the appropriate Section under which to bring deportation action.

13. Mr Vaughan on behalf of the Appellant submitted that this is  a  matter
    of statutory construction and invited us to look at what the Act itself
    states. We think it was in this sense that  Mr  Vaughan  said  that  he
    accepted that the phrase "has been served" may  encompass  the  present
    but, it does not rule out the  past.  He  said  that  the  language  is
    ambiguous  and  in  essence  the  Appellant  should  benefit  from  any
    ambiguity set down. Lastly  Mr  Vaughan  reminded  us  that  caseworker
    guidance is not law.

14. Mr Wilding's responses re-emphasised what he had said previously but in
    addition he said that should we find there to be an error  of  law,  he
    would invite us to remit the matter to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh re-hearing, since no facts were found.

Discussion

15. As the First-tier Tribunal determination revolves around the  statutory
    construction of the relevant part of the transitional provisions to the
    UK Borders Act 2007. We set out the relevant transitional provisions as
    follows.

         "3   (i) Subject to paragraph (2) Section 32 applies, to the extent
         to which it is commenced  in  Article  2(a)  to  persons  convicted
         before the passing of that Act who are in custody at  the  time  of
         commencement or whose  sentences  are  suspended  at  the  time  of
         commencement.

         (ii) Paragraph (1) does not apply to a person who has  been  served
         with a notice of a decision  to  make  a  Deportation  Order  under
         Section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971 before August 2008".

    We reject Mr Vaughan's assertions that the wording of the  commencement
    order is ambiguous.  He  accepted  that  the  phrase  has  been  served
    encompasses the present tense.

16. We approach this by way of an example. A person sentenced to  10  years
    imprisonment in the past 'has been sentenced'. The sentence imposed  by
    the judge is an event in the past. The expression 'has been  sentenced'
    does not indicate when he was  sentenced.  Strictly  speaking  it  says
    nothing as to whether he is currently  in  prison  or  has  since  been
    released. If that same person serves his sentence and has been released
    and is, after release, sentenced to a further 14 years imprisonment, he
    has also been sentenced to 14 years imprisonment, in circumstances when
    he had been sentenced to 10 years before that. In this example, a clear
    distinction has been drawn. There has been an intervening  event  which
    renders the 10 year sentence an historic event which does  not  survive
    into the present. So, too, if the  individual  dies.  His  death  means
    that, prior to his death, he had been sentenced; the deceased cannot be
    described as a person who has been sentenced to 10 years  imprisonment.
    A writer who describes an individual as a person who has been sentenced
    to  10  years  imprisonment  (by  avoiding  the  expression  'had  been
    sentenced') avoids implying that this is not a purely historical event.
    He infers that it has, or may have, an ongoing effect or, at  the  very
    least, that there has not been some intervening event which  decisively
    places the event  into  history  (as  his  release  after  serving  the
    sentence or his death would).

17. It is  our  function  to  construe  what  Parliament  intended  by  the
    expression 'a person who has been served'. Whilst the words are capable
    of bearing the meaning that paragraph 1 does not apply to a person  who
    has, at any time in the past been  served  with  a  notice  to  make  a
    Deportation Order, it  does  not  mean  this  in  the  context  of  the
    circumstances of the  present  case.   Had  that  been  the  intention,
    Parliament could have avoided the ambiguity  by  saying  'has,  or  has
    been, served' or 'has ever been served'. It is  necessary  to  construe
    the expression  in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid  absurd  or  irrational
    consequences. It would be absurd  that  in  the  circumstances  of  the
    present case, the Appellant could benefit from a perpetual  prohibition
    on his deportation when his serial, grave offending renders the  public
    interest in his removal more imperative, not  less.  Furthermore,  this
    construction does not require the Tribunal  to  re-write  the  statute,
    merely to construe it in such a way as to make practical  sense.  Since
    the sense of what Parliament intended is crystal clear,  we  reject  Mr
    Vaughan's assertions that the wording  of  the  commencement  order  is
    ambiguous. He accepted that the phrase has been  served  may  encompass
    the present.

18. We accept Mr Wilding's analysis that the word has clearly  indicates  a
    notice  with  ongoing  effect  and  that  if  the  intention   of   the
    commencement order was to exclude all historic claims,  it  would  have
    said so.

19. Looking at the natural order of the language we are satisfied that  the
    word has plainly refers to a deportation with ongoing effect, and  that
    therefore the  first  deportation  made  against  the  Appellant  which
    followed the  conviction  in  1998  had  no  ongoing  effect  once  the
    Appellant's appeal against that order was allowed.

20. It follows therefore that we  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel materially erred in reaching the decision they did, because their
    analysis of the commencement order is flawed. The determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

21. We did consider whether in the event of  finding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred we could remake the decision ourselves. However we noted
    Mr Wildling's submission and took into account Mr Vaughan's  indication
    that the Appellant would wish to call evidence to show that he would be
    at risk on return to Jamaica.

DECISION

22. The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error of law. It is
    hereby set aside. In accordance with the Senior President of  Tribunals
    Practice Direction 7.2(a)  we  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh  rehearing.  The  rehearing  should  be  before  a
    Tribunal other than Judge Cockrill or Mr Bremmer JP.


No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

