
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00361/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 24th January 2019                      |On the 30th January 2019      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                LORD BECKETT
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     YK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A. Evans, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, promulgated on the 9th November 2018 dismissing
    his appeal against the decision to refuse his protection and human
    rights claim in the context of his deportation. Permission to appeal
    was granted on the 28th November 2018.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 3. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 4. The respondent has subsequently responded to the grounds of appeal,
    conceding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome, and that it
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade in its
    entirety. Having considered the respondent's concession, we agree with
    it.

 5. In the circumstances, we are satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and we set it
    aside. As the errors involved a failure properly to adjourn the case,
    we are satisfied that none of the findings of fact could be sustained;
    the decision will need to be remade in its entirety.

 6. We have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

 7. Thus it is appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh decision on all matters. We have made an anonymity direction at
    this stage of the proceedings but the issue can be re-visited by the
    parties when before the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
     Date 24/1/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

