
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00445/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 July 2019                       |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Criggie, of Latta & Co Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Agnew sent out on 11 October 2018.  The respondent, whom we shall  call
    "the claimant", is a national of France.   She has been resident in the
    United Kingdom for twenty years or more.  She appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on 15 June 2018 to
    make  a  deportation  order  against  her.   That  decision  was  taken
    following the appellant's  conviction  of  criminal  offences  and  her
    sentence to a term of imprisonment.

 2. Given the claimant's nationality, the decision to  deport  her  has  to
    comply with Regulation 27 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations, 2016.  It was found by the judge, and is not contested  by
    the respondent, that the claimant had acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom, and therefore  has  the  middle  (para
    (3)) level of protection given by that  regulation.   Accordingly,  the
    Secretary of State needed to  show  that  the  decision  was  taken  on
    "serious grounds of public policy and public security".   In  addition,
    and as the judge recognised, the decision would  need  to  comply  with
    paras (5), (6) and (8) of that Regulation, which are as follows:

         "(5) The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles -

               a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

               b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

               c) the personal  conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

               d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
                  relate to considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                  justify the decision;

               e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

               f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
                  the absence of a previous  criminal  conviction,  provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ('P')  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc)."

 3. The claimant's offences were serious.  In order to curry favour with  a
    man she had met on the internet, she performed sexual assaults on her 6-
    year old son, whilst photographing  the  acts.   The  photographs  were
    discovered by her young daughter.   On  her  plea  of  guilty  she  was
    sentenced to 45 months in prison, and other orders, to which  we  shall
    refer in due course, were made.

 4. In submissions before the judge, the Presenting Officer emphasised  the
    seriousness of the offences and indicated that there  was  no  evidence
    that the risk of her reoffending had been lowered.  She had  no  family
    contacts in the United Kingdom and there was nothing to  show  that  it
    would be disproportionate to remove her.  Mr Criggie, appearing  before
    the judge on the claimant's behalf drew attention to reports  including
    pre-sentence reports and an email dated 23 May  2018  from  a  Criminal
    Justice Social Worker at Midlothian Council.

 5. In her judgment Judge Agnew cites a  number  of  sentences  from  those
    reports.  One Criminal Justice Social Worker's assessment was that  the
    claimant posed a risk to children.  Another referred to the constraints
    which will be imposed upon her when she is  released  from  prison.   A
    third said that the  claimant  was  motivated  to  avoid  offending  in
    future.  The judge's conclusions were as follows:

         "30. I accept the evidence that there will be an array  of  support
             and monitoring of the appellant upon  release  from  detention
             and she will continue with counselling.   This  will  be  most
             important if she is to re-establish herself in the  community,
             find employment and rebuild her life.  I find that  these  are
             the priorities of the appellant given her long term  aim  that
             her children will wish to regain personal  contact  with  her,
             other than the present minimal contact, and in the  hope  that
             the Social Services will allow them to do  so.   The  agencies
             are also designed to monitor the appellant in order to protect
             the public so that whilst I find  this  is  not  necessary  as
             there  is  an  extremely  low  risk  of  re-offending,  it  is
             important for her and the public that this  monitoring  is  in
             place for a period.

          31. I find that the  appellant's  conduct  does  not  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society as  of  today.   There
             are not serious grounds of public  policy  or  security  which
             justify the  removal  of  the  appellant  despite  her  having
             permanent residence in the UK."

 6. The judge accordingly allowed the appeal.  The grounds of the Secretary
    of State's appeal are that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for  her  finding  that  there  was  a  low  risk  of  reoffending;  in
    particular, the judge had failed to take into  account  the  sentencing
    remarks of Lady Carmichael and had not appreciated the full  impact  of
    the social work reports.  Mr Govan expanded  orally  on  those  grounds
    before us.  The claimant, by  Mr  Criggie,  asserts  that  the  judge's
    sentencing remarks were already old at the time of  the  hearing;  that
    one of the social workers said that the claimant was more likely to  be
    a victim than a perpetrator of abuse in the future, and that  it  would
    be unlikely that in the future she would abuse her  own  children.   He
    submitted that the grounds of appeal amount merely to  disagreement  to
    the judge's lawful conclusions on the evidence.

 7. In passing sentence Lady Carmichael said this:

         "You were  prepared  to  abuse  a  child  in  order  to  promote  a
         relationship which improved your own self-esteem.  While that is no
         doubt reflective of vulnerability on your part, it seems to  me  to
         indicate an ongoing risk of offending unless the underlying problem
         is  tackled.   The  criminal  justice  social  worker  contemplates
         protection for the public being provided by a  robust  post-release
         plan and certain licence conditions.  There is no  suggestion  that
         an extended period of supervision would be required."

 8. The combined effect of  the  offence  and  the  sentence  is  that  the
    claimant is subject to the  notification  requirements  of  the  Sexual
    Offences Act 2003 for an indefinite period.  The proposed conditions of
    any licence following her release from detention are as follows:

         "That the claimant undertake offence focused work  as  directed  by
         the supervising officer;

         that the claimant does not approach, speak or  communicate  in  any
         way, either directly or indirectly with her children without  prior
         approval of the supervising officer;

         that the claimant does not approach, speak or  communicate  in  any
         way, either directly or indirectly with a child under  the  age  of
         17, without prior approval of the supervising officer;

         that the  claimant  does  not  undertake  employment,  training  or
         voluntary work without prior approval of the supervising officer;

         that  the  claimant  resides  only  in  housing  approved  by   the
         supervising officer;

         that  the  claimant  does  not  enter  any  areas  where   children
         habitually  resort  without  prior  approval  of  the   supervising
         officer;

         that the claimant shall not have any means to access  any  internet
         enabled device without prior approval of the  supervising  officer.
         (This will include not installing deletion software to any internet
         enabled devices);

         that the claimant will allow police and social workers  to  inspect
         any electronic equipment or mobile phones used by her."

 9. Mr Criggie acknowledged that there was no  basis  for  challenging  the
    appropriateness or need for any of those  restrictions.   The  Criminal
    Justice Social Work Report prepared before  her  sentence,  immediately
    before the sentence quoted by Mr Criggie and by  the  judge,  reads  as
    follows:

         "This analysis does not excuse the claimant  from  culpability  for
         her behaviour or the responsibility that she had to put  the  needs
         of her children before her own.  However, it does mean that she  is
         unlikely to  repeat  this  behaviour  without  the  motivation  and
         guidance of a more focussed sexual offender.  Still, at present she
         presents as someone with very low self-esteem and who is  desperate
         for  attention/affection.   She   therefore   appears   to   remain
         vulnerable to manipulation by others and until  this  changes,  the
         risk of future abuse cannot be completely ruled out."

10. In his conclusion, the writer says this:

         "[The Claimant] reports being enamoured by the  attention  received
         from the co-accused.  She reports to having no sexual  interest  in
         pre-pubescent children and to  only  performing  sex  acts  on  the
         victim to keep her co-accused interested in her.  At interview  she
         offered limited insight into why she chose to pursue a relationship
         with co-accused which was dependent on sexually  harmful  behaviour
         offering only that she was medicated at the time and this  impacted
         on her thought process.  It would appear that  [the  claimant]  has
         the capacity to be influenced  by  an  indulgent  partner,  at  the
         expense of her and, in this event, her son."

11. On 23 May 2018 a social worker  working  for  Midlothian  Children  and
    Family Centre,  after  reviewing  the  claimant's  case,  reported  the
    assessment that she posed a risk to children and that Social Work  [the
    relevant division of the Local Authority] would have grave concerns  if
    direct contact were to be re-introduced; that communication also refers
    to the conditions following her release and  indicates  that  they  are
    unaware of any impact that the claimant's removal  would  have  on  her
    family circumstances.  The material adduced before the judge includes a
    short report from the Head of Psychology and Programmes at  the  prison
    where  the  claimant  is  detained.   That  report  describes  how  the
    claimant's self-esteem was raised by meeting the man on line  and  that
    at the time the report was issued the  claimant  was  still  displaying
    thinking which "indicates a belief in self-sacrifice".  The  author  of
    the report says that she has "maintained motivation to avoid  offending
    the future" and has begun working on her negative view of herself.

12. Two factors shine out from this  material,  neither  of  which  can  be
    discounted by the evident hopes of some of those who have  worked  with
    the claimant.  The first is that at the time of the offending she was a
    person who was prepared to commit very serious  offences  in  order  to
    please a person with whom she was chatting on line.  The reason for her
    being so prepared may be lack  of  self-esteem.   The  reason  for  the
    offences was that that was what her co-locutor wanted.  It may well  be
    right that she has no inherent desire to commit  sexual  offences;  the
    evidence is clearly that she would have done whatever she was  required
    to do.  Nothing in the evidence we have seen shows  any  real  progress
    away from such an attitude of dependence on  the  view  of  others  and
    anxiety to please them.  The "ongoing  risk  of  offending  unless  the
    underlying problem is tackled" to which  Lady  Carmichael  referred  is
    still current.

13. The second factor is that when the claimant is released there will be a
    considerable number  of  measures  to  prevent  her  offending  against
    children again or offending via the internet again.  As we  have  said,
    Mr Criggie did not suggest that those  measures  were  in  appropriate.
    The purpose of those measures is to protect the public,  and  they  are
    necessary because the claimant has shown that she poses a danger to the
    public.

14. In that context we are, with respect, wholly unable to see how it could
    be said that "there is an extremely low risk of reoffending",  or  that
    "the claimant's conduct does  not  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society".  It is perfectly clear that the  claimant's  character  is
    such that she poses a risk; and the measures which will be imposed upon
    her after her release are a demonstration  of  the  existence  of  that
    risk.

15. In our judgment Judge Agnew  erred  by  not  taking  into  account  the
    evidence as a whole, and not appreciating the  facts  relating  to  the
    claimant's present condition  as  distinct  from  the  hopes  of  those
    working with her.  Her determination cannot stand.  We set it aside and
    substitute a determination dismissing the claimant's appeal against the
    decision to deport her.




                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 7 August 2019



DIRECTION

Pursuant to rule  14(1)(b)  we  direct  that  no  person  shall  publish  or
disclose any matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the
appellant or the members of her family.


