
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00551/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 October 2016                            |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)



                                   Between

                               MEHRAD MOHMADI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co.
For the Respondent:    Miss Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr Mehrad Mohmadi is a Dutch national who was convicted  of  perverting
    the course of justice and, on 31 July 2015, sentenced to twelve months'
    imprisonment.  The Secretary of State made a deportation order  against
    Mr Mohmadi He appealed the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  S  J  Clarke.  By  a
    decision promulgated on 28 June 2016 she upheld  Mr  Mohmadi's  appeal.
    The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision. In
    this decision letter I will refer to Mr Mohmadi as the appellant as  he
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.


The Law


3.   An EEA national may be removed from the UK if the  Secretary  of  State
    has decided that the person's removal is justified on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health:   regulation  19(3)(b)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the 2006
    Regulations).

4.   Where a decision is taken on the grounds of  public  policy  or  public
    security it must be taken in accordance with the principles set out  in
    Regulation 21(5).  These include that (a) the decision must comply with
    the principle of proportionality, (b) that it must be based exclusively
    on the personal conduct of the  person  concerned,  and  (c)  that  the
    personal conduct of the person  concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

5.   Such a decision cannot be taken in respect of an EEA  national  with  a
    permanent right of residence except on serious grounds of public policy
    or public security (Regulation 21(3).  The Immigration Judge found that
    the appellant has not established a permanent right of residence.

6.   The decision-maker must take into account considerations such  as  age,
    state of health, family and  economic  situation  of  the  person,  the
    person's length of  residence  in  the  UK,  the  person's  social  and
    cultural integration into the UK and the extent of the  person's  links
    with the country of origin.

The Circumstances of the Offence

7.   On 7 September 2014 a death occurred outside a hotel  in  London  as  a
    result of an assault. One of the appellant's co-accused  was  convicted
    of manslaughter. The appellant's conviction related to his removal of a
    closed circuit CCTV hard drive and monitor which apparently showed  the
    events leading to the man's death. They were hidden in  the  hotel  and
    only found three days later. The sentencing judge  described  it  as  a
    calculated act and a serious offence.

8.   In her determination the Immigration Judge noted that the Secretary  of
    State concluded that the appellant poses a  serious  risk  because  the
    offender manager remained unsure why he did it and that the crime was a
    serious one.

9.   On 23 May  2016  the  appellant's  probation  officer  wrote  that  the
    appellant's risk of reoffending and his risk of harm to the public  are
    both considered to be low. Against that observation  the  Secretary  of
    State cites the OASys Report of 4 October 2015 to the effect  that  the
    appellant accepted no responsibility for his offence.

10.  The OASys Report also noted that the  appellant  was  highly  motivated
    and very  capable.  The  trial  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    expressed remorse and regret for the consequences of his  actions.  The
    appellant also expressed remorse at the hearing before the  Immigration
    Judge. She found that  the  appellant  had  not  been  able  to  access
    rehabilitation courses because of the length of his detention.  Drawing
    the issues together she found that the appellant first entered  the  UK
    in 2002 and had previously been of good character until committing  the
    offence in question. It was serious because it involved perverting  the
    course of justice but she went on to  accept  that  the  appellant  had
    consistently posed a low risk of reoffending and risk of  harm  to  the
    public.

11.  In conclusion the Immigration  Judge  found  that  whilst  the  offence
    itself can shape the future risk to the public and of  reoffending,  in
    this case she accepted that the crime was esoteric, that it was out  of
    character for the appellant to offend and that he has learned from  his
    conviction and custodial sentence. She found that  the  appellant  does
    not pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. She went  on  to  consider
    the   issue   of   proportionality   and   considered   that   it   was
    disproportionate to deport him.

12.  Before me Miss Brocklesby-Weller, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,
    relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had treated the OASys Report as  determinative  of  the  question
    before her. She submitted that some three months after  the  sentencing
    the appellant was noted as accepting no responsibility for the  offence
    and that he was simply moving the monitor from  the  floor  to  a  safe
    place.  He was not told by anyone to take  it  and  hide  it  from  the
    police. He put it all down to being in the wrong  place  at  the  wrong
    time. The appellant also stated that he went to the police  himself  to
    let them know what had happened that day.

13.  So  according  to  Miss  Brocklesby-Weller,  while  he  may  have  been
    remorseful, he did not accept responsibility and the judge  had  placed
    weight on this.  She referred me to the sentencing remarks and the fact
    that the appellant was a willing participant. The appellant had  failed
    to demonstrate how he had changed  his  offending  behaviour  following
    this incident.

14.  She further submitted that the Immigration Judge's  had  erred  in  her
    assessment of proportionality.

15.  Mr Lam for the appellant relied on his Rule 24 response. He  emphasised
    that this  was  a  careful,  thorough  and  balanced  decision  by  the
    Immigration Judge and said that the Secretary of State's challenge  was
    more on the basis of the decision rather than on an error of  law.   He
    submitted that one could not look at remorse in isolation.  It  has  to
    have a purpose and that  went  to  the  issue  to  be  addressed  under
    Regulation 21(5)(c).

16.  The sentence reflected the seriousness. He accepted that the  crime  of
    perverting the course of justice was indeed a serious one but it had to
    be looked at in context.  He took me through the various OASys  Reports
    that had been before the Immigration Judge, all of which demonstrated a
    low category of risk.  The  appellant  was  recorded  as  being  highly
    motivated and very capable.

My Decision on the Error of Law

17.  The issue for me is not whether or not I would reach the same  decision
    as the Immigration Judge; it is whether there has been an error of law.
    The question is whether the Immigration Judge was entitled to  conclude
    from the evidence that the personal conduct of the appellant represents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.

18.  Miss Brocklesby-Weller founded on the observation in the  OASys  Report
    which I have quoted above. She submits that the Immigration  Judge  has
    made the conclusion of the report the determining factor.

19.  In my opinion, having regard to the whole of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision letter, that is not correct.   She  had  the  benefit  of  the
    evidence from the appellant in person and was  able  to  form  her  own
    judgment on whether he was genuinely remorseful.  She had evidence that
    this man, now in his late forties, was previously  of  good  character.
    She had evidence in the OASys Report that he was highly  motivated  and
    very capable.  She accepted that there were no  rehabilitation  courses
    available to the appellant, a  matter  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. She noted that he has substantial family in the  United  Kingdom
    and it was clear that he is integrated here.

20.  These are all recognised protective factors in assessing  risk.  In  my
    opinion it is incorrect to say that the Immigration  Judge  has  relied
    solely on the OASys Report.  She was entitled to place  weight  on  the
    OASys Report but it was only one factor in her  overall  assessment  of
    the decision that she had to make. Accordingly she was entitled to find
    as a fact that the appellant did not represent a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to one of  the  fundamental  principles  of
    society.

21.   There  is  also  a  ground  of  appeal  attacking  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  In my opinion that does not arise since it  logically
    follows on an assessment that the person  concerned  does  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. Since the opposite is  true  in  this
    case the judge does not require to consider proportionality.

22.  I should just  make  one  observation  in  relation  to  the  grant  of
    permission in which the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal looked at  the
    cases of SSHD v Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145 and NC (Essa principles
    recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC). I asked  Mr  Lam  to  address
    these issues. He pointed out these were about rehabilitation  following
    on an assessment of risk that the person posed a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. He suggested that they were not of relevance  here.  In  my
    opinion for the reason given above that submission is correct.

Notice of Decision

23.  I shall dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:


