
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00772/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 November 2013                        |On 25 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR J K
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr P Deller a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr A Ali a legal representative from Lawrence
Lupin

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of the Ivory Coast who was born on 18 December  1974.  I  will
      refer to him as the claimant. The Secretary of State  has  been  given
      permission to appeal the determination of a panel (First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge N M Paul and non-legal member Mrs V S Street JP) who allowed his
      appeal on human  rights  grounds  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 28 March 2013  to  refuse  his  asylum  and  human  rights
      application and also to refuse to revoke the deportation  made  on  12
      February 2008 under the provisions of s5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971.


   2. The claimant first attempted to enter the  UK  on  6  May  2004  as  a
      visitor. He was refused leave to enter  but  whilst  awaiting  removal
      made an application for asylum on 18 May 2004. This was refused and he
      appealed. His appeal was dismissed on 27 September 2004.


   3. On 15 November 2007  at  Blackfriars  Crown  Court  the  claimant  was
      convicted of possession of a false instrument, namely a passport,  and
      sentenced to 10 months  imprisonment.  He  was  also  recommended  for
      deportation. On 13 February 2008 he completed his  custodial  sentence
      but was detained in immigration custody. He was released on  temporary
      admission on 3 March 2008. On 19 November 2007 he was  served  with  a
      notice of liability to deportation followed by the  decision  to  make
      the deportation order on 12 February 2008.


   4. The claimant made representations on 1 February 2010  and  13  January
      2011. The Secretary of State treated these as a fresh asylum and human
      rights application and an application to revoke the deportation  order
      under the provisions of paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules. On  28
      March 2013 his further application in respect of his claim for  asylum
      and his request that the deportation order be revoked were refused.


   5. The claimant appealed and the panel heard  his  appeal  on  27  August
      2013. Both parties were  represented,  the  claimant  by  Mr  Ali  who
      appears before me. The panel  concluded  that  the  deportation  order
      should be revoked on human rights grounds and allowed the appeal.


   6. The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal  which  was
      granted by a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. There  is  no  Rule  24
      reply from the claimant.


   7. The claimant's wife first  came  to  the  UK  in  2001.  She  now  has
      indefinite leave to  remain.  The  claimant  and  his  wife  have  two
      children born in October 1995 and April 1998 who are  living  in  this
      country and now have indefinite leave to remain. Their youngest  child
      born in March 2006 is a British citizen.


   8. There are three grounds of appeal which submit that the panel erred in
      law. The first is that the panel failed to follow  correct  procedures
      and made findings "without hearing any evidence  or  submissions  from
      the Secretary of State's Presenting Officer". It is not clear  whether
      this is an allegation that the panel refused to hear submissions  from
      the Presenting Officer. The judge who  granted  permission  to  appeal
      said; "It is arguable that if the Tribunal refused to hear submissions
      from the Home Office Presenting Officer that was a serious error.  The
      Secretary of State will need to adduce evidence to  that  effect."  Mr
      Deller accepted that the Secretary of State had produced  no  evidence
      about this. I  find  that  evidence  could  have  been  produced.  For
      example, there could have been a request for the panel to produce  the
      record of proceedings. It is probable that the hearing would have been
      recorded and this could have been called for. Mr Deller said that  the
      Presenting Officer had prepared a minute. This has not been  produced.
      There is no witness statement from the Presenting Officer. There is no
      sufficiently clear indication on the face of  the  determination  that
      the Presenting Officer was denied the opportunity to make submissions.
      I find that this ground is not made out.


   9. Mr Deller relied on the grounds of appeal. In relation to  the  second
      ground of appeal he submitted that the panel had  not  considered  the
      requirement in paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) of the Immigration  Rules  that
      "there is no other family member who is able to care for the child  in
      the UK" except as an afterthought in the last  sentence  of  paragraph
      23.


  10. In relation to the third ground and paragraph 399(b)(ii);  "there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that  wife  continuing
      outside the UK", Mr Deller said that it was necessary to differentiate
      between  insurmountable  obstacles  to   leaving   the   country   and
      insurmountable  obstacles  to  being  removed  from  the  country.  In
      relation to the claimant's wife and  the  children  the  Secretary  of
      State's case was that they could go, not that they could  be  made  to
      go. He made the general point that if they were allowed to  stay  here
      that did not mean that they could not choose to leave. In essence  the
      Secretary of State's position was that the family could be expected to
      go to the Ivory Coast in order to preserve family life. In reply to my
      question, Mr Deller said that he was not aware of any jurisprudence on
      the point.


  11. Mr Deller argued that whilst, at paragraph 22  the  panel  found  that
      there were compassionate circumstances to outweigh the public interest
      to deport the claimant, these had not been identified.  Delay  on  the
      part of the Secretary of State had not been for as long  a  period  as
      the panel stated in paragraph 21. Any delay needed to be  set  in  its
      proper context.


  12. Mr Deller submitted that  this  was  a  case  where  paragraph  398(c)
      applied because; "the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
      conducive to the public good because, in the view of the Secretary  of
      State,  their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
      persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,  the
      Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
      paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be  in
      exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
      be outweighed by other factors." Under paragraph 399 it  was  accepted
      that the claimant and his wife had a child who was a British  citizen.
      However, this did not assist the  claimant  because  his  wife  was  a
      family member who was able to care for that child in the UK.


  13. Mr Deller accepted that if I found there to be an error of  law  there
      was no challenge to the findings of fact made  by  the  panel.  I  was
      asked to remake the decision if I considered that there was sufficient
      information before me to do so.


  14. Mr Ali submitted that the first ground of appeal had not been made out
      because the Secretary of State had failed to provide any  evidence  to
      support the allegation. He said it was clear that  the  panel  applied
      Strasbourg jurisprudence outside the current Immigration Rules dealing
      with Article 8. In paragraph 23 the  panel  reached  a  conclusion  by
      reference to paragraph 398 and it was open to them to  find  that  the
      decision, which could only come within paragraph 398(c),  did  not  do
      so. At this point I allowed Mr Deller  to  intervene.  He  said  that,
      having heard Mr Ali's submissions, he accepted that there was  nothing
      in the reasons for refusal letter which indicated that  the  Secretary
      of State considered the case came within paragraph 398(c). Clearly  it
      did not come within subparagraph 398(a) or (b). In  the  circumstances
      he conceded that the  appeal  fell  to  be  decided  under  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence not the Immigration Rules which came into effect in July
      2012.


  15. Mr Ali submitted that under Strasbourg jurisprudence the panel made  a
      proper assessment of proportionality and reached conclusions  open  to
      them. Even if there was an error of law,  which  he  did  not  accept,
      there was no reason to set aside  the  decision  because,  absent  any
      error, the same conclusion would inevitably have been reached.


  16. I reserved my determination.


  17. The panel made an anonymity direction which should continue in  force.
      I make an order  under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  claimant,
      his wife or children.


  18. There have been unnecessary digressions  considering  paragraphs  398,
      399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules. There is no mention of them  in
      the lengthy and detailed refusal letter. Mr Deller  properly  concedes
      that they do not apply. Clearly paragraphs 398(a) and (b) do not apply
      because the claimant was not sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
      at least four years or less than four years but at  least  12  months.
      Paragraph 398(c) does not apply because the Secretary of State has not
      said that the deportation of the claimant is conducive to  the  public
      good because his  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  he  is  a
      persistent offender who shows particular disregard  for  the  law.  In
      paragraph 23 the panel were correct to conclude that paragraph 398 did
      not apply. The  further  conclusion  that  the  claimant  could  bring
      himself with one of the exemptions in paragraph 399 matters not  where
      paragraph 399 does not apply.


  19. In paragraph 4 of the determination the panel correctly summarises the
      provisions of paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules under  which  the
      decision  was  made  in  the  refusal  letter.  These  included   "any
      compassionate circumstances"; a factor to which the panel returned  in
      paragraph 22 when giving the reasons for their conclusion.


  20. I have found that the first ground of appeal  is  not  made  out.  The
      second ground is based on a misconception. It  would  only  have  been
      necessary for the panel to consider whether there was any other family
      member who was able to care for any a child if paragraph 399  applied,
      which it does not.


  21. The third  ground  of  appeal  submits  that  the  panel  should  have
      considered whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  family
      continuing  family  life  in  the  Ivory   Coast.   Under   Strasbourg
      jurisprudence "insurmountable obstacles" is not the correct test.  The
      Secretary of State is importing a test from paragraph 399, which  does
      not apply.


  22. I find that there is no evidence to  substantiate  the  allegation  in
      paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal that either the  claimant's  wife
      or the  children  failed  to  disclose  their  relationship  with  the
      claimant  or  delayed  making  any  application  for  leave.   Between
      paragraphs 16 and  22  the  panel  gave  sufficient  reasons  for  the
      conclusion that the compassionate circumstances of the case outweighed
      the public interest in deporting the claimant. The  panel's  treatment
      of delay and its consequences in paragraph 21 was correct; indeed  not
      materially different from what the Secretary of State  submits  should
      have been done namely;  "that  the  delay  allowed  the  appellant  to
      develop stronger Article 8 rights in the UK".

  23. I find that the panel reached  conclusions  open  to  it  on  all  the
      evidence. There is no error of law and I uphold the determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 15 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

