

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: DA/00016/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 October 2017 and 8 February 2018       |On 11 May 2018                 |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                             oladimeji ayemojuba
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Dean, of Elizabeth Dean Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, whom we shall call "the  claimant"  is  a  national  of
    Belgium.  Following two convictions for robbery, the Secretary of State
    made arrangements  for  his  deportation  and,  after  an  unsuccessful
    appeal, the claimant  was  deported  to  Belgium  in  July  2012.   The
    claimant then moved to the Republic of Ireland, where he  began  study.
    He is said to be in a relationship with Bianca Taylor,  whom  we  shall
    call  "the  sponsor".   The  sponsor  has  a  child  from  a   previous
    relationship, and she  and  the  claimant  have  a  child  together,  a
    daughter born on 18 December 2015.

 2. Since his deportation,  the  claimant  has  been  encountered  on  five
    separate occasions in the United Kingdom or attempting  to  enter.   On
    the most recent occasion he was found in the United Kingdom in February
    2016 and was, according to Home Office records,  removed  on  21  April
    2016.

 3. In an application submitted on his behalf by Halliday Reeves, a firm of
    solicitors, the claimant  sought  the  revocation  of  the  deportation
    order.  The application was refused in a decision noted as served on 21
    December 2016.  The claimant appealed against that decision, and in the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State appeals against that decision  on  a  number  of
    grounds, the material one being that Judge Povey had  no  jurisdiction.
    The reason for that is as follows.  As the claimant is an EEA national,
    his status and other matters related to immigration were covered by the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, in force at  the
    relevant time.  Under those  Regulations  he  had  a  right  of  appeal
    against an 'EEA decision'.  The latter phrase is defined in such a  way
    as to include only a decision made under the Regulations.

 5. Regulation 24A provided for the revocation of a deportation order,  but
    by reg 24A(3) an application could be made for a deportation  order  to
    be revoked, but  only  while  the  applicant  was  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.  Regulation 24A(1) provided that unless the order  is  revoked
    "under this regulation"  it  is  to  remain  in  force.   Further,  reg
    27(1)(b) provided that an  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  revoke  a
    deportation order could be brought only while the appellant was outside
    the United Kingdom.

 6.  We  have  already  noted  two  of  the  relevant  dates:  Judge  Povey
    specifically found that the claimant's removal in April 2016 was  after
    he had submitted the application  for  revocation  of  the  deportation
    order.  The only further date clearly recorded is that of  the  appeal,
    which was heard on 16 January 2017.

 7. On the basis of the dates of application and removal set out above  and
    by the judge, it is clear that the application was invalid for  failure
    to comply with reg 24A(3) and so could not justify  any  decision  that
    the deportation order ceased to be in force,  because  of  reg  24A(1).
    When we heard the appeal on 20  October  2017  we  announced  that  our
    decision would have to be to that effect,  with  the  result  that  the
    Secretary of  State's  appeal  would  be  allowed  and  that  we  would
    substitute a decision dismissing the  claimant's  appeal  for  lack  of
    jurisdiction.

 8. Shortly after the hearing, however, we received a letter from Ms  Dean,
    who represented the claimant, asserting that  the  Home  Office  record
    that the application that had been made on 17 March was incorrect.  The
    sponsor had explained to her  that  research  had  been  undertaken  in
    connection with a complaint Halliday Reeves had made to the Home Office
    about delay in this case.  The documents that came to light then showed
    that the application had been made on 17 June,  many  weeks  after  the
    claimant's removal in April 2016.  Ms Dean suggested that the  date  of
    17 March had been mistranscribed from the form on  which  the  claimant
    gave  authority  to  Halliday  Reeves,  which  also   accompanied   the
    application.

 9. We reviewed the documentation and arranged for the  matter  to  be  re-
    listed.  The review  of  the  documentation  raises  two  questions  of
    interest in this context.  First, the  documentation  relating  to  the
    submission of the application, now available apparently  from  Halliday
    Reeves' files, includes  a  letter  dated  1  July  2016,  Post  Office
    documents showing the posting of a packet weighing 0.341kg in Kempston,
    Bedfordshire, on 17 June 2016 and its receipt on 20 June 2016,  and  an
    undated letter from an MP's office repeating details obtained from  the
    Home Office, recording no application of 17 March 2016 or 17 June 2016,
    but indicating that on  5  October  2016  the  claimant  had  requested
    revocation of his deportation order, and  that  that  request  "remains
    outstanding" but will be decided by 7 December 2016.

10. At the hearing we were able to ask Mr Richards whether the Home  Office
    Records threw any more light on this, but he was unable to help.  As we
    indicated at the time, it is extremely surprising that  the  claimant's
    application should be said to have been posted in  Bedfordshire  on  17
    June.  Neither the place of business of Halliday Reeves (Newcastle-upon-
    Tyne) nor the residence of  the  sponsor  (Bristol)  is  anywhere  near
    Kempston.  Although we can understand the solicitors having business in
    Bedfordshire,  there  is  no  obvious  reason  why  anybody  going   to
    Bedfordshire should take a  parcel  to  be  posted  there:  it  is  not
    suggested that there was any event connected with the  application,  or
    with instructions for it to be made, either on or about 17 June  or  in
    or about Bedfordshire.  Without further information, we  are  sceptical
    that the post office documents relate to  the  claimant's  application,
    despite the reference in the letter from Halliday Reeves dated  1  July
    2016, to an application of 17 June.

11. There may be explanations for all that: but the review of the documents
    raised another difficulty.  As  we  have  said,  the  daughter  of  the
    claimant and the sponsor was born on 18 December 2015.  Her birth  was,
    however, registered on 28 April 2016, and the  certified  copy  of  the
    Register entry, bearing the signature of the Deputy Registrar and  that
    date, was submitted as evidence of the parentage of  the  child.   That
    certificate makes it  clear  that  on  that  date,  a  week  after  the
    claimant's removal, he appeared before the Deputy Registrar in Bristol,
    giving an address in Southwark.  We invited Ms Dean to explain how this
    could be.  After taking instructions and consulting elsewhere, she told
    us that she was professionally embarrassed and could  not  continue  to
    represent the claimant.

12. There is no reason to doubt what  is  shown  on  the  certificate.   It
    demonstrates that the account given by the claimant  and  the  sponsor,
    that the claimant has been out of the United Kingdom since his  removal
    on 21 April 2016, is not true.  The claimant has continued to enter the
    United Kingdom when he chooses, in defiance of  the  deportation  order
    and other provisions of immigration control.  Evidently he  re-entered,
    illegally, very shortly after his last removal.  His  attitude  can  be
    seen from the fact that he is prepared to give an address in the United
    Kingdom, not, be it noted, anywhere near  where  the  sponsor  and  her
    children live.

13. For the purposes of the appeal before us, this means that no importance
    can be attached to the date of the claimant's removal, because  neither
    that nor the deportation order  are  reasons  for  saying  that  he  is
    outside the United Kingdom.  His own, and the  sponsor's,  accounts  of
    his movement are not true.  Now that the issue of the competence of his
    application has been raised, there is no credible evidence  upon  which
    we could conclude he was outside the United Kingdom on  17  June  2016,
    even if the application was  made  on  that  date.   As  he  has  never
    admitted crossing an international boundary after 28 April 2016  (when,
    as we have indicated, he was evidently in the United Kingdom) there is,
    in addition, no credible  evidence  that  he  was  outside  the  United
    Kingdom on 16 January 2017, when his appeal was filed, so there  is  no
    basis for saying that that was valid either.

14. Judge Povey erred in law because on the material on which he relied  he
    had no jurisdiction to allow the claimant's appeal.  We set  aside  his
    decision.  We re-determine the claimant's appeal.

15. There is no credible evidence that, and no reason to believe that,  the
    claimant was outside the United Kingdom either at the time he made  his
    application or at the time he filed his appeal.  Both were invalid  and
    the only function of  the  Tribunal  is  therefore  to  note  that  the
    deportation order remains in force under the provisions of reg  24A(1).
    To that extent his appeal is now dismissed.








                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 8 May 2018.

