
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00228/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 February 2014                           |On 4 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting
                  Officer
For the Respondent (Mr S): Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Ravi
                  Sethi Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of  a  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan and Mrs A
    J F Cross de Chavannes) which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  11
    June 2013, had allowed Mr S's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007.
    For ease of convenience, I shall throughout this determination refer to
    the Secretary of  State  (who  ws  the  original  respondent)  as  "the
    Secretary of State" and to Mr S who was the original appellant, as "the
    claimant".

 2. The claimant, who  was  born  on  17  August  1972,  is  a  citizen  of
    Mauritius.  His immigration history is disputed, but the contentions of
    both parties are summarised  at  paragraphs  3  to  7  of  the  panel's
    determination as follows:

    "Background

         3.    The  central  issue  in  this  appeal  is   the   appellant's
             immigration  history.   There  is  some  dispute  between  the
             parties as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  granted  certain
             periods of leave to remain, and in particular, whether he  was
             naturalised as a British citizen in 1999 and therefore is  not
             even liable to deportation.

         4.   The appellant first entered the UK on 20  May  1991  (aged  19
             years old) with entry clearance as a student  that  was  valid
             until 31 October 1992.  It is  accepted  that  he  applied  to
             extend his visa on several occasions thereafter until 30  July
             2006  [this  should   presumably   have   read   1997].    The
             respondent's summary of his immigration history (PF1)  accepts
             that he was granted leave to remain until  30  July  1996  but
             goes on to state that there was evidence to show that he  left
             the UK in August 1995 to visit Mauritius.  In  September  1995
             he left Mauritius but there was said to be no  record  of  him
             having re-entered the UK.  However, a copy of the  appellant's
             old passport, which was issued on  04  October  1990  (pg.D1-6
             respondent's bundle "RB") does show a UK re-entry  stamp  from
             an immigration officer in Dover on 22 October 1995 (pg.D3).

         5.   The appellant says that he applied for further leave to remain
             and then for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  (ILR),  which  was
             granted to him in 2007 [this should also presumably have  read
             1997].  The copy of the appellant's passport that  was  issued
             in 1990 does not state how long it was valid for but  normally
             one might expect a passport to be valid for either five or ten
             years.  There is no evidence in that passport to show that  he
             was granted ILR in 2007 [again the panel presumably  meant  to
             record  1997]  as  claimed.   The  appellant  says  that   new
             passports  started  to  be  issued  in  Mauritius  which   had
             'technology in the passport' so  he  had  applied  for  a  new
             passport.  It was that passport  that  he  says  had  the  ILR
             endorsement in it.  The passport issued in 1990 is stamped  as
             'cancelled' but does not state the date when this was done.

         6.   The appellant says that he no longer has that passport or  any
             other evidence to show that he was granted ILR in 2007  [again
             the panel must have intended to say 1997].  He  says  that  he
             was naturalised as a British  citizen  in  1999  but  did  not
             obtain a British passport.  The appellant claims that he  lost
             the passport with the ILR endorsement and  his  naturalisation
             certificate when he moved house in late 1999.   He  wanted  to
             travel to Mauritius for a visit but realised  that  he  didn't
             have the passport.  The appellant and his wife say  that  they
             both went to the Home Office in  Croydon  to  see  whether  he
             could have  his  ILR  reinstated  or  be  issued  with  a  new
             naturalisation certificate but they were told  that  the  file
             had been sent to  Liverpool,  and  despite  further  enquiries
             being made, no records could be  found.   Both  witnesses  say
             that they were advised by a solicitor that it could take  some
             time to sort the problem out and if he  wanted  to  travel  it
             would be quicker for him to apply for leave  to  remain  as  a
             spouse on a new Mauritian passport.  The couple had married on
             04 March 2000.

         7.   The appellant applied for a new Mauritian passport, which  was
             issued on 01 August 2000 (pg.E1 RB).  He applied for leave  to
             remain as a spouse in November 2000 but no mention was made in
             that application to his claim to already have ILR or  to  have
             been naturalised as a  British  citizen.   The  appellant  was
             granted leave to remain until 20 March 2002.  He then  applied
             for ILR as a spouse, which was granted on 19 March 2002.  Once
             again no mention was made in that application of the fact that
             the appellant had  already  previously  been  granted  ILR  or
             naturalised."

 3. As the panel notes at paragraph 8 of its  determination,  the  claimant
    was convicted of two offences (which the panel referred to  as  "fairly
    minor offences") for which he did not receive custodial sentences.   In
    April 1993, which was less than two years after he had arrived in  this
    country, he was given concurrent community sentences of  80  hours  for
    offences of obtaining property by deception, theft and handling.   Then
    in April 1998, he  was  convicted  of  shoplifting,  and  conditionally
    discharged for 24 months.

 4. Then, on 30 May 2003, he was sentenced to fifteen  years'  imprisonment
    for what was an extremely serious offence  indeed.   He  was  convicted
    after a trial of "possession of drugs the import of which is prohibited
    - class  A  drugs"  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  years'
    imprisonment.  The  conviction  related  to  the  importation  of  8.09
    kilogrammes of cocaine between 29 January 2002 and 16 May 2002, and  it
    is clear from the judge's sentencing remarks that the  claimant  was  a
    principal organiser of this extremely  serious  offence.   The  judge's
    sentencing remarks in respect of the claimant were as follows:

         "You, [JS], were shown, on the evidence before the  jury,  to  have
         been the effective controller of this  importation;  having  worked
         airside at London Heathrow Airport in the past,  you  had  a  clear
         understanding of where a weakness could be  found  in  the  customs
         controls.  You were closely involved with Plummer during  a  period
         which must have been the  planning  phase  of  this  enterprise,  a
         period of a number of weeks.  During the critical  days  and  hours
         when Rutty was  moving  this  consignment  of  cocaine,  you,  [S],
         exercised control over the key participants  in  this  importation:
         you supervised your contact airside  at  London  Heathrow  Airport,
         with whom you were  in  frequent  communication;  you  ensured  the
         successful smuggling while  Plummer  was  close  by,  awaiting  the
         completion of the enterprise.

         In all the circumstances of this case, I must sentence you, [S], as
         a principal organiser and  active  participant  at  each  important
         stage of the criminal plan."

 5. The judge did not make a deportation  recommendation,  from  which  the
    panel inferred (at paragraph 29)  that  "it  does  seem  to  have  been
    accepted that the appellant was likely to have been a  British  citizen
    when he was sentenced in 2003" but all one can say with  any  certainty
    from the  judge's  sentencing  remarks  is  that  this  issue  was  not
    considered at that time.

 6. It appears that an OASys assessment was carried out  on  28  July  2006
    which assessed the claimant as presenting a low  risk  of  reconviction
    (even though he continued to deny the offence) following which  he  was
    moved to an open prison from where he was released on licence in  2010.



 7. Thereafter, no steps were taken to deport  the  claimant  until  on  15
    February 2011 he made an application for a "no time limit" stamp to  be
    placed in his new passport to confirm what he claimed was his  previous
    grant of indefinite leave to remain.   As  recorded  by  the  panel  at
    paragraph 12 of its determination, no  action  was  taken  in  response
    until his local MP became involved in the case, but then on 31  October
    2012 the Secretary of State wrote to the claimant to notify him of  his
    liability to deportation.  The claimant replied by asserting  now  that
    he was a British citizen, although, as the panel  records,  he  had  no
    evidence to confirm that fact.  The Secretary of State's  position  was
    that there were no records to show that he had been naturalised  as  he
    now claimed.

 8. Thereafter, on 16 January 2013, the Secretary of State made a  decision
    to deport the claimant.  It is stated in the decision letter that under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, the Secretary of  State  must
    make a deportation order in respect of a foreign national who has  been
    convicted in the  United  Kingdom  of  an  offence  and  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve months, unless
    that foreign national falls within one of the  exceptions  set  out  in
    Section 33 of that Act.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the
    deportation of the claimant would be in breach of his Article 8 rights;
    although it was accepted that his deportation would interfere with  his
    rights and also that it "may not be  in  the  best  interests  of  your
    children", nonetheless the  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    decision was necessary for the legitimate purpose of the prevention  of
    disorder and crime and that this purpose outweighed the  countervailing
    factors.  In reaching her decision, the Secretary of State had in  mind
    the provisions of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules
    and also the provisions of Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, which required her to consider the  interests  of
    the claimant's children as a primary consideration.

 9. The Secretary of State also gave consideration to the claimant's  claim
    that he had been naturalised as a British citizen in 1999, but  in  the
    absence of any documentary evidence confirming  this  and  also  having
    searched her own records, she did not accept that this  was  the  case.
    Even though the Secretary of State accepted that there had been a delay
    in informing the claimant of his liability to deportation,  nonetheless
    it  was  considered  that  the  public  interest  in  his   deportation
    outweighed his right to  family  and/or  private  life  such  that  his
    deportation would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. The claimant appealed against this decision and there were  essentially
    two issues before the panel.  The first, central issue was  whether  or
    not the claimant was  indeed  a  naturalised  British  citizen,  as  he
    claimed, because if he was, then it was accepted that he could  not  be
    deported.  The second issue was whether, in any event,  the  claimant's
    decision to deport him was disproportionate, such that it was in breach
    of his Article 8 rights.  If it was, then by virtue of Section 33(2)(a)
    of the 2007 Act, Section 32(4) would not apply because his  deportation
    would breach one of his Convention rights.

11. As already noted above, following the hearing  before  the  panel,  the
    panel found, on the balance of probabilities,  that  the  claimant  was
    indeed a naturalised British citizen, as he had claimed.  It also found
    that his deportation would be  in  breach  of  his  Article  8  rights,
    although it is clear from  its  determination  that  this  finding  was
    dependent on the finding that the claimant was a British citizen.  This
    is clear from what was said at paragraph 44 of  its  determination,  as
    follows:

         "44. It might well be that if the  appellant  was  relying  on  his
             family life alone that the very serious nature of the  offence
             for which he has  been  convicted  might  still  outweigh  the
             weight to be given to the  best  interests  of  the  children.
             However, in this case we also  find  that  the  evidence  that
             shows that he is likely to have been naturalised as a  British
             citizen is the factor that tips the balance in favour  of  the
             appellant."

12. The Secretary of State has appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was
    granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 2 August
    2013.

13. This appeal then came before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McKee  sitting  at
    Field House on 14 November 2013.  Having heard submissions on behalf of
    both parties, Judge McKee set aside the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal as containing a material error of law and  directed  that  the
    decision on the appeal was to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

14. Judge McKee's reasons for so deciding are set out in his "Decision  and
    Directions" which document is dated the same date as the hearing, which
    I now set out:

    "1.  The Secretary of State appeals, with leave granted on  2nd  August
    2013 by Judge Dawson,  against  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, allowing the appeal of Mr SS against a deportation order made
    under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 on 15th January 2013.  After a
    hearing on 20th May 2013 a panel comprising Judge Canavan and Mrs Cross
    de Chavannes found it to be more likely  than  not  that  Mr  SS  is  a
    British citizen, and hence not liable to deportation.  They went on  to
    consider the appeal on an 'even if' basis under Article  8,  and  found
    that, although the very serious nature of his offence (he was sentenced
    to 15 years' imprisonment for the importation of Class A  drugs)  might
    otherwise have outweighed the  best  interests  of  his  children,  the
    likelihood of his having been naturalised as a British  citizen  tipped
    the proportionality balance in his favour.


    2.    Mr SS has no direct evidence to confirm his claim to be a British
    citizen.   He  has  two  Mauritian  passports,  one  issued  in   1990,
    apparently valid for ten years, the other issued in 2000, and saying on
    its face that it was valid  for  ten  years.   The  former  has  stamps
    showing successive grants of first leave to enter  and  then  leave  to
    remain as a student between May 1991 and July 1996, although there is a
    curious middle period when Mr SS was apparently given leave  to  remain
    with no conditions attached at all.  There is a stamp showing leave  to
    remain from December 1993 to December 1995, followed by a further grant
    of unconditional leave between May and September 1994.  Not only is the
    latter grant ostensibly redundant, but it was apparently granted by the
    same official, P. Winston.  Then there is a grant of student leave from
    September 1994 to August 1995, which again would be unnecessary  if  Mr
    SS already had leave until December 1995.  Finally  comes  a  grant  of
    student leave from August 1995 to July 1996.  It was  after  this  last
    date, in 1997, that Mr SS claims to have been granted indefinite  leave
    to remain, but there is no stamp for that in  the  passport  issued  in
    1990.  He had, says Mr SS, applied for a new passport, although his old
    one had not expired, and it  was  this  new  passport  which  bore  the
    indefinite leave stamp.


    3.   The grant of  settlement  led  naturally  to  an  application  for
    naturalisation, which was granted in 1999.  But later  that  year  both
    the new passport and the naturalisation certificate were  lost  when  -
    says Mr SS - he moved house.  He also says that the documents were in a
    briefcase which was impounded by HM  Customs  &  Excise  after  he  was
    arrested for importing drugs in 2002.  At all  events,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had  to  determine  whether,  despite  the  absence  of  these
    documents, and the absence of any current record  at  the  Home  Office
    that indefinite leave or naturalisation had ever been  granted,  Mr  SS
    really  was  a  British  citizen.   At  paragraphs   24-25   of   their
    determination, the panel list factors pointing away from the likelihood
    of this claim.  But at paragraph 26 they  say  that  "there  are  other
    pieces of evidence before us that  support  the  appellant's  account."
    The first of these, at paragraph 27, is that the  chronology  given  by
    the appellant is "at least consistent with someone who might have  been
    eligible to apply for ILR and then naturalisation.  The  appellant  had
    leave to remain in the UK  from  1991  to  1996  and  it  is  therefore
    possible that he could have accrued sufficient time in the UK  to  make
    an application for ILR by 2007 (sic - 1997 is intended)."


    4.   The panel went on to find that Mr SS was indeed, on a  balance  of
    probabilities,  a  British  citizen,  and  the  Secretary  of   State's
    challenge is essentially that they did not give  adequate  reasons  for
    this conclusion.  The observation made at paragraph 27 is criticised as
    being "entirely speculative."  When the matter came before me today,  I
    put it to the representatives that there  was  indeed  something  badly
    wrong with paragraph  27.   Examination  of  the  stamps  in  the  1990
    passport shows unexplained overlaps in the grants of  leave.   It  also
    shows that most of the leave granted  to  Mr  SS,  including  the  last
    period of leave, was as a student.  The student route has never led  to
    indefinite leave under the Immigration Rules, unless a student  manages
    to 'clock up' ten continuous years of study.


    5.   Mr O'Ceallaigh submits that this point was not made in the grounds
    for seeking leave to appeal, and was not  a  'Robinson  obvious'  point
    which the panel should have picked up for themselves.  I disagree.   As
    a specialist tribunal, the panel should have been aware that the  leave
    granted to Mr  SS  would  not  normally  have  made  him  eligible  for
    settlement.  This called for further inquiry into how it was that Mr SS
    obtained indefinite leave.  The panel's acceptance  without  more  that
    this was perfectly possible could indeed be characterised as  "entirely
    speculative."


    6.   It was an error of law for the panel to assume that the entries in
    Mr  SS's  passport  supported  his  contention  that  he  was   granted
    indefinite leave in 1997.  This was the first of the reasons  given  by
    the panel for accepting that Mr  SS  is  a  British  citizen,  and  was
    plainly material to the outcome of the appeal.  But Mr O'Ceallaigh  was
    quite right to contend that his client was not in a position to address
    the point today, it not having been particularised in this way  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  An adjournment would clearly be needed  before  the
    decision on the appeal could be re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
    enough time would need to be given so that  both  sides  could  try  to
    obtain any further evidence that might shed light  on  the  nationality
    question.


    7.   As for Article 8, Mr O'Ceallaigh readily accepted that there was a
    logical flaw in the panel using his client's British nationality to tip
    the proportionality balance in his favour.  If Mr  SS  is  British,  he
    cannot be deported.  It is only if he is not British  that  he  has  to
    rely on Article 8.  So there too the panel fell into error.


     DECISION


     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside,  and  the
    decision on the appeal is to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal."

15. Although in the normal course of events the resumed hearing would  have
    again come before Judge McKee, since making this decision, Judge  McKee
    retired and accordingly a transfer order has been made,  which  is  how
    this appeal has come before me.

The Hearing

16. During the course of the hearing, I heard submissions on behalf of both
    parties and also heard evidence from the claimant  and  his  wife,  who
    were both cross-examined.  I recorded the evidence and the  submissions
    contemporaneously, and my notes are  contained  within  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  Accordingly, I shall not set out below  everything  which
    was said to me during the course of the hearing, but shall  refer  only
    to such of the  evidence  and  submissions  as  is  necessary  for  the
    purposes  of  this  determination.   However,  I  have  had  regard  to
    everything which was said to me,  as  well  as  to  all  the  documents
    contained within the file, whether or not the same is specifically  set
    out below.  Regrettably, after I had reached my decision but  before  I
    had written my determination, the file was mislaid, but having found it
    again and having read through the detailed Record of Proceedings  which
    I made, I am entirely confident that notwithstanding the  period  which
    has elapsed since the hearing,  the  submissions  and  evidence  remain
    clearly in my mind.

17. At the outset, Ms Easty submitted on behalf of the claimant that  Judge
    McKee should not have found that there had been an error of law in  the
    panel's determination, and had been wrong to consider  that  successive
    grants of leave would not have amounted to a proper basis on which  the
    claimant could have been granted indefinite leave to remain, because he
    had looked at this on the basis of the  claimant  being  a  student  as
    opposed to a commonwealth student who was ordinarily resident  in  this
    country.  Also, it was submitted that Judge  McKee  had  not  made  any
    decision as to what findings of fact should be retained.

18. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the
    judge's  finding  that  there  had  been  an  error  of  law   in   the
    determination was properly open to him for the  reasons  he  gave,  and
    that the only appropriate way of proceeding with the  hearing  was  for
    this Tribunal now to consider the evidence afresh.

19. In my judgment, Judge McKee's decision is adequately reasoned  and  was
    open to him.  In light of his decision, I agree with Mr Avery that  the
    only appropriate course for this Tribunal now to take was  to  consider
    the evidence afresh.

20. The claimant gave evidence and adopted the statement he had made on  14
    May 2013, which is at pages 1 to 3 of the bundle which had been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In this statement he  describes  how  he  had
    come to the UK in 1991 for further studies after completion  of  his  A
    levels in Mauritius and then at paragraph 4, he states as follows:

         "4.  I was granted ILR in 1997 and  I  received  my  Naturalisation
             Certificate in 1999.  At present I do not have  any  documents
             to prove as HM Customs and Excise are holding everything  they
             took from my house after my arrest  in  2002."  (That  was  in
             respect of  the  drugs  offence  for  which  he  received  the
             custodial sentence of fifteen years).

21. He states at paragraph 5 that: "whilst I was in  custody  I  was  asked
    about my nationality and the Home Office confirmed on several occasions
    that I was a British citizen".  He contends that "they could  not  have
    relied on my assertion that I was British and they must  have  verified
    it within their departments".

22. He still denies the offence of which he  was  convicted  and  he  gives
    evidence as to the harmful effect there would be on  both  himself  and
    his children if they were to  be  separated.   Then,  at  paragraph  15
    onwards, he states further with regard  to  whether  or  not  he  is  a
    British citizen as follows:

         "15. For the UKBA to now say  that  I  am  not  a  British  citizen
             beggars belief.  They were the ones  to  confirm  that  I  was
             British.  They did not just believe  me  but  they  did  their
             checks.  I was only released because I was British.  Otherwise
             there is no basis they would have released  me.   When  I  was
             arrested Customs and Excise took all my documents which I  had
             kept in a briefcase.

         16.  They never returned the documents despite the fact that I  had
             written to them through my solicitors.  A Mr  Lakhampaul  from
             the Customs had taken the documents but never  returned  them.
             All  my  important  documents  including   my   naturalisation
             certificate was in the briefcase.  I had also written  to  the
             UKBA myself in December 2012 to inform them of the same."

23. In cross-examination, the claimant was asked what had been the basis of
    his application for indefinite leave to remain in  1997,  to  which  he
    replied that he had sent it to his solicitor to renew the  work  permit
    he had "and after a while my solicitor informed me I had received ILR".
     He had been a student but he had a work permit at the same time.

24. In his statement, the claimant had said (at  paragraph  3)  that  after
    coming to the UK in 1991 for further studies  he  had  "applied  for  a
    working holidaymaker visa, which I was  granted  for  two  years".   He
    stated that he was entitled to such a  visa  as  he  had  come  from  a
    commonwealth country  and  that  he  started  working  part-time  while
    carrying on with further studies (which included completing his MBA and
    graduating with a further diploma in marketing).  The claimant said  in
    cross-examination that he had started at the Jewish Care Home  when  he
    received "my work permit" in 1993, and that he had finished his MBA  in
    1996.  He was asked whether he actually had a document called  a  "work
    permit" or whether this was just part  of  his  studies,  to  which  he
    replied that there was no restriction on taking paid employment in  the
    UK.

25. Mr Avery suggested on the basis of the documents that he had seen  that
    the claimant had had leave to remain as a student in which capacity  he
    was allowed to carry out some  work,  at  which  point  Ms  Easty  made
    reference to the relevant section in  the  1995  edition  of  Macdonald
    which suggested that at that time a student would need the  consent  of
    the Department of Employment to work.  There did not appear to  be  any
    entry in his passport to show that he needed any permission other  than
    the permission of the Department of Employment.

26. The reason why Mr Avery sought to seek clarification on this issue  was
    because the claimant had said that he had  a  letter  stating  that  he
    could seek employment which would not be in accordance  with  what  was
    said in his passport.  The claimant then said that he had  "received  a
    work permit".

27. The claimant when asked then clarified that it was his evidence that he
    had initially come in 1991 for further studies but  that  he  had  then
    stayed on as a working holidaymaker from 1993.  Mr Avery then  referred
    to the entry on the claimant's old passport which suggested that on  20
    December 1993 he had been granted permission to  remain  as  a  working
    holidaymaker for two years, with no restrictions on employment.

28. The claimant was asked whether it was right then to say that he did not
    know on what basis he had been granted indefinite leave to  remain,  to
    which he replied that  "I  wanted  to  stay  after  graduation  and  my
    solicitor sent off my passport  and  told  me  I  had  got  ILR".   The
    claimant continued by saying that "I wanted to have more work permit in
    1996 when my visa was ending".

29. He was asked again whether it was right that he did not know the  basis
    upon which his solicitor was applying for him  to  which  the  claimant
    replied that the basis was to work as a chef in a care home.

30. The claimant was then asked whether it was correct that he did not have
    any evidence that he had been granted indefinite leave  to  remain,  to
    which he replied, "not at present.  My passport was lost".  When he was
    asked when this was, he said that it  was  when  he  moved  house  from
    Barnet to Hounslow in late 1999.  The claimant, who had  made  a  fresh
    application for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse after  the  date
    on which he now claims he had been naturalised as a British citizen was
    asked whether he had any evidence from the Mauritian  authorities  that
    he had been provided with a new passport to replace the  one  which  he
    claimed had been lost (which passport was  relied  upon  in  his  later
    application for indefinite leave to remain and which  did  not  contain
    within  it  any  reference  to  his  having  previously  been   granted
    indefinite leave to remain) to which he replied that he did not.   When
    he was asked why that was, the claimant replied that he had returned to
    the Mauritian High Commission but was "still awaiting their  reply.   I
    wrote to them in November last year".

31. When asked by the Tribunal whether he had a copy of that letter he  had
    written, he said "not on me now, no.  I did write  to  places  where  I
    worked".

32. The claimant did not dispute when asked by Mr Avery  that  he  did  not
    have any evidence that he had had a passport between the  time  he  had
    entered and the time he had made his (later) application for indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of his marriage.  He was asked whether  he
    had been back to the solicitor who had  represented  him  when  he  had
    applied for ILR originally, and he said that he had been told that  the
    person dealing with this had passed away and  the  firm  did  not  keep
    records more than ten years.  He was asked the name of the firm and  he
    said it was JR Immigration, which was based in Brixton.   He  confirmed
    that his evidence was that he had been granted ILR  in  1997,  and  had
    then made a subsequent application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    his marriage in 2001.

33. Mr Avery asked him why as he must have known at that time that  he  was
    missing the necessary paperwork he did not seek this evidence from  his
    former solicitors then, to which the claimant replied that he  had  and
    had applied for a new passport, his third passport.  His first passport
    was an old style passport which was valid  for  five  years,  then  the
    passport he lost which he had obtained in 1996 was a ten year passport.

34. The claimant said that he had taken his new passport to the Home Office
    to reinstate his indefinite leave to remain, but when asked whether  he
    had any correspondence with the Home Office at  that  time  he  replied
    that he did not, because he had just walked in there.   He  needed  the
    passport to travel and he  was  told  that  they  could  not  find  any
    documents in the Home Office.

35. The claimant was then asked why in that case he had not gone back  then
    to the solicitors who had dealt with  his  application  previously,  to
    which he replied that he had gone to Malik Solicitors  in  East  London
    who had advised him that they would take the  case  and  sue  the  Home
    Office for losing his documents.  He did not act on this advice because
    they had wanted a large sum of  money  to  fight  the  case,  and  also
    because by that time his wife had started to work for the  Home  Office
    and so it would have been difficult to start a case to expose them.

36. When asked again why in the circumstances he had not gone back  to  his
    old solicitors to see if they had any record  of  his  application  and
    subsequent grant of ILR, the claimant then said that he could  not  get
    hold of the person who had been dealing with  his  case  before  at  JR
    Immigration.

37. In further questioning, the claimant said that he  had  applied  for  a
    British passport in 2000, although he did not have the exact date,  and
    he did not have any documents because  "all  documents  were  taken  by
    Customs and Excise".  When asked, he said that he had used a  different
    solicitor from the solicitor he had used to make  his  application  for
    naturalisation, whose name was something like Stephen Sanbor "something
    like that".

38. When asked when he had made that application, he said it was  in  1999.
    That application had been granted.  He had sent his  passport  and  his
    birth certificate and it came through the post.

39. The claimant was asked why if he is now saying that  he  had  lost  his
    passport which had the ILR stamped in it when he moved in 1999, he said
    in his statement that he had lost his naturalisation  certificate  when
    he was arrested, to which the claimant's initial reply was that "when I
    was arrested everything was taken".

40. When it was put to him that  that  was  in  2002,  he  then  said  that
    everything had gone missing when he moved home.

41. Mr Avery pressed the claimant as to why  he  had  said  initially  that
    Customs and Excise had taken the documents, to which  he  replied  that
    "they took a lot of documents".

42. The claimant was asked why he did not say he had lost the documents  in
    1999 when he had moved, to which he eventually replied that he had been
    "mixed up with the timings".

43. As it was  the  claimant's  evidence  that  he  had  used  a  different
    solicitor to submit his application for naturalisation,  he  was  asked
    whether he had tried to get in contact with this  solicitor,  to  which
    the claimant replied that he had tried but he was in Mauritius now.

44. Mr Avery then asked the claimant why, when at an earlier stage  he  had
    applied for leave to remain on the grounds of his marriage he  had  not
    approached that solicitor then, to which the claimant replied  that  he
    had been "told to go to a bigger solicitor" so he had gone to Malik Law
    in Bethnal Green in East London.

45. When asked whether he had or had not gone to either  solicitor  he  had
    been to before, the claimant said that he had called  JR  Immigration's
    office, just the once, but the person he had dealt with before was  not
    there when he called, and he had not called back because having  talked
    to his friends he had been advised to go to Malik Law because they were
    a well-known firm.  When asked whether it  occurred  to  him  that  his
    previous solicitors might have had a record  of  his  application,  the
    claimant replied that although they might have a record  of  what  they
    had written he thought at the time that he should deal  with  the  Home
    Office directly instead of incurring all the costs of  dealing  with  a
    solicitor.

46. When asked why, having been unsuccessful with the Home  Office  he  had
    not contacted his previous solicitors then, he replied that he had gone
    to a different solicitor who had advised him to apply on the grounds of
    marriage.  They advised him that it would be very costly to pursue  the
    Home Office if they had lost the documents and said that it would be  a
    lot cheaper for him to do this by himself.  He  did  not  approach  his
    previous solicitors to ask if  they  had  a  record  of  his  documents
    because "in my mind the Home Office should have had a record".

47. In evidence the claimant had said that he had  applied  for  a  British
    passport, but it was pointed out to him in  cross-examination  that  in
    his statement he had said, in his second  paragraph  that  he  had  not
    applied for a passport.   He  agreed  that  what  he  had  written  was
    incorrect and the reason he gave was that "I forgot all about it".

48. It was also put to the claimant that when he had applied for a "no time
    limit" stamp to be put on his passport in 2011, at 1.7,  where  he  was
    asked for his "nationality" he had answered  "Mauritian".   When  asked
    why he had done this, the claimant  said  this  was  because  the  Home
    Office could not find his documents.  When asked again why, if  he  did
    not think this was right, he had still given this answer,  he  repeated
    that it was because the Home Office could not find his documents.

49. At section 3.1, under "Personal History" within the  2011  application,
    the claimant was asked in terms whether he or any  dependants  applying
    with him "have any criminal convictions in the UK or any other  country
    (including traffic offences) or any civil judgments made  against  you"
    to which he had ticked the box saying "No".   When  asked  why  he  had
    ticked this box, given that  he  had  in  fact  received  a  very  long
    sentence of imprisonment, the claimant replied that  this  was  because
    when he was in prison he had been told that he did not have to  declare
    any convictions, except when he was working with children.  When it was
    pointed out to him that immediately above this  answer  it  was  stated
    that it was "an offence under Section 26(1)(c) of the  Immigration  Act
    1971 to make a statement or representation which you know to  be  false
    or do not believe to be true" the claimant merely repeated that it  was
    his understanding  that  he  did  not  have  to  declare  the  previous
    conviction unless he was working with children  or  vulnerable  people.
    He accepted, as he had to, that this was not stated on the form, and he
    also accepted that it was stated on the form that if he  gave  a  false
    answer he would be committing an offence.

50. The claimant was then asked some questions about his children and  also
    continued to deny that he had been guilty of the offence  of  which  he
    had been convicted.

51. With regard to a letter dated  30  November  2013  which  the  claimant
    claimed to have sent to the Mauritius High Commission (an unsigned copy
    was produced) in which the claimant asks the High Commission to  obtain
    the records  of  all  passports  he  had  travelled  on,  the  claimant
    confirmed that he had not followed up this letter in writing.  He  said
    he had spoken to the High Commission in "early January"  but  was  told
    that the person he needed to speak to was away and he had not  followed
    this up.

52. The claimant's wife  then  gave  evidence.   She  adopted  her  witness
    statement (at pages 4 to 6 of the claimant's bundle) in which  she  had
    said that her children would suffer if the  claimant  was  removed  and
    that she believed that her husband was innocent.  At  paragraph  15  of
    her statement, the claimant's wife had stated as follows:

         "15. It is now  been  alleged  that  my  husband  is  not  British.
             However this cannot be right.  My husband's  certificates  and
             with other of our documents were taken  away  by  the  customs
             officers when they arrested him.  They  never  returned  them.
             In fact I was told that they caught fire and  were  destroyed.
             The person who took his documents does not  work  for  Customs
             anymore."

53. There is no mention in this statement of any documents  being  lost  in
    1999.

54. While answering supplementary questions, Mrs S told the  Tribunal  that
    she worked for the Home Office in the detained fast  track  department.
    She had started working for the  Home  Office  in  2000  and  in  their
    immigration department since 2006.  She said that she was familiar with
    the asylum procedures and had  been  with  the  claimant  when  he  had
    applied for ILR, but then she said that she had not been with him  when
    he made that application, but she knew he had had ILR when they married
    because they had travelled together in 1998.  They had gone  to  France
    in April, Spain in the summer and the claimant  went  to  Mauritius  in
    August where she joined him in September.  Then they returned  back  to
    the UK in November 1998.

55. When asked whether she had seen the ILR  stamp  in  his  passport,  she
    replied that she had and that she sometimes had his passport with  her.
    She claimed to be "100% sure" of that.

56. When asked whether  the  couple  were  together  when  he  applied  for
    naturalisation, she said that they were  but  that  she  had  not  been
    involved in that application although she was aware  he  had  made  it.
    When asked when he had made it she said that it was probably in 1998 or
    1999, she was not too sure but it must be after they had returned  from
    Mauritius.  She said that he was naturalised, because he had  "received
    a certificate".  She had seen it with her own eyes, which she believed,
    when asked, was in 1999.  She knew it was a naturalisation  certificate
    because she was naturalised herself.  Again, she was 100% sure.

57. Mrs S told the Tribunal that if her husband  was  deported  this  would
    have a big impact on her children but she was sure he would not  commit
    any other offences, because he  was  not  that  sort  of  person.   She
    confirmed that she still did not believe  that  he  had  committed  the
    offence of which he had been convicted either.

58. In cross-examination, Mrs S said that she had met her husband  in  1997
    and he must have had ILR when they met, because  she  knew  he  had  it
    later when they travelled in 1998 and there had  been  no  conversation
    between them about his applying subsequently.

59. When asked why there was no mention of the  couple  travelling  in  her
    statement, Mrs S said she did not know  but  that  they  had  travelled
    together in 1998.  When it was put to her that there was no mention  of
    this in the claimant's statement either,  she  replied  that  the  Home
    Office must have some record because  they  had  filled  in  travelling
    cards at the time.  They had also filled in landing cards,  because  at
    that time she did not have a British passport.  When asked, Mrs S  said
    that they did have some pictures, for  example  they  had  visited  the
    Eiffel Tower in France in 1998, but it was correct that  none  of  this
    evidence had been put before the Tribunal.

60. Mrs S was then asked what had happened to the claimant's documents,  to
    which she replied that everything had been taken by Customs.

61. When asked to what documents she had been referring to at paragraph  15
    of her statement, when she had said that  the  claimant's  "certificate
    and with other of our documents were taken away by the customs officers
    when they arrested him" Mrs S said that she did not know what documents
    they took.  She was not there and when she arrived home they had  taken
    everything, her certificates, her passport and his passport.

62. When asked when she claimed to have seen her  husband's  naturalisation
    certificate, the witness said that she thought it was in 1999, but  she
    did not remember the month.  She had realised the document was  missing
    in 2000, when they had planned to go to a wedding in France and  needed
    to travel.  Because the claimant had a new passport, they had  gone  to
    Lunar House to get ILR endorsed on his new passport.

63. When asked why they had done this if the claimant was a British citizen
    at this time, she replied that this was "because he hadn't applied  for
    a British passport by that time".  They could not find anything.

64. When asked whether or not the claimant had made an attempt to apply for
    a British passport, she said that she thought he had but could  not  be
    sure when that was.  She did not know,  when  asked,  why  he  had  not
    applied for a British passport instead of trying to get an  ILR  stamp.
    When asked whether she had discussed this with him  at  the  time,  she
    said that maybe she had but she did not recall.

65. When asked whether it would have been easier to  travel  on  a  British
    passport as an EU citizen, she at first said that this was  not  really
    so, because if they were planning to go to  Mauritius  he  would  still
    need ILR.  She did not know whether it would be easier to travel  on  a
    British passport as an EU citizen.

66. When asked what steps they  had  taken  as  a  couple  to  correct  the
    situation and whether or not they  had  discussed  going  back  to  the
    solicitors who they said had dealt with the previous grant of  ILR  and
    the claimant's naturalisation  application  to  see  if  they  had  any
    documents, the witness said she did not recall.   She  had  been  "very
    young at the time and had just started working at the Home Office"  and
    "I didn't know anything about immigration".  She claimed that they  had
    just listened to what their solicitors had to tell them  at  the  time.
    She eventually recalled  their  name  as  Malik.   They  had  told  the
    claimant that he should sue the Home Office but because  she  had  just
    started working for the Home Office they did not wish to go  down  that
    route.

67. When asked again why she had said at paragraph 15 of her statement that
    these documents had been taken by customs  officers,  the  witness  had
    replied that she did not know what documents had been taken.

68. I record that at this point Ms Easty conceded that she was  "not  going
    to pretend there was not  an  apparent  discrepancy  in  the  evidence"
    although it would be her case that this had been dealt with in evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions

69. I then heard submissions on behalf of both parties.  On behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, Mr Avery accepted that at some stage  an  erroneous
    check had been carried out which suggested  that  the  claimant  was  a
    British national, but that numerous checks  had  been  made  since  and
    there was not the slightest bit of evidence produced to suggest that in
    fact he was.  Furthermore, despite this being a key factor in the case,
    no further evidence had been put  in  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  to
    support his contention that at any stage he had either been granted ILR
    or had been granted British citizenship.  Also, even though it was  the
    evidence of the claimant's wife that they had  had  documents  enabling
    them to travel, no evidence regarding this had been put in either.

70. The claimant claimed that he had had a further passport issued  to  him
    after the passport which  was  exhibited  at  D1  of  the  main  bundle
    onwards, into which his ILR stamp was placed, but he  had  produced  no
    evidence of this.  Nor had he produced evidence from either of the  two
    solicitors he said had worked for him, and so  had  not  satisfied  the
    burden of proof that he had British nationality.

71. With regard to the evidence of the claimant's wife, either she was  not
    telling the truth or  what  she  had  been  shown  which  she  believed
    indicated that the claimant had British citizenship was not  a  genuine
    document.  Also, with regard to her evidence, it is hard to  understand
    why if the claimant had indeed  been  granted  ILR  previously  or  had
    British citizenship he should have made a  subsequent  application  for
    ILR, rather than taking steps to confirm what they both  now  said  his
    true position had been.  The Secretary of State had made  enquiries  to
    establish whether there was anything in her  records  to  suggest  that
    enquiries had been made, but no records existed to show that they  had,
    which simply beggared belief.

72. With regard to Article 8, and whether removal would  be  proportionate,
    the Tribunal had heard the evidence and could make  its  own  mind  up.
    Although the claimant might present a low risk of re-offending, he  had
    not accepted responsibility for his  actions  and  also  had  shown  by
    stating on his application that he had no  previous  convictions,  that
    his evidence could not be relied upon.  Although there was  nothing  to
    suggest that he was not participating in family life, his crime in this
    case was extremely serious and his removal would be proportionate  even
    if one of its consequences was the break-up of his family.

73. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Easty referred to the "bad  old  days  in
    the 1990s" when Home Office files regularly went missing,  but  (as  Ms
    Easty asserted) "we know that the  sentencing  remarks  say  he  was  a
    British citizen".  However, when asked by the Tribunal to show where in
    the sentencing remarks this had been said, Ms Easty accepted that  this
    had not been  said  within  the  sentencing  remarks.   Ms  Easty  then
    referred to an email which is at page 54 of the  claimant's  bundle  in
    which reference had been made by a Home Office official to a  Jaysen  S
    who was said to be a British citizen, and enquiries made  in  2007/2008
    had apparently concluded that this  claimant  was  a  British  citizen,
    which was why no attempt had been made to deport him at that time.   It
    was asserted that no action had  been  taken  for  a  number  of  years
    because during these periods the Home  Office  had  accepted  that  the
    claimant was a British citizen and it was unclear where  the  Secretary
    of State had got this information from.

74. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether or not  it  was
    correct that no request had been made on behalf of the claimant for the
    Secretary of State to state where she had got this information from, Ms
    Easty replied that she would have requested it, but she had not  looked
    at this evidence before this hearing.  The Home Office were  saying  in
    the past that the claimant had been a British citizen and the  Tribunal
    had the benefit of the evidence of the claimant and his  wife,  and  it
    was also very significant evidence that the claimant's  wife  said  she
    had seen the relevant documents.

75. With regard to Article 8,  although  it  was  a  serious  offence,  the
    claimant had been assessed as representing a low risk of  re-offending.
    With regard to the consideration of Article  8  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, while the claimant would have to demonstrate that there  was  no
    other adult who could care for the children, it was her submission that
    "care" in this context meant the best care that the child would require
    and it was her case that these children would not be properly cared for
    under the Rules without the  care  of  both  parents,  including  their
    father.  Without his presence, they would not be cared for to the  same
    level as before, and accordingly there was not an appropriate adult who
    could care for them to the same level.

76. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to why if  her  submission
    was correct the Rules  did  not  refer  to  "primary  carer"  Ms  Easty
    submitted that in terms of  Article  8  simpliciter,  the  law  was  in
    disarray.

77. With regard to the claimant's assertion that he had been given ILR,  he
    might well have got settlement by working, or as a commonwealth student
    resident in the UK because we did not know if his parentage  or  grand-
    parentage were British.

Discussion

78. I have referred above to a considerable amount of  the  evidence  which
    was given by the claimant and his  wife  and  the  way  in  which  they
    answered questions in cross-examination because in the circumstances of
    this appeal I consider this evidence relevant to the decision I have to
    take as to whether or not this evidence is credible.  The  onus  is  on
    the claimant to establish on the balance of probabilities that he is  a
    British citizen (such that he cannot be deported) but  I  am  not  only
    unpersuaded to that degree that he is, but I am indeed convinced  to  a
    high degree of probability that he is not.  Having set out the evidence
    and submissions so fully above, I  can  summarise  my  reasons  for  so
    finding, which I do below.

79. I start by taking account of the chronology.

80. It is common ground that the appellant first entered  this  country  in
    1991, when he was 19,  and  that  his  visa  was  extended  on  several
    occasions until 1996.  As already noted, it is not entirely clear  what
    happened subsequently, because the Secretary of  State  contends  there
    was evidence that the claimant had left the UK in August 1995 to  visit
    Mauritius but there was no record of  his  having  re-entered  the  UK.
    There are also oddities within his earlier Mauritian  passport,  issued
    in 1990, which were  referred  to  at  paragraph  2  of  Judge  McKee's
    decision.

81. In any event, following various grants of  student  leave,  it  is  the
    claimant's case that in 1997 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.
     Although his Mauritian passport, which had been issued  in  1990,  was
    apparently valid for ten  years,  and  the  claimant  was  issued  with
    another passport in 2000 which says on its face that it was  valid  for
    ten years, there is no stamp on the passport  issued  in  1990  showing
    that ILR was granted in 1997.  The claimant's explanation now  is  that
    he had applied for a new passport by then, which has subsequently  been
    lost.   No  evidence  has  been  put  before  the  Tribunal  from   the
    authorities in Mauritius to support the contention that  this  claimant
    was ever issued with such a passport.

82. On the claimant's case, having been granted ILR in  1997,  he  received
    his  naturalisation  certificate,  confirming  that  he   was   now   a
    naturalised British citizen in 1999.  However, he no  longer  had  this
    document either, because (according to the statement  he  made  in  May
    2013) this document had been taken from his house by Customs and Excise
    after his arrest in 2002.  The next important date in the chronology is
    2001, when, notwithstanding that it is the claimant's case that he  had
    been granted ILR in 1997 and been naturalised as a British  citizen  in
    1999, the claimant made a further application for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of his marriage in that year.  Clearly, this calls  for  some
    explanation, as, without good explanation, it is astonishing that  this
    application was made if indeed by that time the claimant was a  British
    citizen.  This is all the more surprising as in his statement which was
    made for these proceedings in 2013, the claimant had stated that he had
    lost his naturalisation  certificate  when  it  was  taken  with  other
    documents by Customs and Excise in 2002  (which  if  correct  means  he
    would still have had it in 2001 when his further application for  leave
    to remain was made).

83. There  are  other  aspects  of  the  claimant's  case  which  call  for
    explanation, and it is because these aspects are so  important  that  I
    have recorded so much of his cross-examination above.

84. In a statement which the claimant made on 18 November 2012, in which he
    stated that he had applied for ILR in 1997 which had been  granted  and
    then in 1999 had applied for naturalisation,  following  which  he  had
    received a certificate from Liverpool, he stated that  "however  I  did
    not apply for a British passport".  In that document, he claims to have
    misplaced his documents in late 1999, and says that it was then that he
    reapplied for a new passport.  In that letter, he does not  attach  any
    extracts from what he now says was a five year passport issued in 1990.
     Nor does he make any mention of having renewed his passport before the
    expiry of its  ten  year  term  because  technology  had  changed  (the
    explanation apparently  given  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  to
    explain why he had the 1990 passport but no  longer  had  the  passport
    which he claimed covered the relevant years, as set out at paragraph  5
    of the panel's determination, referred to  above).   In  light  of  the
    claimant's statement that he had not applied for  a  British  passport,
    his answer in cross-examination that  he  had  applied  for  a  British
    passport in 2000 is also clearly inconsistent.

85. The absence of any  evidence  from  the  authorities  in  Mauritius  is
    significant.  Although the claimant produced a  letter  he  claimed  to
    have written to the High Commission on 30 November 2013,  in  which  he
    asked for any records  they  might  have  in  respect  of  his  various
    passport applications, in cross-examination, he confirmed that  he  had
    not followed this up.  He claimed that when he had spoken to  the  High
    Commission in "early January" he had been told the person he needed  to
    speak to was not available, because he was away.  Given the  importance
    of this evidence, I am unable  to  accept  this  explanation.   If  the
    claimant had indeed obtained a new passport before 1997 (either because
    his earlier passport had expired after five years or because  owing  to
    new technology he decided to obtain a new passport, depending on  which
    of his inconsistent explanations was accepted, if  either)  it  is  not
    credible that he would not have taken any  steps  he  could  to  obtain
    confirmation of this from the Mauritian authorities.  The fact that  he
    has  not  even  attempted  to  obtain   this   information   would   be
    extraordinary if there was any truth in his story.

86. As already noted above, when asked to explain how it was  that  he  had
    said in an earlier statement that he had not applied for a passport but
    had said in cross-examination that he had, the  best  answer  he  could
    give was that he had forgotten about it.  Again, I did not accept  this
    answer.  If he had applied for a passport, as he now claims,  he  would
    almost certainly have followed  this  up  when  the  passport  did  not
    arrive, and in those circumstances this is not something he would  have
    forgotten about.  Nor would his wife, who has also claimed to have been
    aware of his immigration position at this time.

87. Clearly, if the claimant's position was true, there were  a  number  of
    solicitors  who  might  have  been  in  a  position  to  confirm  this.
    Apparently, according to the claimant's account,  different  solicitors
    had  made  the  application   for   ILR   and   his   application   for
    naturalisation.  However, for different reasons, neither was available.
     On this aspect of  his  case  as  well  the  claimant's  evidence  was
    entirely unconvincing.  He at first claimed that he could not get  hold
    of the person who had been dealing with his application for ILR  at  JR
    Immigration, and that the different solicitor  who  had  submitted  his
    application for naturalisation was now  in  Mauritius.   However,  that
    does not explain why he had not obtained evidence from either solicitor
    in  2001,  instead  of  making  a  fresh  application  for  ILR.    The
    explanation he now gives is that he had been advised to go to Malik Law
    because they were a well-known firm, but there is no evidence from that
    firm either.  In the event, according  to  the  claimant  he  made  the
    application himself, because it would be a lot cheaper than using Malik
    Law.  In these circumstances, it is all  the  more  unbelievable  (when
    assessing whether the claimant's account should be  believed)  that  he
    did not at that stage seek  further  information  from  either  of  the
    solicitors who had been involved earlier, because their evidence  could
    have been crucial in establishing first that he had been given  ILR  in
    1997 and secondly that he had been naturalised in 1999.

88. With regard to the claimant's evidence  generally,  he  has,  as  noted
    above, continued to deny that he was guilty of the offence of which  he
    was convicted.  While, as the Court of Appeal noted in AM  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1634, there may be many reasons why a guilty  person  continues  to
    deny his guilt, and the fact that a person continues to deny his  guilt
    does not necessarily mean that he presents a high risk of  reoffending,
    this does not inspire  confidence  that  he  is  a  witness  of  truth.
    Further, when making his application for a "no time limit" stamp to  be
    put on his passport in 2011, when asked for his "nationality"  at  1.7,
    he had answered "Mauritian".  His answer,  when  questioned,  was  that
    this had been because the Home Office could  not  find  his  documents,
    begs the question of why he had not stated what he  claims  to  be  the
    true position, which is that he is a naturalised British  citizen.   If
    this was true, that is what  should  have  been  stated  at  the  time.
    Furthermore, at Section  3.1,  under  "personal  history"  within  this
    application, in answer to the  question  as  to  whether  he  had  "any
    criminal convictions in the UK or any other country (including  traffic
    offences)..." he had ticked the  box  saying  "no"  which  was  plainly
    untrue. The reason he gave, which was that he had  been  told  when  in
    prison that he did not have to declare any convictions, except when  he
    was working with children, does not explain why he gave this answer  to
    that question in circumstances where immediately above it was stated in
    terms that it was an offence to make a statement which was known to  be
    false or which the maker did not  believe  to  be  true.   Clearly  his
    answer was not true, and I do not accept his explanation as to  why  he
    did not tell the truth on this form.

89. With regard to the evidence of the claimant's wife, who says  that  she
    remembered seeing his passport which  he  now  claimed  to  have  lost,
    containing the ILR stamp which he says he had, her  evidence  had  been
    that this document had been taken away by customs officers and she  had
    been told that the documents taken  had  either  caught  fire  or  been
    destroyed, and there was no mention in  the  statement  which  she  had
    previously made of any documents being lost in 1999.

90. When asked why in 2000 the couple had gone to Lunar House in  order  to
    get ILR endorsed on the claimant's new passport, if indeed the claimant
    was a British citizen at this time, she replied that this was  "because
    he had not applied for a British passport by this  time"  but  she  was
    unable now to say whether or not he had made any attempt to apply for a
    British passport, or if he had when that was, or why he had not applied
    for a British passport instead of trying to get an ILR stamp.

91. As already noted above, even Ms Easty, representing  the  claimant  was
    obliged to concede that she could not pretend that "there  was  not  an
    apparent discrepancy in the evidence".

92. While the evidence submitted on behalf of the claimant  (including  the
    evidence given by his wife) contains so many  glaring  inconsistencies,
    other than that the Secretary of State on a previous occasion acted  on
    the basis that the claimant was a British citizen and Mrs S  says  that
    she believes she saw an ILR stamp in a  passport  which  is  now  lost,
    there  is  no  evidence  corroborating  the  claimant's  account.   The
    Secretary of State has carried out extensive checks but has been unable
    to find any evidence supporting the claimant's contentions either  that
    he was granted ILR in 1997 or that he was a naturalised British citizen
    in 1999.  The conduct of the claimant has,  as  indicated  above,  been
    consistently inconsistent with his having either been  granted  ILR  or
    been naturalised.  Evidence which should have been  available  had  his
    account been true has not been adduced and the  explanations  given  by
    and  on  behalf  of  the  claimant  have  been  inconsistent  and   not
    believable.

93. It is, of course, incumbent on the claimant to establish his  case,  on
    the balance of probabilities, but in my judgment he has not come  close
    to this.  Having considered all the evidence in the  round,  I  do  not
    believe that he was granted ILR in 1997 or that he was naturalised as a
    British citizen in 1999.  I do not accept his explanation as to why  it
    was that he applied for ILR after  apparently  been  naturalised  as  a
    British citizen or why it is that at no stage has he made  any  serious
    attempt to  obtain  evidence  from  those  who,  if  his  evidence  was
    truthful, could have assisted him, in  particular  the  authorities  in
    Mauritius and his former solicitors, who may have been able to  provide
    evidence of the applications he says they made on his behalf.   I  also
    consider that the reason why the claimant was so vague as to  what  the
    basis was on which the application for ILR was apparently made in  1997
    is that no such application was made.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
    having considered the evidence given by both the claimant and his wife,
    I am not satisfied to the requisite standard of proof that  either  are
    witnesses of truth.

94. For the reasons I have given, I am not satisfied that the claimant  has
    established that he is a British citizen, and  accordingly  his  appeal
    cannot succeed on that ground.

95. I accordingly turn now to consider the  claimant's  argument  that  his
    deportation would not be proportionate for Article 8 purposes.  I  deal
    first of all with Ms Easty's argument that although under the Rules the
    claimant would have to demonstrate that there was no  other  adult  who
    could care for the children, "care" in this context meant the best care
    that the child would require which  meant  the  care  of  both  parents
    including their father.  In making this submission, Ms Easty  contended
    that the law was "in disarray" regarding this point.  In  my  judgment,
    this is simply unarguable.  The Rules are clear, and the  children  can
    go on being cared for by their mother, as they were while the  claimant
    was in prison.

96. I do not need to set out the jurisprudence in any great detail.  As the
    Court of Appeal found in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the Tribunal
    first has to consider whether or not the deportation of this  appellant
    would be disproportionate within paragraphs 398, 399 and  399A  of  the
    Rules.  The claimant does not  come  within  the  provisions  of  these
    Rules, and it is not arguable that  the  children  cannot  be  properly
    cared for unless both parents are present in this country.  If that  is
    what the Rules had intended to say, they would have said so.

97. As is made clear by the Court of Appeal in both  MF  (Nigeria)  and  SS
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550, although the Tribunal must then consider
    whether or not outside these provisions it was still arguable that  the
    deportation of an applicant was disproportionate, the cases where  this
    would be found to be so would be very rare and the arguments to support
    such a finding would have to be very compelling.  My starting point  in
    this case (where the automatic deportation provisions apply) has to  be
    the extreme seriousness of  the  offence  of  which  the  claimant  was
    convicted, for which he was sentenced to fifteen  years'  imprisonment.
    This offence is so serious (involving large-scale importation  of  very
    dangerous drugs) that for reasons of general deterrence as well as  the
    expression of the revulsion of the  public  towards  offences  of  this
    kind, it is very much in the public interest to  deport  those  foreign
    criminals convicted of such offences.  While there is clearly a  family
    life between the claimant and the children, as Sedley  LJ  acknowledged
    in AD Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348 (at paragraph 27) one of the consequences
    of deportation is that in cases such as this, a family  will  be  split
    up, because "that is what deportation does".  The  public  interest  in
    deporting this claimant is so great that even  though  his  deportation
    will involve the break-up of his family, this factor does not  outweigh
    the legitimate public interest in his deportation.  Even the First-tier
    Tribunal panel, which allowed his appeal,  acknowledged  that  on  this
    aspect of the case, the factor which it considered  tipped  the  scales
    was that he was, in their  judgment,  a  naturalised  British  citizen,
    which finding has  been  set  aside.   The  claimant  has  not,  in  my
    judgement, established that the consequences of his  removal  would  be
    "unjustifiably harsh". Although the consequences might be  regarded  as
    "harsh"  (in  that  his  family  will  be  split  up)   this   is   not
    "unjustifiable" in the context of his extremely serious offending.

98. It follows that the claimant's appeal must be dismissed, and I so find.



Anonymity direction

99. An anonymity direction has previously been made, and no application has
    been made to discharge this direction.  Accordingly, no report  can  be
    published which identifies Mr S or his family.



Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Dated: 25 July 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
