

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00441/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th November 2013                         |On 28 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Godfrey mutekedza
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Martin, senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Manning, counsel, instructed by French and
                    Company solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State (hereafter the SSHD) appeals against a decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth allowing the appeal by
      Mr Mutekedza (the claimant), who is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 18th
      April 1981, against a decision of the respondent dated  12th  February
      2013 refusing to revoke a deportation order.


      Immigration background


   2. The claimant arrived in the UK in May 2002  and  claimed  asylum.  The
      application was refused. There does not appear to have been an  appeal
      against any subsequent decision to refuse him leave to enter the UK or
      to remove him from the UK. On 8th August 2007 a deportation order  was
      signed pursuant to a conviction. On 6th June 2009 a further claim  for
      asylum was made and on 24th August 2012 an  application  was  made  to
      revoke the deportation order. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that
      the claimant was a persistent offender.


   3. The essence of the challenge to that determination is as follows:  the
      First-tier Tribunal failed

   a. to have regard to the  Immigration  Rules  in  making  its  Article  8
      assessment; the Tribunal had no regard to the  Immigration  Rules  and
      failed to consider public  policy  considerations  against  individual
      family and private life rights;
   b. to give any or any adequate reasons for findings on material  matters;
      in particular treated the claimant's 11 years residence as a  positive
      factor; failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the  claimant
      had been rehabilitated when he had continued to offend; failed to give
      adequate reasons as to why  the  circumstances  at  the  time  of  the
      assault on police "merited any discretion being made", failed to  give
      adequate reasons for finding it was in his son's best interest for him
      to remain in the UK.




     4.  In  oral  submissions  Ms  Martin  expanded  upon  these  grounds,
        referring inter alia to the  child's  mother  being  in  employment
        despite her illness; that the claimant was only a partial carer for
        his son; that the judge had failed to place sufficient weight  upon
        the public interest in removal;  failed  to  take  account  of  the
        increasing seriousness of the claimant's criminality  and  his  own
        finding that he is persistent offender. Ms Manning referred to  the
        overall consideration given by the judge and that he  was,  on  the
        evidence before him entitled to reach  the  findings  he  did.  She
        specifically asserted that the reference in  the  determination  to
        the claimant having been in the UK was  a  fact,  not  a  "positive
        factor". She asserted that the judge  considered  the  evidence  as
        regards his alcohol treatment, his explanation given  with  regards
        the most recent offence and that the judge specifically referred to
        the  decision  being  finely  balanced.  The  SSHD   accepted   the
        relationship between the claimant and his son as per the reason for
        refusal letter.


     5.  There are  some  superficial  inconsistencies  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal determination: in [27] the judge  refers  to  it  being  a
        "conducive" deportation decision although he does also refer  to  a
        "great deal" having happened since the order  was  made.  He  later
        refers correctly [28] to the deportation decision having been  made
        pursuant to a court  recommendation  six  years  earlier.  He  also
        states, rather inexplicably, that the conducive  decision  did  not
        result in custodial sentence. It seems this is a  rather  inelegant
        way of expressing the fact that although an  order  consequent  and
        ancillary  to  the  sentence  for   the   index   offence   was   a
        recommendation  for  deportation,  there  had  been  no   custodial
        sentence for that offence. In [33] he sets out the correct position
        namely  that  the  issue  "revolves  around  whether  the  [SSHD's]
        decision  to  refuse   to   revoke   the   deportation   order   is
        proportionate....".

     6. The judge sets out clearly and concisely the evidence  before  him.
        He refers to the great weight placed by  the  respondent  upon  the
        claimant's offending and he clearly accepts the seriousness of this
        in finding that the claimant is a persistent offender.  He  records
        the evidence before him and states [28] that he has considered  the
        SSHD's guidance but that  it  was  not  "really  relevant"  to  the
        claimant. He refers to the deportation  order  having  been  signed
        some 6 years earlier.

     7. Having arrived at that position the judge went on to carry  out  an
        assessment of the article 8 claim, not  within  the  scope  of  the
        immigration rules, but by applying an assessment guided by the five
        step approach provided by Razgar, R  (on  the  Application  of)  v.
        Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27.  The
        judge cannot be criticised for that because in  doing  so  she  was
        following the approach indicated as the correct one by the reported
        case of MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC)
        (31 October 2012). As has now been  made  clear  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
        [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 in fact the rules do provide a  complete  code
        and so it is not necessary to look outside them.  That  is  because
        paragraph 398 provides that:

           :... the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
           factors."


         It is,  therefore,  at  this  stage  that  everything  relevant  is
         considered as the decision maker looks at the "other  factors"  not
         relevant to the application of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  to  see
         whether they outweigh the public interest in deportation.  That  is
         the same exercise of  striking  a  balance  between  the  competing
         interests in play as this judge carried out by applying the  Razgar
         analysis. True  it  is  that  paragraph  398  speaks  in  terms  of
         circumstances being "exceptional" but, as was pointed  out  by  the
         Master of the Rolls in MF (Nigeria) that has to  be  considered  in
         the light of the "Criminality Guidance for Article  8  ECHR  cases:
         issued by the respondent to decision makers:

           "... "exceptional"  means  circumstances  in  which  deportation
           would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   the
           individual or their family such that deportation  would  not  be
           proportionate. That is likely to be the case only very rarely."

     8. Thus although the judge has not  followed  the  route  through  the
        Rules, it is relevant to assess whether he has in any  event  taken
        all factors into  account  in  reaching  his  conclusion  upon  the
        article 8 claim.


     9. The judge specifically  takes  account  of  the  breakdown  in  the
        relationship between the claimant and the child's  mother[41];  the
        fragility of the claimant's immigration status when  they  met  and
        she became pregnant [43]; the primary importance of the child  [45,
        46]; that the child's mother  is  the  principle  carer  [47];  the
        mother's medical problems [48 -53]; that the  relationship  between
        the claimant and his own mother is not one of dependency [54]; that
        there is nothing other  than  unremarkable   about  the  claimant's
        length of residence  [55];  his  offending  behaviour  [56-65,  67,
        69,70, 73] including the lack of custodial sentences  and  lack  of
        any pre sentence reports but including the probation service letter
        of 2nd May 2013; that  the  assault  on  the  police  although  not
        considered by the SSHD was treated by the judge  as  an  indication
        that there should be no exercise  of  discretion;  the  substantial
        changes made by the claimant [66-68]. The judge records that  there
        was agreement by both representatives that the decision was  finely
        balanced [71].

    10. Although it is possible that the judge could have expressed himself
        more clearly in some respects, what is  beyond  doubt  is  that  he
        carefully considered the whole  of  the  evidence  before  him  and
        reached a reasoned and broadly coherent decision. His decision,  as
        acknowledged by the SSHD's and the claimant's representatives could
        have gone either way. This was a  fact  based  assessment  for  the
        judge to carry out as he struck the balance between  the  competing
        interests in play and, having  hear  oral  evidence,  he  was  best
        placed to do. That he reached the decision he did  after  full  and
        considered deliberation is not as a result of lack of reasoning  or
        unreasonable or perverse fact finding.

    11. There is no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
        determination such as to set aside the decision.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  judge
stands.









                                    Date
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
