
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by ATLEU


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C M Phillips promulgated on 20  October  2015
    in which she allowed the appeal of [RN] against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to revoke a deportation order.  The appeal
    was allowed on a relatively limited basis, the judge recording that, by
    concession the appeal is allowed on Article 8 human rights to allow the
    respondent to continue her appeals  against  the  adoption  order,  the
    period of Article 8 leave to be granted being in the discretion of  the
    Secretary of State.  The judge also made an anonymity order.

 2. It is unnecessary to go into the particular facts of  this  case  which
    are extremely  complex  and  as  there  are,  as  accepted,  continuing
    proceedings in the family court.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  this
    decision primarily on the basis that the Secretary  of  State  had  not
    conceded that the appeal should be allowed under  Article  8  and  also
    that the judge had failed properly to apply the law as set  out  in  RS
    (Immigration and Family Court Proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 218.

 4. Mr Duffy and Miss Cronin both accepted that the primary issue  here  is
    whether in fact there had been a concession and to what extent  it  was
    made. It is important to set out exactly what was said in  the  grounds
    at paragraph 8:

         "The judge has  stated  at  [29]  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
         representative conceded that the appeal  should  be  allowed  under
         Article 8 ECHR.  This is not accepted.  It  is  contended  that  no
         such concession was made at any time.  It is respectfully submitted
         that the judge's erroneous  indication  that  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal was conceded by the Secretary of State amounts to a material
         legal error."

 5. Whilst it does go on to submit that in the alternative the Secretary of
    State's appeal should still be allowed that is not  a  point  which  Mr
    Duffy pressed on me today.

 6. Turning to evidence of whether there was a concession or  not,  I  have
    now belatedly been supplied with a note  signed  by  Miss  Ayodele  who
    represented  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Phillips.  Materially it says:

         "During the evidence in chief it turned out  that  appellant  still
         had a case with COA in relation to  getting  her  child  back  from
         adoption ...

         At that stage, [that is after examination-in-chief], IJ stated  she
         was minded to allow appeal under Article 8 in light of the case law
         that SoS should grant some form of DL [discretionary leave] for the
         appellant to pursue her case with COA.

         I asked IJ rather than allow whether she should consider  remitting
         but she had made up her mind to allow. Reps also  argued  that  the
         appellant should be entitled to D/L.  IJ allowed the  appeal  under
         Article 8 and will send back to the Secretary  of  State  to  grant
         some form of DL."

 7. There is also a statement  from  Miss  Louise  Hooper  of  Counsel  who
    represented the claimant at the appeal. Attached to the  statement  are
    Miss Hooper's written notes from the hearing which had been  typed  up.
    Her statement records  [2] as follows:-

         "I have a very clear recollection that the presenting officer agree
         with the Immigration Judge that the appeal should be allowed and Ms
         N granted leave to remain."

    She then sets out why that is so.

 8. Ms Hooper also states [2 iii)] that, after calling live  evidence  from
    the respondent:

    "ii)     ...the Immigration Judge enquired as to  whether  I  would  be
         satisfied if she were to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds  and
         not deal with the asylum trafficking  matters  which  would  remain
         outstanding and to be dealt with if and when necessary.  I  stepped
         outside to take instructions and having explained the  implications
         of the grant of limited leave I obtained the consent of  my  client
         to the outcome proposed by the judge.

     iv) The Judge then sought confirmation from the Presenting Officer that
         she was happy with that course of action.  The  Presenting  Officer
         indicated that this course was  acceptable  for  the  Secretary  of
         State as recorded and described in the judge's determination."

 9. Ms Hooper concludes at [4]:

         "I can confirm therefore  that  the  concession  was  made  by  the
         Presenting Officer in the  terms  outlined  by  the  judge  in  her
         determination and that as Counsel I and my client relied upon  this
         concession in agreeing that the  asylum  and  human  rights  matter
         could be stayed and reconsidered if necessary  after  Miss   N  was
         granted determinative discretionary leave.

10. It is important to note also what is recorded by Judge Phillips in  her
    notes.  She states:

         "Both reps agree ... that in line of the case law  referred  to  in
         the skeleton and Mohammed [2014] UKUT 419 the  revocation  decision
         should be remitted i.e. the appeal allowed to the extent  that  the
         period of Article 8 leave be granted to allow family proceedings to
         conclude this would give time for applicants to seek a solicitor if
         so advised"

    The notes then go on with other matters which are less legible.

11. Whilst I note that Mr Duffy submits that the concession does not appear
    to have been in terms recorded by the judge, taking  into  account  the
    evidence of Miss Hooper and the judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  I  am
    satisfied that in reality the concession made was as  set  out  in  the
    judge's notes, the decision and in  what  is  said  by  Ms  Hooper.  Ms
    Ayodele's notes are less detailed than the evidence of  Ms  Hooper  and
    make no positive statements about what she said. I therefore prefer the
    evidence of Ms Hooper and the Judge that there was in fact a concession
    in the terms recorded.

12. I therefore find that the Secretary of State has not satisfied me  that
    there was any error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    capable of affecting the outcome. I do not consider  in  light  of  the
    terms of the concession which was consistent with case  law,  that  the
    judge was in the alternative bound to  consider  other  matters  as  is
    averred in paragraph 9 of the grounds, and I am not satisfied  for  the
    sake of completeness that the judge erred in  her  application  of  the
    relevant case law in this case RS (Mohammad).

13. What I find particularly troubling in this case  is  the  assertion  in
    grounds of appeal that "there was  no  concession  whatsoever  of  this
    type".  It is difficult to conclude that  that  statement  is  entirely
    candid or complies with the standards that  are  to  be  expected  from
    litigants before this Tribunal.

14. I am satisfied therefore that this is a case in which it  may  well  be
    proper to award the  costs incurred by the claimant  in  responding  to
    this appeal given that it is  not  at  all  clear  that  had  the  true
    position  been  put  before  the  judge  who  granted  permission  that
    permission would have been granted.

15. I therefore adjourn the  issue  of  whether  costs  should  be  awarded
    against  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representatives in this case to a further hearing in respect of which I
    will give directions The Secretary of State is also put on notice  that
    if she unsuccessfully resists the costs order then she  may  well  face
    the paying the respondent's costs of the further hearing.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. The issue of whether and to what extent the Secretary of  State  and/or
    her  representatives  must  bear  the  respondent's  costs  is  to   be
    considered at a further hearing in respect of which directions set  out
    below shall apply.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given that much of these proceedings relate to a child who  is  involved  in
proceedings before the Family Courts, and in order to  protect  the  child's
identify, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
respondent is granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify the respondent, the  respondent's  child  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Directions with respect to the adjourned hearing to consider costs.

      1) The matter be listed on the first available date after 4 April 2016
         with a time estimate of 2 hrs to deal with the following issues:

          a. Whether the Secretary of State shall be ordered to pay all  or
             part of the Respondent's costs incurred in connection with the
             appeal before the Upper Tribunal; and/or whether the Secretary
             of State's representatives shall be ordered to pay all or part
             of the Respondent's costs  incurred  in  connection  with  the
             appeal before the Upper Tribunal;

          b. The summary assessment of the amount of any such costs.

      2) Within 7 days of the issue of these directions the Respondent shall
         file and serve a schedule of costs setting out her costs, including
         an estimate of future costs include the costs hearing

      3) Within 14 days of the issue of these directions:

          a. The Secretary  of   State  shall  file  and  serve  a  witness
             statement together with any evidence in support in response to
             the Respondent's application for costs;

          b. The Secretary of State and/or  her  officers  shall  file  and
             serve a witness statement  or  statements  together  with  any
             evidence in support showing  cause  why  they  should  not  be
             ordered to pay all or part of the Respondent's costs  incurred
             in connection with the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

      4) Within 21 days of the issue  of  these  directions  the  Respondent
         shall (if so advised) file and serve any evidence in reply.

      5) If either party fails to comply with these  directions  within  the
         time period given, they will be deemed to be  no  longer  resisting
         the  application  for  costs  or  no  longer   seeking   costs   as
         appropriate.


Signed   Date: 12 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

