
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00840/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 September 2013                          |On 24th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR



                                   Between

                          rochelle tiffaNy bennett

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Kiai of Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 21 September 1987.    She
    arrived in this country at the age 14 on a visit visa in the year 2009.
      She  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  2002  but  this
    application was refused  in  2003.   She  made  a  further  application
    seeking leave as the family member of her aunt on 16 February 2005  but
    that application was not considered until 17 October 2012.

2.   Meanwhile on 22 October 2010 the appellant was convicted of  harassment
    and blackmail and sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.   At  the
    time of her sentence she was four months  pregnant  and  her  daughter,
    Maddison, was born on 12 April 2011.  Maddison  was  removed  from  her
    care at birth and placed into foster care because of threats being made
    against the unborn  child prior to delivery.  On 16 May  2011  Maddison
    was placed in the care of the appellant's aunt.  On 15 August  2012  it
    was determined by the Family Court that the appellant's  aunt  and  her
    husband should be appointed as special guardians for  Maddison.  On  16
    October 2012 the appellant had a second  child,  Kingston,  and  on  29
    March 2013 the  appellant's  aunt  and  uncle  were  appointed  special
    guardians of Kingston.

3.   When sentencing the  appellant  for  the  offences  of  harassment  and
    blackmail, the judge noted  that  the  appellant  had  been  given  the
    opportunity to be assessed by  a  psychiatrist  but  had  declined  the
    opportunity.  The appellant's barrister had made it  quite  clear  that
    she wished to be dealt with without delay and were the judge to adjourn
    the case further she would again not cooperate and would not  agree  to
    be interviewed by a psychiatrist.  The offences, the judge stated, were
    directed against the 60 year  old  mother  of  her  ex-boyfriend.   The
    threats included threats to burn her house down.  There were  long  and
    abusive phone calls made to her  demanding  money.   She  maintained  a
    campaign  of  threats  and  intimidation  against  her.   She   had   a
    devastating affect on her victim's life.  The judge noted the appellant
    was aged 23 and had  convictions  but  only  for  assaulting  a  police
    officer and for disorderly behaviour.  A credit was given for the  plea
    of guilty.  The sentences were imposed to run concurrently.

4.   In the light of her  conviction  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to
    deport the appellant under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007,
    the appellant having been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
    least twelve months. The Secretary of State's  decision  was  dated  16
    October 2012 and it turns out that the appellant's  second   child  was
    born on that date.

5.   The appellant appealed  against  the  decision  and  her  hearing  came
    before a panel on 29 May  2013.   The  panel  was  invited  to  adjourn
    matters, remitting the case to the Secretary of State to  consider  the
    issue in the light of the fact that the  appellant  had  had  a  second
    child born  and  the  Secretary  of  State  should  consider  the  best
    interests of the appellant's second child.  The panel  declined  to  do
    this and distinguished the case  of  Tinizaray  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2011]  EWHC  Admin  1850.   The  Tribunal  noted  all   the   relevant
    information concerning the best interests of the second child had  been
    placed before it.  The panel was in as good a position as the Secretary
    of State to discharge the statutory obligations under  Section  55.   A
    refusal to remit the matter to the respondent  would  not  prevent  the
    just disposal of the appeal and if anything the best interests  of  the
    two minor children dictate that the appeal be dealt with expeditiously.

6.   The panel heard oral evidence from the appellant as  well  as  evidence
    from the appellant's cousins and her aunt.  The panel set out a summary
    of the oral and documentary evidence in paragraphs  13  to  17  of  the
    determination.  Having reminded itself of the need to consider the best
    interests  of  the  children  it  summarised  the  expert  evidence  in
    paragraphs 21 to 23 of its determination as follows:

         "21. We find it convenient, to begin our consideration of the  best
             interests of the children, by providing the following  summary
             of the  expert  evidence  that  guided  the  Family  Court  in
             concluding that it would be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
             children that the not be reunited with the appellant and  that
             the appellant's aunt and uncle be appointed as  their  special
             guardians.

             (i)  In his report of 29 April 2013 Dr Dale states that

                  Appellant  would  benefit  from  psychotherapy  and  would
                  require it for a sustained period of time. If she complies
                  there would be a real prospect of meaningful change. It is
                  only when the appellant's immigration status  is  resolved
                  that some insight could be gained into  whether  appellant
                  is able to sustain an intensive period of treatment  which
                  would be long term and intensive over  a  period  of  two,
                  possibly three years. As to the impact of  deportation  on
                  her and the children, he states that she has strong family
                  support in the UK and would be isolated  in  Jamaica,  and
                  would lose the benefit of the opportunity to  receive  the
                  treatment that he has in mind  for  her.  Her  deportation
                  would have an adverse effect on her relationships with her
                  children.


             (ii)     Ms Larmie, a social worker  appointed  by  the  local
                  authority compiled a report, dated April 2013, on the best
                  interests of the appellant's second  child  Kingston.  She
                  notes that:

                  Appellant has demonstrated the ability to provide positive
                  practical  and  warm  emotional  care  to  Kingston.   She
                  observed  positive  and  warm  interaction   between   the
                  appellant and her children during contact  visits.  It  is
                  clear that the appellant was able to attune to  his  needs
                  and she loves her son and wants to provide permanent  care
                  for him. Kingston's needs will increase as he grows  older
                  and the appellant's diagnosis  of  borderline  personality
                  disorder and  emotional  behavioural  instability  implies
                  high level of risk with regards  to  consistent  and  safe
                  parenting. She has engaged with counsellors  well  but  at
                  time gives in to anger.  Her continued engagement  in  the
                  medium to long term cannot  be  guaranteed,  nor  can  her
                  engagement with professionals to  ensure  that  Kingston's
                  needs are appropriately met are assured.


             (iii)    Cafcass, appointed  as  the  children's  guardian  in
                  October 2012, states, in its April 2013  Final  Report  to
                  Family Court that:

                  Care proceedings in respect of both children stemmed  from
                  a diagnosis of emotionally unstable  personality  disorder
                  and a history of cannabis use,  a  chaotic  lifestyle  and
                  domestic  violence.   Kingston  would  be   at   risk   of
                  significant harm as a result of the detrimental impact  on
                  him of his  mother's  personality  disorder  and  historic
                  concerns  raised  about  the  appellant   being   involved
                  cannabis use, and being  involved  in  a  relationship  in
                  which she was the victim of domestic violence.   It  would
                  be in the appellant's interests  and  would  help  her  as
                  parent  in  the  future  if  she   were   to   engage   in
                  psychotherapy for her personality disorder.

             (iv) Sheila Sidhu, an independent social worker, states in her
         report that:


                  She observed good contact between the  appellant  and  her
                  children.    The  appellant  has  begun  to  address   her
                  cannabis misuse. She is however not yet able to assume the
                  care of her children. Her own  difficult  experiences  and
                  unresolved personal issues and  diagnosis  of  personality
                  disorder  indicate  that  she  would  struggle   to   meet
                  Kingston's emotional needs as he gets older.


             (v)  Dr Castle, in his  March  2013  update  on  his  original
                  diagnosis, states that:


                  Appellant has begun to address her cannabis  use  and  has
                  independently sought mental health treatment.   She  needs
                  sustained treatment for change to take  place.  In  recent
                  meetings she seemed courteous and intelligent and  capable
                  of recollection and was able to demonstrate  some  insight
                  and  has  been  able  to  accept  responsibility  for  her
                  actions.


                  Appellant  was  keen  to  know  the  process  for  her  to
                  discharge the special order. She was vehemently opposed to
                  the prospect of adoption of her children  by  the  special
                  guardians and had made threatening comments.  She  is  not
                  comfortable with the idea of  Kinston  being  attached  to
                  someone else.


                  Cafcass recommends generous contact with  Kingston  -  but
                  this is predicated on the  basis  that  the  appellant  is
                  supportive of the children placements and that she is able
                  to work positively with her aunt who will be  his  primary
                  carer.  She needs to  understand  that  her  own  role  in
                  Kingston's upbringing will be limited. Kingston will  need
                  to develop an attachment to his primary carer as this will
                  become his  family  home.   This  is  likely  to  be  very
                  difficult for the appellant and the hope is expressed that
                  the therapy she requires will be in place to support  her.
                   It is clear that the appellant  will  never  be  able  to
                  support any plans by her  aunt  and  uncle  to  adopt  her
                  children if the  decide  to  adopt  this  plan  will  have
                  serious implications for the stability  of  the  placement
                  and could compromise contact between  appellant  and  both
                  her children in the future.  This is an area  which  needs
                  further consideration.

         22.  In summary, the salient features that emerge from the opinions
             of  the  various  experts,  and  that  are  relevant  to   the
             assessment for the best interests for  the  children  are  the
             following:

             (i)  The clinical diagnosis is that the appellant suffers from
                  Emotional Unstable Personality Disorder. Her condition  is
                  treatable but this would require intensive therapy over  a
                  sustained period of up to three years.  The appellant has,
                  in recent months, shown a willingness to engage  with  her
                  counsellors and a genuine commitment  to  receiving  help.
                  She is intelligent and articulate and has the capacity  to
                  show insight into her behaviour and its consequences.


             (ii)     The children are in immediate need of  a  stable  and
                  permanent environment which the appellant is not  able  to
                  provide in the short and in the long term given  the  time
                  frame it is likely to take for the full  benefits  of  her
                  treatment to take effect.  It is not therefore in the best
                  interests of the children for them to be reunited with the
                  appellant.  The arrangements with  the  special  guardians
                  are  therefore  permanent  and  will  endure  until   both
                  children reach the age of maturity.


             (iii)    It would be in the interests of the children to  have
                  contact with the appellant and  to  that  end  formal  and
                  informal contact arrangements have been put  it  place  as
                  part of the care plan.   Although  the  special  guardians
                  shall be the primary carers, it is contemplated  that  the
                  appellant  will  be  consulted  when  important  decisions
                  concerning the children have to be made.


             (iv)      The  appellant  has  a  strong  commitment  to   her
                  children.  She  has  a  difficult  relationship  with  her
                  daughter, partly, because of her separation  from  her  at
                  birth and the  lack  regular  contact  in  the  first  six
                  months. Her ultimate wish is that her  son  Kingston  will
                  return to her.  It  was  with  real  reluctance  that  she
                  consented to the award of special guardianship to her aunt
                  and uncle.  She is strongly opposed to the children  being
                  adopted by the special guardians and  has  intimated  that
                  this might  push  her  over  the  edge.   The  appellant's
                  opposition  to  the  adoption  of   the   children   could
                  destabilise the children's placement in the future.

         23.  It is clear in our assessment that the best interests  of  the
             children have been served by the appointment  of  the  special
             guardians who will provide them with a stable upbringing,  the
             care plan recognises the importance of the children  retaining
             contact with their mother and to that end provides for  formal
             contact six times a year and also makes provision for informal
             contact.  However, the experts recognise that there  would  be
             serious implications for the stability of the children, if the
             guardians adopt  the  children,  because  of  the  appellant's
             vehement opposition to such a plan.  In our view the available
             evidence points  to  the  real  likelihood  of  the  appellant
             causing long term  instability  to  the  children's  placement
             because of her difficulty, which we do not believe  is  easily
             overcome, even with therapy, in accepting the limited role she
             will apply in the children's upbringing."

 7.  The  panel  then  turned  to  consider  the  guidance  in  Uner  v  The
    Netherlands [2006] ECHR 873 concluding its determination as follows:

         "25.  In considering  proportionality  we  take  into  account  the
             following factors:


             (i)  The gravity of the offence  the  appellant  committed  is
                  reflected in the length of the sentence she  received.  As
                  the sentencing judge observed, the appellant subjected  an
                  elderly  lady  to  a  campaign  of  threats  that  had   a
                  devastating effect on her life.


             (ii)     The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  at  the
                  young age of  14.   She  attended  school  in  the  United
                  Kingdom. She has established  strong  social,  family  and
                  cultural ties.  Her mother and  brother  live  in  Jamaica
                  but, as the  experts  have  observed,  she  enjoys  strong
                  family support and ties in the United Kingdom and would be
                  isolated in Jamaica.  We  accept  that  the  appellant  is
                  devoted to her children and that her separation from  them
                  would be devastating for her.  The medical evidence  shows
                  that she needs long term therapy for  her  condition,  and
                  whilst some form of mental health  care  is  available  in
                  Jamaica, we accept the expert opinion that her deportation
                  would deprive her of the very specific treatment plan that
                  would be put in place for  her  if  she  were  allowed  to
                  remain in the United Kingdom.


             (iii)    We accept that it would be in the best  interests  of
                  the children if the appellant were, through  the  proposed
                  treatment plan, to achieve a level of emotional  stability
                  that would enable her to develop  a  healthy  relationship
                  with her children. It is clear that the placement  of  the
                  children  with  the  special  guardians  meet  their  best
                  interests.  The guardians intend at some stage to formally
                  adopt the children, a development that would enhance their
                  best interests.  We have real concerns that the  appellant
                  will have difficulty in allowing the children  to  develop
                  strong and parental bonds with their primary  carers.   In
                  this regard the real potential for the  stability  of  the
                  children's placement to  undergo  serious  disruption,  is
                  clear  from  the  evidence  placed  before  us.   We   are
                  concerned that this would  seriously  undermine  the  best
                  interests of the children and their long term future.


             (iv)     The appellant's deportation is supported by important
                  public interest considerations.  We accept that  the  risk
                  of  the  appellant  reoffending  is  low.   However,   her
                  deportation would serve the public interest  in  deterring
                  others from committing offences in the  first  place.  Her
                  deportation  also  expresses  society's  condemnation   of
                  serious criminal activity and promotes  public  confidence
                  in the treatment of foreign citizens  who  have  committed
                  them.


             (v)  It is right that we  recognise  that  the  weight  to  be
                  attached to the public interest in this case is reduced by
                  the respondent's delay of  seven  years  in  deciding  the
                  appellant's application for leave to  remain.   We  cannot
                  dismiss as fanciful the  appellant's  assertion  that  her
                  uncertain immigration status, when she left school, was  a
                  source of emotional. stability for her as she  was  unable
                  to continue her education and to find employment.

         26.  The best interests of the child are  a  primary  consideration
             and  we  have  borne  this  in  mind  in  our  assessment   of
             proportionality. A factor that has  weighed  with  us  in  the
             assessment of proportionality,  is  the  likelihood  that  the
             appellant's personality disorder,  which  requires  long  term
             treatment, poses the real danger,  in  the  short  and  medium
             term,  of  being  a  source  of  serious  instability  in  her
             children's placement.  We do not therefore view  her  presence
             in the  United  Kingdom  as  being  necessarily  in  the  best
             interests of the children for the reasons  that  we  have  set
             out. Accordingly, we find that in all the  circumstances,  the
             decision  to  deport  the  appellant   does   not   constitute
             disproportionate interference with the right  to  private  and
             family life.  This we  appreciate  is  a  grave  decision.   A
             different tribunal, we accept, may have come  to  a  different
             decision, because the separation of parent and child breaks  a
             natural bond that lies at the core of  the  values  Article  8
             seeks to protect."

8.   Permission to appeal was applied for on various grounds and  permission
    was granted on 17 July 2013 by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that the panel had given no or insufficient reasons for its  conclusion
    that the appellant  posed  a  source  of  serious  instability  in  her
    children's placement in the light of the evidence the panel heard.  The
    panel had given insufficient reasons for finding that it would  not  be
    in the best interests of the children for the appellant  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom to continue to  play  a  meaningful  part  in  their
    lives. They had given insufficient reasons  for  disagreeing  with  the
    expert witnesses.  Counsel submitted that the panel's finding head been
    in direct contrast to the conclusions of the family  court.  The  court
    had concluded that it was in the best interests of  the  children  that
    they should have contact with their mother.  The Tribunal  had  ignored
    all the evidence that the appellant was dealing with her mental  health
    difficulties.  The  children  had  been  found  to  require  a   stable
    environment but the panel  had   failed  to  acknowledge  that  regular
    contact with the appellant was part of that environment.  The panel had
    not properly mentioned or recorded the evidence given at the hearing or
    set out in the witness statements. They had attached no weight  to  the
    evidence given in support of the appellant's case.   The  evidence  was
    that the appellant had improved and cooperated and was granted  regular
    contact and was taking steps to  overcome  her  difficulties.   It  was
    clear that  the  appellant's  aunt  wanted  a  normal  relationship  to
    develop.

9.   It  was  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had  at  some  times  been
    difficult and obstructive.

10.  The panel had erred in finding that there were only formal  contact  on
    six occasions a year.  In fact the appellant  had  nearly  three  times
    this level of contact.  She had fifteen formal  contact  sessions  with
    both the children in addition to informal contact.  The panel  had  not
    mentioned the contact with Kingston.  Counsel referred to  the  amended
    final care plan at page 100 of the bundle.  She told me that the Family
    Court order had not been signed but would follow this care plan.

11.  In relation to Kingston, the Tribunal had  been  the  primary  decision
    makers since the Secretary of State had not  considered  Kingston.   In
    ground 2 it was said that the panel had erred in  not  considering  the
    best interests of the  children as  a  primary  consideration  and  had
    overridden the conclusions of the Family Court and the experts.

12.  In ground 3 the panel had referred to the Secretary  of  State's  delay
    where it was submitted that the decision of the panel was perverse  and
    lacked transparency and sufficient reasoning.

13.  In ground 4 it was said that the panel had failed to take into  account
    relevant considerations such as the appellant's destitution  on  return
    and her vulnerability and her mental health problems.

14.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the panel had dealt properly with  an  unusual
    set of  facts  and  had  approached  the  issues  and  considered  them
    lawfully.  In relation to the claim that removal would  result  in  her
    destitution, it was up to her to prove destitution:  see  MA  (Jamaica)
    [2005] UKIAT 00013 at paragraph 14.   No  specific  evidence  had  been
    provided about the facilities on return. It had been suggested that her
    criminal behaviour was a consequence of her  personality  disorder  but
    she had not cooperated with the psychiatrist  and  had  elected  to  be
    sentenced without the benefit  of  a  report.  She  had  been  properly
    represented.   (Counsel  at  this  point   conceded   this   particular
    submission).  I pointed out that  it  appeared  that  Counsel  who  had
    granted permission did so on limited grounds.

15.  The Secretary of State's delay had been acknowledged by the panel.   Mr
    Jarvis referred to Onur [2009] ECHR 289 at paragraph 52 where there had
    been a lengthy delay.  Even if the appellant had got  indefinite  leave
    to remain this would not have prevented her deportation.

16.  Mr Jarvis referred to OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694 at paragraph  15.
     The risk of reoffending was one facet of the public interest but there
    was also the need to deter foreign nationals  from  committing  serious
    crimes as well as the role of a deportation order as an  expression  of
    society's revulsion at serious crimes and in building public confidence
    in the treatment of foreign citizens who  had  committed  such  crimes.
    Where a foreign criminal's deportation was conducive to the public good
    under Section 32  the  nature  of  the  public  interest  was  "vividly
    informed by the fact that  by  Parliament's  express  declaration  that
    public interest  is  injured  if  the  criminal's  deportation  is  not
    effected"  - see SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ  550
    per Laws LJ.

17.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    very carefully considered the points  made  and  the  passages  in  the
    bundle to which Counsel helpfully referred me.  I remind myself that  I
    can only interfere with the decision of the panel if it was flawed on a
    point of law.

18.  I am not satisfied there was any unfairness in  the  panel's  decision.
    It declined to adjourn the proceedings for reasons set out in paragraph
    10 of its determination. It distinguished the facts in Tinizaray.  That
    decision did not perhaps, receive unqualified support in the  Court  of
    Appeal in SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  at
    paragraph 55.  While the interests of a child  affected  by  a  removal
    decision are a matter of substantial  importance  and  the  court  must
    proceed on a proper understanding of the facts which  illuminate  those
    interests, Lord Justice Laws  did  not  accept  that  the  decision  in
    Tinizeray "should be regarded as a establishing anything in the  nature
    of general principle".

19.  The main point on which permission to appeal was granted was  that  the
    panel had misdirected itself in concluding that  the  appellant  was  a
    source of instability.  I was taken by Counsel at some  length  through
    all the material that had been before the panel.  I should  observe  en
    passant that this material is heavily marked in places by the panel and
    it is quite clear from exhumation of the  material  that  it  had  full
    regard to the material placed before it.

20.  It is also said that the panel overlooked or  ignored  material  but  I
    see no evidence of that.  It is not incumbent on the appeal to set  out
    all the evidence verbatim.  It summarised the salient points  and  that
    was sufficient.

21.  It is also  said  that  the  panel  should  have  put  matters  to  the
    witnesses.  In a case of this type such  an  approach  is  unrealistic.
    The panel would need to  give  careful  scrutiny  to  all  the  lengthy
    documentary evidence and reach its decision  on  that  evidence  taking
    into account the oral evidence in addition.

22.  On reading through this evidence with Counsel  I  pointed  out  various
    occasions where there were expressions of concern about the appellant's
    behaviour and Counsel accepts that the appellant had occasionally  been
    difficult and uncooperative. There is a reference, for example, on page
    87 to the appellant's "extremely abusive  behaviour",  behaviour  which
    the appellant acknowledged as described on page 89 although she  denied
    she had made violent threats.  She wanted to do anything  in  order  to
    keep her son.  She was very worried about Kingston becoming attached to
    someone else.

23.  The issue of adoption was clearly one which troubled  the  appellant  -
    see paragraph 25 on page 91 where the  appellant  stated  that  if  her
    children were to be adopted  this  would  send  her  "over  the  edge".
    Parents who adopt the children would have "serious implications for the
    stability of the placement ..." - see paragraph 28 on page 93.

24.  I have only taken a few extracts from  the  large  volume  of  material
    before me but I am quite unable to conclude that the view taken by  the
    panel of the evidence was not open to the panel.

25.  Of course the decision in the family proceedings  is  a  matter  to  be
    taken into account by the panel but the  panel  is  not  bound  by  the
    decision in the family proceedings.  It has to make its  own  decision.
    It is not there to rubber stamp the decision of the Family  Court.   If
    it were, there would be no point in having the proceedings at all.  Its
    task is in  any  event  different.   When  hearing  an  appeal  against
    deportation under Section 32 a balancing exercise is required in  which
    the child's interests feature prominently but there are other interests
    in play also, as Mr Jarvis points out.

26.  Another point worth making is that this is a decision which  the  panel
    reached in my view conscientiously but it was also aware  that  another
    panel might reach a different decision. It was not a decision which was
    lightly undertaken. The fact  that  two  panels  might  take  different
    decisions does not mean that one or the other was not entitled to reach
    the decision it did.

27.  Various subsidiary points were taken.  Firstly, it is quite clear  that
    the panel had regard to the decision in Uner and indeed it set out  the
    relevant principles in paragraph 24 of the decision.  It had regard  to
    the gravity of the offence and it is quite clear that the  offences  of
    blackmail and the threat were serious matters quite apart from  Section
    32. That was one aspect of the decision which the panel had had to have
    regard to.  It noted that the victim was subjected  to  a  campaign  of
    threats that had a devastating affect on her life.

28.  The panel then had regard to the  appellant's  history,  education  and
    the young age at which she had  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    acknowledged all  relevant  circumstances,  in  my  view.   It  further
    acknowledged the appellant's devotion to her children and  the  effects
    of separation from them. The panel considered mental health issues  and
    found that mental health care was available  in  Jamaica  although  she
    would lose the benefits of the very specific treatment  plan  that  she
    now had the benefit of.

29.  The panel was concerned that the appellant  would  have  difficulty  in
    allowing the children to  develop  strong  parental  bonds  with  their
    primary carers and was entitled to see a real potential for  disruption
    in the stability of the appellant's placement.  The  panel  found  this
    was clear from the evidence placed before it.

30.  Again, while the risk  of  reoffending  was  low,  the  panel  did  not
    misdirect itself in finding that deportation  would  serve  the  public
    interest and Mr Jarvis  draws  my  attention  to  paragraph  54  of  SS
    (Nigeria) as well as paragraph 15 of OH (Serbia).

31.  On the issue of delay, I see no evidence of misdirection.   The  panel,
    in paragraph 25, considered the question of proportionality taking into
    account factors including the question of delay. This  was  part  of  a
    legitimate balancing exercise conducted by the panel.

32.  In the unusual circumstances of this case, the panel  was  entitled  to
    conclude as it did.

33.  It is said that the panel misdirected itself on the facts  in  relation
    to the level of contact. There is a reference in paragraph  23  to  the
    provision for formal  contact  six  times  a  year  and  provision  for
    informal contact.  Counsel says that understates the level  of  contact
    significantly.  She says that the panel ignored  the  fact  that  there
    were two children involved.

34.  I note  that  in  paragraph  13(x)  of  the  determination  the  appeal
    summarised the appellant's evidence to the effect that she was   having
    contact with Maddison at least six times a year with further contact to
    be arranged on an informal basis with her aunt, and that the court  had
    also approved contact with her second  child  Kingston  at  least  nine
    times a year with informal arrangement  to be made with her family.

35.  I am not satisfied that the panel arguably proceeded  on  an  incorrect
    assumption as to the facts underlying the appellant's level of  contact
    with  her  children,  still  less   that   there   was   any   material
    misappreciation of the facts in this case.   This was not  a  point  on
    which First-tier Judge was moved to grant permission to appeal.

36.  The panel carefully summarised the medical and  other  evidence  before
    it including the material from the family court. It  did  not  overlook
    positive as well  as  negative  aspects.  It  summarised  the  evidence
    properly.  In short it reached a reasoned conclusion on the totality of
    the material before it.  There was no  element  of  perversity  in  the
    decision.  The panel was fully aware of the appellant's  case  and  the
    difficulties that she would face in Jamaica.  However it  was  entitled
    to conclude that some form of  mental  health  care  was  available  in
    Jamaica.  The panel no doubt had in mind the evidence contained in  the
    Secretary of State's refusal letter at paragraphs 41 to 59.

37.  As I have said, permission to appeal was granted on  a  specific  issue
    and not a number of the sub-issues that were raised in this  case.   Mr
    Jarvis says that it would be for the appellant to show that  she  would
    be destitute, again in the refusal letter there  was  evidence  of  the
    grants available  under  the  facilitated  return  scheme  as  well  as
    resettlement services available  in  Jamaica  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was a relatively well educated woman and support was provided
    locally for individuals who required assistance.

38.  For the reasons I have given I am not satisfied that  the  panel  erred
    on a point of law in its conclusions on the point on  which  permission
    to appeal was granted.  I am not satisfied that the other points  raise
    any error of law in the panel's approach.  Accordingly this  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 23 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

