
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA000662014
     DA000672014
     DA000702014
     DA000692014
     DA000682014

                                                               ia209062014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Consent to withdrawal given orally immediately|                              |
|following the hearing                         |                              |
|On 4 February 2016                            |On 24 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               h j and others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Goldborough, Solicitor instructed by UK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


            CONSENT TO WITHDRAWAL OF DECISION UNDER RULE 17(2) OF
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellants brought an appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    to deport them to  Nigeria.   The  first  appellant  has  a  number  of
    criminal convictions and the respondent considered that she  should  be
    subject to conducive deportation pursuant to paragraph  398(c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that her offending  had  caused  serious
    harm.  It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to express
    a view as to that.  The other four appellants are her children, all  of
    whom were born in the UK and have lived here since.  The  oldest  child
    is now 10 years old and by the time the appeal was heard in the  First-
    tier Tribunal he had made an application for British citizenship  which
    was noted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  at  paragraph  44.
    Unless there were circumstances of which the Tribunal was not  at  that
    time made aware it must have seemed fairly likely that that application
    would be granted because  absent  special  reasons  the  oldest  child,
    having been born in this country and having lived  here  for  over  ten
    years was at that time entitled to British citizenship.   Although  the
    Tribunal found (in my judgment without giving sufficient reasons for so
    finding) that if the older child's  appeal  succeeded,  so  should  the
    appeals of the other appellants,  his appeal  in  fact  failed  because
    even though it was recognised  that  the  medical  treatment  which  he
    required would probably not be as good in Nigeria as  it  would  be  in
    this country, as he was not a British citizen he was  not  entitled  to
    better treatment than was available in his own country and so it  would
    be reasonable for him to be removed along with his mother and the  rest
    of his family.

 2. I had reached a decision which if necessary  I  would  have  given  but
    which for the reasons which follow it is not necessary now  for  me  to
    elaborate on,  that  the  decision  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    rejecting the appellants' appeals contained errors of  law  which  were
    material such that the decision would have had to be set aside and  re-
    made. However, matters have moved on since that  hearing  in  that  the
    oldest child has now in fact been granted British citizenship and so in
    respect of him at any rate clearly he cannot be deported because he  is
    a British citizen.

 3. The circumstances of the remainder of the appellants  have  changed  to
    the extent that whatever the situation might have been at the  time  of
    the original decision when none of the family had any right to  remain,
    it is now the case that the oldest child  cannot  be  deported  and  so
    consideration of his best interests and whether or not the consequences
    on him of his mother's removal  would  be  unreasonable  and/or  unduly
    harsh (depending on whether or not the actions of the  first  appellant
    could properly be said to have caused serious harm so that she  can  be
    properly deported under the Rules rather than removed) will have to  be
    considered  in  the  context  of  the  position  of  the  older  child.
    Consideration if the first appellant could otherwise be deported  would
    have to be given to whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a
    British citizen child to go to a country where he  will  be  unable  to
    avail himself of the medical treatment which he requires which, as  the
    First-tier Tribunal found, was probably better in this country.

 4. In these circumstances on behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Norton  very
    properly advised the Tribunal that the respondent  wished  to  withdraw
    the underlying decision deporting these appellants  and  reconsider  in
    the case of each appellant (although clearly the older child cannot  be
    deported) whether or  not  she  wishes  still  to  make  a  deportation
    decision.  In my judgment this  is  effectively  a  withdrawal  of  the
    respondent's case as covered by Rule 17(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 but this withdrawal requires the consent of
    the Upper Tribunal pursuant to Rule 17(2).

 5. I note that on behalf of the appellants Mr Goldborough agreed that this
    is a sensible course for the respondent to take and does  not  seek  to
    object to the withdrawal.  In the view of this Tribunal this is  indeed
    a sensible course for the respondent to take because the  circumstances
    have changed so significantly that these changes need  to  be  properly
    considered by the respondent.  Accordingly, this Tribunal  consents  to
    the withdrawal of the underlying decision pursuant to Rule 17(2).

 6. I would however add just one observation and it is this.  The  original
    decision carried with it a right of appeal which these appellants  have
    exercised and although Mr Norton was not able to give an undertaking to
    this effect, I would expect the respondent, if she chooses  to  make  a
    fresh deportation and/or removal decision in  respect  of  any  of  the
    appellants not to certify such a decision because in the view  of  this
    Tribunal, on the facts as they  are  currently  being  put  before  the
    Tribunal, an appeal against a decision to deport or remove any of these
    appellants could not properly be seen to be clearly unfounded such that
    an appeal could not possibly succeed in front of an Immigration  Judge.
    I trust the views of this Tribunal on  this  point  will  be  respected
    because were this Tribunal not  confident  that  the  appellants  would
    still have an in  country  right  of  appeal  against  any  deportation
    decision which might subsequently be made, consent  to  the  withdrawal
    would not be granted.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig      Date: 15 April 2016

                                                  and amended 23-5-16

