

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00859/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th April 2013                            |On 10th June 2013            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                UNAL KAHRAMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Collins instructed by Montague Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Nath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. On the 9th January 2013 the Upper Tribunal found that  a  panel  of
        the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, primarily in failing to  make
        sufficiently detailed and proper findings in relation to  the  core
        element of the appeal. The  finding  the  claim  of  detention  and
        torture is disbelieved is not supported by adequate  reasons.  Such
        errors were found to be material and the determination  set  aside.
        The appeal comes before me today for the purposes  of  the  Resumed
        hearing.


     2. The preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal are as follows:


     28.  We note that the appellant clearly stated in answer to question  3
   of the         asylum interview that he wanted to claim asylum and yet he
   only made      the claim after enforcement  action  was  taken.   He  was
   notified  of  the               deportation  order  in  the  reasons  for
   deportation letter dated 8 March  2011          and  this  triggered  the
   asylum claim on 16 March 2011.  There is a letter  of         instruction
   to Montagues Solicitors signed and dated 09.03.2011 and it was       sent
   with  the  letter  from  them  notifying  the  respondent  of  a  pending
   asylum claim.


     29.  What the appellant stated in his witness statement was that at his
   criminal       trial he raised the fact that he was afraid to return  but
   no one advised him      what to do, neither the Judge, not his  solicitor
   nor his brother told him to      claim asylum  immediately,  and  it  was
   only his current solicitor who            advised him to claim asylum.


     30.  The appellant relies upon what the Judge remarked when  sentencing
          him.    The record shows that he  said  'You  were  determined  to
          enter this country     unlawfully,  for  reasons  that  have  been
          explained to the court by Mr Barnett.  I    have  been  told  that
          there are serious problems  in  the  village  where  you  live  in
          Eastern Turkey, which you felt it was best to turn your back  on'.
          The Judge    went on to note that 'To your credit,  you  have  not
          sought to establish any   fanciful  defence,  you  pleaded  guilty
          today, which has been the first opportunity     open  to  you....'
          and the Judge noted that the IM3 had been served upon     him  and
          there is an automatic deportation.


     32.  No complaint was made about  the  solicitor  acting  for  him,  no
          evidence     has been produced by him about what was noted in  his
          meeting with the      appellant, to support the  appellants  claim
          that he raised asylum with his     solicitor.....  We  accept  the
          appellant experienced some problems in his  village...


     35.  We read carefully the psychiatric report of Dr Chiedu Obuaya  MBBS
          BSc     MRCPsych. He examined the appellant for about 2 � hours on
          27 July      2012 and for about 30 minutes over the telephone on 8
          September 2012. He    diagnosed PTSD  on  the  following  clinical
          features: the appellant had a  delayed response  to  a  series  of
          stressful situations of  an  extremely    threatening  nature;  he
          experiences trauma in the form  of  nightmares  and      intrusive
          thoughts  related  to  the  trauma;  his  is  anhedonic;  he   has
          insomnia. The trigger was the detention in the UK upon his arrival
          and     there was cumulative deterioration in  his  mental  health
          following the    three distinct traumatic experiences  in  Turkey.
          There is evidence that    detention itself  can  have  an  adverse
          impact on the mental health of     detainees. The  fact  that  his
          wife was beaten by the  Turkish  authorities   whilst  he  was  in
          prison in the UK would contribute to further     deterioration  in
          his mental health.


     36.  The psychiatrist examines other factors,  such  as  his  difficult
          military     service in Turkey, his separation from  his  country,
          and the entry and     detention in the UK, but they cannot explain
          his core PTSD symptoms.  We      note  that  the  doctor  did  not
          consider the other reasons given in  the      Screening  Interview
          about how his car was scratched, and his tyres  cut,   and  nobody
          wanted to work for him.  It  was  almost  impossible  to  continue
          working and he was going to have  to  work  alone  because  nobody
          wanted  to work for him. The work colleagues were threatened.   He
          was in  construction and in his asylum interview he said that  his
          firm employed    10 to 20 men.  We also have had to  consider  the
          sentencing  Judge's     reference  to  serious  problems  in   the
          appellant's village, which were not    interpreted by the Judge as
          constituting an asylum claim based upon ill     treatment  by  the
          Turkish authorities.


     37.  The psychiatrist noted that the appellant  had  a  fairly  limited
          response to  anti-depressants and  suggests  that  trauma  focused
          therapy  will  be   required.  He  bases   the   length   on   the
          interrogation, and therefore little    weight can be  placed  upon
          this estimate.


     38.  The psychiatrist considered the possibility that the appellant may
          have     been  feigning  his  symptoms,  and  concluded  that  the
          appellant was not     experiencing all the possible  symptoms  and
          would have claimed to have     been actively  suicidal.  He  noted
          some inconsistencies in  the  presentation     of  the  facts  and
          concluded that they were in  keeping  with  someone      suffering
          from PTSD.


     39.  We note that the Medical  Foundation  letter  of  23rd  June  2011
          confirms that    the appellant has no physical scars  on  which  a
          medical report could be   based but that he is  clearly  suffering
          from psychological sequelae from his   alleged torture in  Turkey.
          The appellant said that  following  the  first      detention  his
          father took him to a doctor at the Maras  State  hospital  and  he
          was prescribed antibiotics called Baraltin but could not  remember
          the     doctor's name and he  could  not  get  evidence  from  the
          hospital or the  doctor to confirm the visit. He had blood in  his
          urine which was the   reason for the prescription.


     42.  The background evidence clearly shows at paragraph  25.18  of  the
          COIR    that there are psychiatric clinics at state hospitals  and
          there is one at  Maras, and there is no issue that  the  appellant
          would be denied access to       mental  health  care  in  his  own
          country.


     3. The chronology of  events  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  is  as
        follows:


     5th May 1985      Appellant born


     1992-2000         Appellant educated in the village.


      2000-2001          Appellant  attends  "Lycee  (secondary  school)  in
               Elbistan      and      becomes      politically       active,
   subsequently expelled from Lycee.


        2005            Appellant    begins     his     own     construction
   business.


     April 2007        Appellant arrested for the first time.


     15th July 2008        Appellant marries.


     March 2010        Appellant arrested for the second time.


     September 2010    Appellant arrested for the third time.


      17th  October  2010  Appellant   leaves   Turkey   and   arrested   at
             Gatwick     airport     and     is     subsequently     charged
   with a criminal offence for which he is                         sentenced
   to 12 months imprisonment.


     4. In his witness statement the appellant claimed he  became  involved
        in DEHAP when he went to secondary school [4] which was the Kurdish
        party at that time [5]. His father had been  involved  in  politics
        since the 1980's and his brother Dogan was too [4].  The  appellant
        states he experienced problems in his  own  right  after  he  began
        activities for DEHAP in Elbistan [9].


     5. The appellant's brother left  Turkey  in  2005  following  marriage
        [10]. The appellant travelled to the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  in
        2006 to visit his brother where he remained for three  and  a  half
        months before returning to Turkey [12].


     6. The first arrest is alleged to have occurred on 20th April 2007  at
        his home. He states he was arrested by the Gendarmes as some of his
        friends had left the village to join the PKK. He  was  interrogated
        during which time he was stripped, beaten, and  sprayed  with  cold
        water. He was eventually releases after three days  without  charge
        [14].


     7. The appellant married on 15th July 2008. His wife lived in  Germany
        at that time but returned to live with him in Turkey [16].


     8. The second arrest occurred in March 2010. The appellant  states  he
        was distributing leaflets for the BDP  in  a  caf�  when  Gendarmes
        entered the premises. They stated they had been told  PKK  leaflets
        were being distributed. The appellant claims he was  beaten  up  at
        the Gendarmes station and interrogated, although  released  without
        charge the following day [17].


     9. The final arrest was in September 2010. He was retuning  from  work
        when he was stopped. He was taken away to a building located  up  a
        stony road where he was accused of recruiting people for  the  PKK.
        He claims he was attacked and threatened with death. He was told he
        had to work for the authorities but when he refused  he  was  given
        electric shocks. He was eventually released without charge [18-19].


    10.  The  appellant  claims  he  then  remained   in   Elbistan   until
        arrangements were made for him to  leave  for  the  United  Kingdom
        which he did on 17th October 2010 using a false visa [22  -23].  He
        claims his wife was detained after he left and held for two  nights
        before being released. He  claims  the  authorities  think  he  has
        joined the PKK.


    11. In his oral evidence the appellant stated that the visa be used  to
        enter the UK in 2006 had been obtained in Cyprus and was valid.  He
        did not claim asylum in 2006 as at that time he did not have  "huge
        problems". His wife, parents and  two  siblings  remain  living  in
        Turkey. One sibling lives in the village the other is constantly on
        the move. His wife returned to the village two to three  weeks  ago
        after having lived elsewhere. He claims she returned as she was  no
        longer able to stay where she was as she did not want to.  She  was
        getting depressed and so left those relatives  and  returned  home.
        His wife is in the village and he is able to speak to  her  on  the
        telephone although she says  nothing  about  the  attitude  of  the
        Gendarme to her return.


    12. The relative his wife stayed with is his mother's sister who  lives
        about 300km from the village.  He and his wife  maintained  contact
        on a mobile telephone whilst at the relatives but now  speak  on  a
        land line.


    13. His wife was detained once. His father was not detained.  His  wife
        was never taken to the Public Prosecutors  office  or  through  the
        courts and neither was he.



Discussion



    14. The appellant claims he has a credible fear of the  authorities  on
        return to Turkey such as to entitle him to a grant of international
        protection. It is for him to substantiate his claim.


    15. The appellant has not substantiated a claim that his family profile
        puts him at risk which was accepted to be the case by Mr Collins in
        any event.


    16. The appellant attended school and completed his  national  service.
        He entered the UK lawfully in 2006 and retuned after  three  months
        or so with no claim to have experienced any difficulties on  return
        although none of the claimed arrests had occurred at this time.


    17. There are three specific incidents mentioned  the  first  of  which
        occurred in 2007. The village in which the appellant was  born  and
        lived in is in the South East of Turkey, in the Kurdish region.  He
        claims to have supported DEHAP, the Democratic People's Party which
        was  a  Kurdish  nationalist  party.  On  17th  August  2005  DEHAP
        announced its merger with the Democratic Society Movement (DTH)  to
        form the Democratic Society Party (DTP). On 11  December  2009  the
        Constitutional Court closed the DTP party for its association  with
        the PKK terrorist  organization  and  imposed  a  5-year  ban  from
        politics on thirty seven of  its  members.  The  remaining  elected
        officials reunited under the Peace and Democracy Party  (BDP).   It
        is plausible that an  association  or  perceived  association  with
        organisations deemed to be against the  interests  of  the  Turkish
        State, especially in the Kurdish regions, could lead  to  detention
        and ill-treatment as alleged.


    18. The appellant claims that in 2007 he was  arrest  at  his  home  as
        others had left the village to join the PKK. The  country  material
        refers to round ups and raids by the authorities and  ill-treatment
        in detention, of  the  type  described  by  the  appellant,  during
        interrogation. The Turkish COIR for 9th August 2010 records:


              8.18      The  USSD  Report  2009  reported  that  "[t]he  law
       prohibits arbitrary arrest             and  detention;  however,  the
       government at times did not observe these          prohibitions."[5i]
       (Section  1d,  d.  Arbitrary   Arrest   or   Detention)    The   same
       source went onto explain:

                  "During the year police routinely  detained  demonstrators
       for a few hours               at  a  time.  Police  detained  several
       hundred members of the former  DTP               [Democratic  Society
       Party]   and   its    successor    Peace    and    Democracy    Party
       (BDP) on various occasions. Police continued  to  detain  and  harass
       members             of human rights organizations,  media  personnel,
       and  human  rights                   monitors.  Police  continued  to
       detain persons on suspicion of 'membership              in an illegal
       organization'  and  for  'promoting  terrorist   propaganda'."   [5i]
       (Section 1d, d. Arbitrary Arrest or Detention)


    19. Roundups were commonplace as was  the  use  of  torture  and  other
        illegal means to extract confessions and information.  The  country
        information also notes that many were released although others were
        charged and brought to trial on charges of  membership  of  illegal
        organisations     or     being      involved      in      terrorist
        organisations/activities. The appellant was  not  charged  and  was
        always released.


    20. Three years later, in March 2010, he was detained again.  I  accept
        that even though he was distributing leaflets for the BDP, a  legal
        party in Turkey at that time, it is plausible he  would  have  been
        detained if the authorities were told he was distributing  leaflets
        for the banned PKK.  The fact he was  only  detained  for  a  short
        period of time and then released the following day  without  charge
        is indicative of a lack of interest in him as a person perceived to
        be a threat to state interests.


    21. His final period of detention occurred in September 2010  some  six
        months later. This resulted in his  being  detained  and  taken  to
        premises  in  an  isolated  location  which   is   plausible   when
        considering the country information which speaks of such  locations
        being used by the authorities as places of 'unofficial  detention'.
        It is plausible in such a situation the appellant would  have  been
        tortured, but again he was released without charge.


    22. He claims he remained in Elbistan until he left for the UK  in  his
        first witness statement but also states he  travelled  to  a  major
        city before leaving via Izmir Airport which is in the west  of  the
        country elsewhere in his evidence. He left using his  own  passport
        with the false UK visa.


    23. My  primary  finding,  having  considered  the  appellants  claimed
        detentions and  specific  alleged  methods  of  ill-treatment,  the
        country material and conditions at that time, the medical evidence,
        and the background material provided in his bundle relating to  the
        experiences of Kurds in that area of Turkey, and applying the lower
        standard applicable to appeals of  this  nature,  is  that  he  has
        substantiated his claim to have been detailed  on  three  occasions
        when he was questioned and ill treated  although  released  without
        charge or any conditions being imposed upon him such  as  reporting
        conditions each time.


    24. The question for me to consider, however, is whether he is at  risk
        on return now, in 2013, sufficient to entitle him  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.


    25. In the case of Fatih Andic [2004] EWCA Civ 557 the Court of  Appeal
        said that it was no flaw of reasoning to  conclude  from  the  fact
        that the applicant had been  released  without  charge  after  each
        detention that the Turkish authorities had no further  interest  in
        him.


    26. In IA and  others  (Risk-Guidelines-Separatist)  Turkey  CG  [2003]
        UKIAT   00034    the   Tribunal   refined   the    factors    which
        "inexhaustively" they considered to be material in giving  rise  to
        potential suspicion in the minds of the  authorities  concerning  a
        particular claimant. In the latest  case  of  IK  (see  below)  the
        Tribunal said that these still have  some  relevance.   In  IA  the
        Tribunal said that an Adjudicator needed to consider:

         i)   The level, if any,  of  the  Appellant's  known  or  suspected
      involvement with          a separatist organisation:-  This  appellant
      has not substantiated any claim        to have  been  a  member  of  a
      banned separatist organisation  or  to  be               suspected  of
      being so, such as to place him at risk on return.

         ii)  Whether the Appellant has ever been arrested or  detained  and
      if so in         what circumstances:- See above.

         iii) Whether the circumstances of the Appellant's past arrests  and
      detentions,      if any, indicate that the  authorities  did  in  fact
      view him or her as a          suspected separatist:- The detentions do
      not demonstrate that the           authorities viewed the appellant as
      being a credible suspected separatist.           The  first  detention
      appears to have resulted from a raid  on  the  village  to        find
      others, the second as a result of inaccurate information  relating  to
      leaflets he was distributing for a legal political party and the third
      based        upon an allegation he was recruiting for  the  PKK  after
      which he was              released, which he would not have been if he
      was suspected of assisting         this group.

         iv)  Whether the Appellant  was  charged  or  placed  on  reporting
      conditions or         now faces charges:-  He  was  never  charged  or
      placed on any conditions      when released. There is no  evidence  he
      faces any charges now.

         v)   The  degree  of  ill-treatment  to  which  the  Appellant  was
      subjected in the          past:- The appellant describes beatings  and
      methods of torture it is known         were used by the authorities in
      Turkey.  He sustained no scarring but       required medical treatment
      after the first detention by way of antibiotics.          The  medical
      evidence  is  indicative  of  psychological   rather   than   physical
      injury.

          vi)   Whether  the  Appellant  has  family  connections   with   a
      separatist                organisation  such  as  KADEK  or  HADEP  or
      DEHAP:-  The  appellant  claims        his  father  and  brother  were
      politically active although also stated  his               father  was
      not arrested when  his  wife  was  as  the  authorities  were  looking
      for the younger people. I comment  upon  the  lack  of  evidence  that
      family       profile will place him at risk elsewhere.

         vii) How long a period elapsed between the Appellant's last  arrest
      and              detention and his departure from Turkey. Whether  the
      Appellant was         under surveillance or monitored after  his  last
      arrest:-  The appellant claims         he remained in  his  home  area
      for two to three months before leaving for      the UK.  There  is  no
      evidence he was kept under surveillance or monitored         after any
      of his arrests.

          viii)     Kurdish  ethnicity:-  the  appellant   is   of   Kurdish
      ethnicity.

         ix)  Alevi faith:- the appellant is not of the Alevi faith.

          x)    Lack  of  a  current  up-to-date  Turkish  passport:-    The
      appellant entered the         UK using his own passport and states  in
      his screening interview that he        also had  his  NUFUS  Card  and
      driving licence with him.

         xi)  Whether there is any evidence that the authorities  have  been
      pursuing or      otherwise expressing an  interest  in  the  Appellant
      since he or she left          Turkey:- the appellant claims  his  wife
      was detained for two nights after he        left and asked  about  his
      presence. There is insufficient evidence to               substantiate
      an ongoing  interest  in  him  despite  regular  contact  with  family
      members in Turkey. I also note his oral evidence  that  his  wife  has
      returned         to  their  home  village  with  no  repercussions  or
      evidence of adverse interest       being taken in  her  based  upon  a
      desire to find the appellant. There  is  no        evidence  of  valid
      arrest warrants being issued  or  judicial  proceedings          being
      commenced against him at any time.

         xii) Whether the Appellant became  an  informer  or  was  asked  to
      become one:-          he claims he was asked but was tortured when  he
      refused. He does not      claim he was asked again or agreed to be  an
      informer.

          xiii)     Actual  or  perceived  political  activities  abroad  in
      connection  with  a              separatist  organisation:-  there  is
      insufficient evidence to substantiate a          claim  to  have  been
      involved    with    separatist     organisations     in     the     UK
      sufficient to place him at risk on return , or at all.

         xiv) Whether the Appellant is a military draft evader:- he  is  not
      as he            completed his military service.

    27. The case law also makes it clear that these factors should  not  be
        treated simply as a checklist and that none  of  these  factors  is
        necessarily determinative of the issue.

    28. The issue of risk on return was considered further in the  case  of
        IK  (Returnees-Records-IFA)  Turkey  CG  2004  UKIAT   00312.   The
        following is a summary of the Tribunal's main conclusions  in  this
        determination.


              i)  The  GBTS  comprises  only  outstanding  arrest  warrants,
   previous                arrests, restrictions on travel abroad,  possible
   draft evasion, refusal                to perform military service and tax
   arrears. "Arrests" as comprised in                 the GBTS require  some
   court intervention, and must be                        distinguished from
   "detentions" by the security forces followed  by                  release
   without  charge.  The  GBTS  is  fairly  widely  accessible  and  is   in
   particular available to the border police at booths in Istanbul  airport,
              and elsewhere in Turkey to the security forces.


              ii) In addition, there is border control information  collated
   by the                       national police (Department for  Foreigners,
   Borders and Asylum)                   recording past legal  arrivals  and
   departures of  Turkish  citizens,  and                 information  about
   people prohibited from entering Turkey as a                     result of
   their  activities   abroad,   collated   by   MIT.   (Note   a   returnee
   who  arrives  with  a  one  way  emergency  travel  document  and   about
   whom there is no record of a previous legal departure  is  likely  to  be
          perceived as a failed asylum seeker and is likely to be  taken  to
   the                 police station at the airport for further questioning
   rather than just                 waved through.)


               iii)      The  Judicial  Record  Directorate  keeps  judicial
   records  on  sentences                   served  by  convicted   persons,
   separate from GBTS. The system is                  known as "Adli Sicil."
   It is unlikely that  this  system  would  be                     directly
   accessible  at  border  control  in  addition  to  the   information   in
   the GBTS.


              iv) The Nufus registration system comprises  details  of  age,
   residence,                   marriage,  death,  parents'  and  children's
   details, and religious status.                It may also include  arrest
   warrants and if any of the people listed               have been stripped
   of    nationality.    There    is    no    evidence    that     it     is
   directly available at border control.


              v)  If a person is held for questioning either in the  airport
   police station                   after arrival or subsequently  elsewhere
   in  Turkey  and  the  situation                justifies  it,  then  some
   additional inquiry could be made of  the                      authorities
   in  his  local   area   about   him,   where   more   extensive   records
   may  be  kept  either   manually   or   on   computer.   Also,   if   the
     circumstances so justify, an enquiry could be made of the  anti  terror
          police or MIT to see if an individual is of material  interest  to
   them.


              vi) If there is a material entry in the GBTS or in the  border
   control                      information, or if a returnee is  travelling
   on a one-way emergency                travel document, then  there  is  a
   reasonable likelihood that he will be                  identifiable as  a
   failed   asylum   seeker   and   could   be   sent   to    the    airport
   police station for further investigation.


              vii)     It will be for an Adjudicator in each case to  assess
   what  questions  are                likely  to  be  asked   during   such
   investigation and how a returnee                   would respond  without
   being    required    to    lie.    The    ambit     of     the     likely
   questioning depends upon the circumstances of each case.


              viii)    The escalation of the violence following  the  ending
   of the PKK                       ceasefire reinforced the Tribunal's that
   the risk to a Kurdish returnee                of  ill  treatment  by  the
   authorities may be greater if his home  area  is                   in  an
   area  of  conflict  in  Turkey  than  it  would  be  elsewhere,  for  the
   reasons described in paragraphs 90 and 116 of the determination.


              ix) The Turkish Government is taking action in legislative and
   structural                   terms to address the human  rights  problems
   that present a serious                obstacle to its membership  of  the
   EU. It has made its zero tolerance                 policy towards torture
   clear. However the use of torture  is  long  and                    deep-
   seated in the security  forces  and  it  will  take  time  and  continued
     and determined effort to bring it under  control  in  practice.  It  is
              premature to conclude that the long established  view  of  the
   Tribunal                concerning  the  potential  risk  of  torture  in
   detention  as  per  IA  and                    others   (Risk-Guidelines-
   Separatist) Turkey CG 2003 UKIAT  00034)                 (also  known  as
   ACDOG)  requires material revision on the present               evidence.
   However    the    situation    will    require    review    as    further
   evidence becomes available. For the time  being  as  in  the  past,  each
     case must be assessed on its  own  merits  from  the  individual's  own
     history and the relevant risk factors as described in paragraph  46  of
           IA  and  others  (Risk-Guidelines-Separatist)  Turkey   CG   2003
          UKIAT 00034)  (also known as ACDOG)  .


              x)  Many of the individual risk factors described  in  IA  and
   others (Risk-                Guidelines-Separatist) Turkey CG 2003  UKIAT
   00034)  (also known                   as ACDOG)   comprise in  themselves
   a  broad  spectrum  of  variable                   potential  risk   that
   requires careful evaluation on the specific facts of                 each
   appeal as a  whole.  The  factors  described  in  IA  and  others  (Risk-
      Guidelines-Separatist)  Turkey  CG  2003  UKIAT  00034)   (also  known
     as ACDOG)   were not intended as  a  simplistic  checklist  and  should
          not be used as such.


              xi) A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving his home area  and
   seeking                 unofficial employment in a big city, may not feel
   the need to register                  with the local Mukhtar, at least at
   the outset. Many do not. However,                   given  the  range  of
   basic activities for which a certificate of  residence                 is
   needed,  and  which  depend  upon   such   registration,   the   Tribunal
   concluded  that  it  would  in  most  normal  circumstances   be   unduly
   harsh to expect a person to live  without  appropriate  registration  for
          any material time, as a requirement for avoiding persecution. This
                  does not necessarily preclude the  viability  of  internal
   relocation  for                    the  reasons  described  in  paragraph
   133.13 of the determination.


              xii)     The  proper  course  in  assessing  the  risk  for  a
   returnee is normally to                   decide first whether he  has  a
   well founded fear of persecution in his                 home  area  based
   upon   a   case   sensitive   assessment   of   the    facts    in    the
   context of an analysis of the risk factors described  in  IA  and  others
          (Risk-Guidelines-Separatist) Turkey CG 2003  UKIAT  00034)   (also
          known as ACDOG)  . If he does not then he is unlikely to be at any
                  real risk anywhere in Turkey.


               xiii)     The  risk  to  a  specific   individual   in   most
   circumstances will be at its                  highest in  his  home  area
   for a variety  of  reasons,  and  particularly  if  it                 is
   located in the areas of  conflict  in  the  south  and  east  of  Turkey.
     Conversely the differential nature of the risk outside  that  area  may
          be sufficient to mean that the individual would  not  be  at  real
   risk  of                  persecution  by  the  state  or  its   agencies
   elsewhere in Turkey, even if                  they were made aware of the
   thrust of the information maintained in                his home  area  by
   telephone or fax enquiry from the airport  police                 station
   or  elsewhere,  or  by   a   transfer   of   at   least   some   of   the
   information  to  a  new  home  area  on  registration  with   the   local
     Mukhtar there.  Internal  relocation  may  well  therefore  be  viable,
     notwithstanding the need for registration in the new  area.  The  issue
          is whether any individual's material history would  be  reasonably
          likely to lead to persecution outside his home area.


              xiv)     This determination was intended to update and replace
   the various                  earlier decisions in the  light  of  further
   evidence and argument, and                now  comprises  the  Tribunal's
   current country guidance on the issues                 described.


    29. The appellant will be returned on his own passport if valid, or  an
        emergency travel document. Even accepting his case at its highest I
        find he has not substantiated a claim that there will  be  anything
        adverse on the GBTS. He was never arrested in  the  sense  of  that
        term requiring court intervention.


    30. In relation to the border control information, he returned in  2006
        lawfully and exited via Izmir airport in October 2012 using a valid
        Turkish passport. It is  likely  that  what  will  be  recorded  is
        therefore legal entry and exit. As such IK indicates he  is  likely
        to be waved through.


    31. There have been no prosecutions and so no adverse information  will
        be recorded with  the  Judicial  Record  Directorate  and  even  if
        detained  and  questioned  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  there  is
        insufficient evidence to substantiate a claim that records exist of
        his being of adverse interest.


    32. I find the appellant has not substantiated a claim that he will  be
        detained on arrival and I  find  he  will  be  able  to  leave  the
        airport.


    33. In R (on the application of Baydak) v SSHD [2008]  EWHC  244  Judge
        Mackie QC said that IK made it clear that an assessment of risk  on
        return should begin by deciding whether there was  a  well  founded
        fear of persecution  in  the  claimant's  home  area  based  on  an
        analysis of the risk factors described in IA.  If the claimant  was
        not at such risk, then it was unlikely that he or she would  be  at
        any real risk elsewhere in Turkey, in terms of internal relocation.


    34.  The  IK  assessment  supports  the  respondent's  claim  that  the
        appellant can return to Turkey and that he faces no  real  risk  of
        ill-treatment or persecution in his home area. He is  not  formally
        wanted and his wife  has  returned  to  his  home  village  without
        suffering adverse attention.


    35. IK refers to the breakdown of a ceasefire with the PKK.  A  further
        cease fire was agreed between Abdullah Ocalan, the  leader  of  the
        PKK, and the Turkish government shortly before this hearing but  it
        is too early to find this material to the outcome. This  issue  may
        have to be considered by the relevant country guidance team in  due
        course.  It  is,  however,  relevant  as  an  indication   of   the
        developments in Turkey in relation to Kurdish issues at this time.


    36. I also note the fact there is a relative who lives 300km  from  the
        village who the appellant's wife lived with until recently. It  has
        not been shown the appellant and his wife will not be able to  live
        there if unable to return or that it will be  unreasonable  in  all
        the circumstances for him to relocate internally  if  he  does  not
        want to return to the village or his relative is unable to  assist.
        Kurds live throughout Turkey and the appellant has  a  skill  as  a
        builder and ran his own firm. There is nothing to indicate he  will
        face a real risk if he registers elsewhere as his difficulties  are
        associated with the locality of his village and Kurdish issues. The
        lack of state interest in  him  beyond  the  three  detentions  for
        localized issues does not substantiate a claim to be at risk in all
        of Turkey.


    37. I have considered the fact that in NS v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  802
        the Court of Appeal said that it was necessary for the judge having
        ticked off all the points listed in IA  and  IK  that  might  cause
        trouble for a failed asylum seeker returning  to  Turkey  to  stand
        back and take a view as to whether  they  might  cumulatively  give
        rise to a risk, when individually they did not. I have done so  and
        on these facts  I  find  they  do  not.  Any  subjective  fear  the
        appellant may have is not objectively well founded.


    38. The appellant has failed to substantiate his claim to  be  entitled
        to be recognised as a refugee as he  has  not  proved  he  will  be
        persecuted for a Convention reason or face  a  real  risk  of  ill-
        treatment on return in all of Turkey. His  claim  for  humanitarian
        protection and under Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  falls  for  the  same
        reason.


    39. The appellant has not proved he can satisfy the high  threshold  of
        Article 3 on the basis of his mental health issues as treatment  is
        available in Turkey as the First-tier Panel found. In  relation  to
        Article 8 this was not argued strongly  before  me.  The  appellant
        will have a private life with his brother and others in the UK  but
        having assessed such ties I find  the  respondent  has  proved  the
        decision is proportionate in all the circumstances of this case.


    40. None of the exceptions contained in the UK  Borders  Act  2007  are
        made out. The appeal is dismissed.


Decision

    41. The First-tier Tribunal Panel materially erred in law. I  have  set
        aside the decision of the original Panel. I remake the decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    42. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.









Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7th June 2013












