

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00202/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th May 2016                               |On 19th May 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             ABDULLAH KARIM OMAR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr D Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emezie of Roli solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The SSHD sought and was  granted  limited  permission  to  appeal  the
      decision of a First-tier Tribunal  panel  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Dineen and Mrs L R Schmitt JP) which allowed Mr Omar's appeal  against
      a decision to deport him.


   2. Permission was sought on the grounds - in essence - that

   i) The panel erred in allowing the appeal under  Article  8  outside  the
      Immigration Rules when the Immigration Rules provide a complete code;
  ii) The panel made a material misdirection in law in finding that Mr  Omar
      met Exception 1 in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules;
 iii) The panel materially erred in failing to have adequate or  any  regard
      to evidence produced regarding Mr Omar's  alleged  criminal  behaviour
      that had not resulted in criminal  convictions,  in  so  far  as  they
      affected conduct
  iv) The panel materially erred in law in failing to refer  to  or  address
      the public interest considerations  in  particular  the  risk  of  re-
      offending; the need  to  deter  foreign  criminals  and  the  role  of
      deportation as an expression of society's revulsion.


        Permission was not granted with regards to (iii) namely the alleged
        criminal behaviour. The SSHD did not seek to renew the  application
        for permission on that ground.


   3. The SSHD sought permission to adduce evidence which was not before the
      First-tier Tribunal but was, it was submitted, relevant to the  issues
      before the First-tier Tribunal in reaching their decision  as  to  the
      credibility of Mr Omar and his mother and thus the credibility of  the
      account given and in particular the length of time spent away from his
      country of origin. Mr Clark submitted that the evidence sought  to  be
      adduced was necessary in order to assist in the establishment  of  the
      materiality of the errors of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel
      decision. Mr Emezie submitted that the material sought to  be  adduced
      did not meet the Ladd  and  Marshall  test,  in  particular  that  the
      material could not reasonably have been made available to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal panel if the SSHD had acted with due diligence prior  to
      or at the hearing before  them  and  that  this  had  in  effect  been
      accepted by Mr Clark because it was acknowledged that the material was
      there although not on Mr Omar's file.


   4. I heard submissions from both representatives on the basis both that I
      accepted the new evidence and that I did not.  Having  considered  the
      provenance of the evidence sought to be adduced I refuse to admit  it.
      The evidence was on Mr Omar's mother's Home Office file. Mr  Omar  had
      arrived in the UK as a dependant of his mother, who  had  applied  for
      asylum with him as her dependant. She  had  been  refused  asylum  but
      eventually granted indefinite leave to remain and he had been  granted
      ILR in line. The evidence sought to  be  adduced  included  Mr  Omar's
      mother's earlier asylum claim in a false  name.  Mr  Clark  said  that
      although the material was available at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal panel hearing, it had not been adduced  because  it  was  not
      before the caseworker and was not on his file.  It was however  plain,
      or should have been to the caseworker, from Mr Omar's  file,  that  Mr
      Omar had arrived in the UK as a dependant of his  mother  and  applied
      for asylum as her dependant and obtained ILR in line with  her.  Given
      the seriousness of potential deportation it would have been reasonable
      and indeed expected that the caseworker would have considered  whether
      there was information about other family members available that  could
      have been relevant to the consideration  whether  Mr  Omar  should  be
      deported. These investigations would be the same as undertaken by  the
      SSHD if a witness is tendered on behalf of an appellant who is  not  a
      British Citizen by birth - it seems to be usual practice for the  SSHD
      to obtain disclosure of that witness's immigration history  to  enable
      effective cross-examination. The SSHD put her case in the  manner  she
      did based upon the evidence she relied upon; she  had  not  sought  to
      obtain any additional evidence prior to the hearing and did  not  seek
      an  adjournment  in  order  to  obtain   such   evidence.   In   these
      circumstances the evidence is not admitted.


   5. In considering  the  grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was
      obtained, I have put out of my mind the evidence the  SSHD  sought  to
      adduce.

   6. Mr Omar arrived in the UK in 2004 aged 10. At the date of the decision
      the subject of appeal he was aged 19.  His  first  conviction  was  in
      August 2011  and  since  that  date  he  has  accrued  20  convictions
      including seven offences of possession of cannabis, two of theft,  one
      of robbery, one of  resisting  or  obstructing  a  constable,  one  of
      possession of a bladed article or pointed article in a  public  place,
      one of possession of an offensive weapon, one  of  using  threatening,
      abusive or insulting  language  or  behaviour,  one  of  making  false
      representations and one of criminal damage.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal panel found that notwithstanding the fact that
      Mr Omar had given Dr Marco false information (he had denied  any  drug
      use and failed to take any part in a future care plan), they  accepted
      that he remained significantly dependant  upon  his  mother,  suffered
      from depression and that there still existed family life  between  him
      and his mother.  The First-tier Tribunal do not identify the nature of
      the family life that exists between him  and  his  mother.  Mr  Omar's
      evidence was that he did not go  out,  suffered  from  depression  and
      relied upon his mother. He is stated to assist her with  shopping  but
      no other household chores. Dr  Marco  described  the  relationship  as
      symbiotic.

   8. A description of a relationship as symbiotic is a strong term to  use.
      The First-tier Tribunal in adopting this  analysis  of  Dr  Marco  has
      failed to take into account the evidence that  was  placed  before  Dr
      Marco and the acknowledgement by Mr Omar that  he  had  given  the  Dr
      false information. There  has  been  no  analysis  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal of whether and to what extent the conclusions of the  Dr  are
      infected by this. There has been no analysis  of  Mr  Omar's  evidence
      that his convicting was because he had been led  astray;  an  apparent
      failure by  him  to  admit  to  any  personal  responsibility.  It  is
      difficult to see any analysis by the First-tier Tribunal of the impact
      of this and his offending on his mother given the claimed symbiosis of
      the  relationship.  There  is  a  considerable  difference  between  a
      symbiotic relationship and a relationship  with  his  mother  that  is
      significant emotionally or psychologically. There has been no  attempt
      by the Tribunal to consider the extent of that relationship, Mr Omar's
      age and the impact of that upon the relationship  or  his  significant
      number of convictions over a relatively short period of  time  despite
      the claimed relationship with his mother.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal make a finding that Mr Omar has been in the UK
      for most of his adult life. Whilst he has been in the UK  for  all  of
      his adult life he had not, at the date of decision been in the UK  for
      most of his life.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal finds that Mr Omar is socially and  culturally
      integrated in the UK. There is no reasoning for this finding.  Indeed,
      the First-tier Tribunal states that his integration  has  to  a  large
      extent been anti-social.  Mr  Omar's  evidence  was  that  he  has  no
      interest in developing any skills or  acquiring  education;  he  takes
      drugs. There was no recorded evidence that he has any interaction with
      society other than through  his  criminal  behaviour.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal have  not  provided  any  reasons  for  finding  that  he  is
      therefore socially and culturally integrated.

  11. The First-tier Tribunal also found that he had no cultural  or  social
      ties with his country  of  origin.  That  is  not  the  question.  The
      question to be asked is whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to
      his re-integration. There does not appear to have  been  any  evidence
      why, if he does have such a close relationship with  his  mother,  she
      could not return to Iraq with him (she is an Iraqi  national)  or  why
      she would not be able to provide him with support. That he has been in
      the UK for a number of years does not necessarily result in  obstacles
      to reintegration particularly given the lack of  evidence  before  the
      Tribunal to make a finding that he had no family or other  connections
      and that he had no outside interests (other than  criminal  activity).
      There has been no finding on the mother's role or potential role in re-
      integration. Given the evidence that he does not engage  with  society
      (other than through criminality) and given the evidence that he has  a
      close relationship with his mother, it was incumbent upon  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to assess the extent  to  which,  through  her,  he  had
      retained knowledge and awareness of his cultural and  social  heritage
      and the extent to which that knowledge would or would not assist in re-
      integration. That was not done.

  12. The finding by the First-tier Tribunal that Mr Omar  meets  s117C  (4)
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is plainly, on  the  basis
      of the evidence recorded and the reasoning applied, a  material  error
      of law.

  13. In the light of the need to make primary findings of fact and that the
      scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign
      the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal, I set  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal to be re-made - no findings of fact to be retained.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

     [pic]


        Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
    Date 16th May 2016

