
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da000952015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the RCJ                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 June 2016                              |On 15 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Mallick, Counsel, instructed by Marsans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (SSHD) against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Moore promulgated on 24 March 2016 in which he allowed SC's  appeal
         against the SSHD's decision of 12 March 2015 to make a  deportation
         order against him  under  Regulations  19(3)  (b)  and  21  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
         Regulations). For the purpose of this decision I will refer  to  SC
         as the 'claimant'.

Background

      2. The claimant is a national of Germany, of Tamil ethnicity, born  in
         1993. He entered the UK in 2001 when he was 8  years  old.  He  has
         lived in the UK ever since. On 16 December  2004  the  family  were
         issued UK residence permits  valid  until  16  December  2009.  The
         permits were not extended  after  that  time  although  the  family
         continued to reside in the UK.


      3. On 4 March 2013 the claimant was convicted of one count  of  sexual
         assault on a female by penetration, and two counts  of  rape  of  a
         female aged 16 or over. On 2 April 2013 he was sentenced to a total
         of six years imprisonment. The victim  was  the  claimant's  former
         girlfriend. Both came from traditional  and  conservative  families
         that did not condone  sexual  activity  outside  of  marriage.  The
         offences occurred on the 23rd and 24th of June 2012.  The  claimant
         effectively blackmailed his victim into having  non-consensual  sex
         by threatening to inform her  family  of  their  relationship.  The
         claimant pleaded not guilty at trial and the victim was required to
         undergo a robust cross-examination.


      4. In her reasons for refusal letter the SSHD considered whether the
         claimant had resided lawfully in the UK in accordance with the 2006
         regulations. She took into account a number of documents relating
         to the claimant and his family but she was not satisfied that this
         evidence demonstrated that the claimant had resided in the United
         Kingdom in accordance with the 2006 regulations for a continuous
         period of five years. The SSHD did not therefore consider that the
         claimant had acquired a permanent right of residence. Nor was it
         accepted that he had been continuously resident in the United
         Kingdom for 10 years in accordance with the 2006 regulations. As a
         consequence the SSHD was not satisfied that the claimant was
         entitled to the enhanced protection under Regulation 21(3) or (4)
         of the 2006 regulations.


      5. The SSHD noted that the claimant had been subject to the minimum
         level of Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA level
         1) and that he had also been required to register on the sex
         offenders register indefinitely. This indicated that the claimant
         posed a continuing risk to a vulnerable group, namely women, and in
         particular to his victim. In completing his NOMS 1 assessment the
         offender manager found that the claimant posed a medium risk of
         harm to a known adult. Whilst acknowledging that the NOMS 1
         assessment also indicated that the claimant posed a low risk of re-
         offending, the SSHD was of the view that the serious harm that
         could occur if the claimant did reoffend meant that it was not
         reasonable to leave the public vulnerable to the effects of his
         reoffending. The SSHD was not satisfied there was sufficient
         evidence that the claimant had adequately addressed all the reasons
         for his offending behaviour. There was no evidence before the SSHD
         that the claimant had successfully completed an enhanced thinking
         skills course or a victim awareness course, which could possibly
         reduce the risk of reoffending in the future. The SSHD was
         consequently satisfied that the claimant did have a propensity to
         reoffend and that he represented a genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious threat to the public such as to justify his
         deportation on grounds of public policy. In finding that her
         decision was proportionate the SSHD took into account the
         claimant's age (21), and the fact that he was in good health. The
         SSHD noted the claimant's claim to have been exercising treaty
         rights in the UK for approximately 13 years, but stated that no
         sufficient evidence of this had been provided. Nor was there said
         to be evidence of any significant integration into the community in
         the UK. With respect to the possibility of rehabilitation, the SSHD
         claimed there was no evidence that the claimant had undertaken any
         rehabilitative work while in custody. Whilst acknowledging that the
         claimant's mother, father and sister were residing in the United
         Kingdom, they had been unable to prevent him from committing his
         offences. The SSHD did not consider it likely that the claimant's
         family would be able to provide him with the necessary to support
         to aid his rehabilitation. The SSHD then went on to consider
         whether her decision breached article 8 ECHR, but concluded that it
         did not.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

      6. The first-tier Tribunal judge heard evidence from the claimant, his
         mother, and his sister. The judge set out the claimant's
         immigration and criminal history. At [22] the judge satisfied
         himself that the claimant had entered the UK in 2001 when he was
         approximately 8 years of age. The judge found that the claimant had
         lived in the UK in excess of 14 years. With reference to a
         supplementary claimant's bundle the judge satisfied himself that
         the claimant had resided in the UK between 2003 and 2013. Although
         the earliest document provided by the claimant was a karate award
         dated 31 January 2003, the judge was nevertheless satisfied that
         the claimant must have entered the UK at some time prior to that
         date and was willing to accept the claimant's assertion that he
         entered the UK on 29 August 2001, this also being the evidence of
         the claimant's sister. In light of this finding, and by reference
         to regulation 21 (4) of the 2006 Regulations, the judge concluded
         that the SSHD could only deport the claimant on imperative grounds
         of public security.


      7. The judge noted that imperative grounds of public policy required
         the threat posed by the claimant to be of a particularly high
         degree of seriousness. The judge was not satisfied that the
         claimant posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat,
         despite his conviction and sentence. At [25] the judge found that
         the claimant had integrated into society and life in the UK. To
         support this conclusion the judge drew on the fact that the
         claimant had lived in the UK since the age of eight, that he had
         been educated in the UK through primary and secondary school, and
         thereafter college and, for a short period of time, at university.


      8. At [26] the judge acknowledged the seriousness of the claimant's
         offending but found that the claimant now genuinely regretted his
         conduct, was remorseful and understood the trauma that he placed
         his victim under up until his conviction. The judge referred to the
         sentencing judge's the marks noting that his victim did not wish
         the claimant "any harm". The first-tier Tribunal judge concluded
         that the sentencing judge viewed the claimant as unlikely to
         reoffend.


      9. At [28] the judge directed himself in accordance with the Court of
         Appeal decision in SSHD v FV(Italy) [2013] 1 WLR 3399 and rejected
         the proposition that there were imperative grounds of public
         security warranting the expulsion measure. This case was thought to
         have decided that periods of imprisonment could be included when
         calculating lengths of residence for the purpose of Regulation 21.
         The judge considered that that relevant test was whether the union
         citizen had become genuinely integrated into the member state
         during the relevant period [23]. Applying that test the judge
         concluded that the claimant had genuinely integrated into UK
         society. At [29] the judge found that the claimant had returned to
         Germany only once for a short holiday and that he no longer had any
         family or friends who lived there. Applying FV (Italy) the judge
         was not satisfied that any threat posed by the claimant was of a
         particularly high degree of seriousness as reflected by the use of
         the words "imperative grounds."


     10. At [30] the judge concluded that the SSHD's decision was
         proportionate. The judge concluded by stating, "Having reached such
         a finding I have not then gone on to consider article 8 of ECHR,
         but if I was to do so bearing in mind all my findings above I find
         it likely that this appellant may have a successful claim under
         article 8".

The grant of permission to appeal and the Upper Tribunal hearing

     11. Permission was granted on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal
         had arguably failed to apply MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of
         Citizen's Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC), which
         considered the judgement of the Court of Justice of the European
         Union in case C- 400/12 (SSHD v MG) with respect to the meaning of
         the "enhanced protection" provision. The CJEU case made clear that
         the 10 year period should be calculated by counting back from the
         date of the expulsion decision and that, in principle, periods of
         imprisonment interrupted the continuity of the period of residence.
         A period of imprisonment during those 10 years did not however
         necessarily prevent a person from qualifying for enhanced
         protection if that person was sufficiently integrated, even though,
         according to the same judgement, a period of imprisonment had a
         negative impact in so far as establishing integration was
         concerned. The first-tier Tribunal was said to have arguably erred
         in disregarding the period of imprisonment when calculating the
         relevant 10 year period. It was also arguable that the tribunal's
         consideration of integration was not done in the manner required by
         MG.

     12. Mr Jarvis provided a copy of the decision in Ahmed Warsame v SSHD
         [2016] EWCA Civ 16 and expanded upon the SSHD's grounds. It was
         submitted that the judge's failure to consider and apply MG and
         Warsame (which was promulgated 2 months prior to the First-tier
         Tribunal's decision) amounted to a material legal error as the
         judge counted the claimant's incarceration as part of the 10 year
         period and failed to properly assess whether the nature and degree
         of the claimant's integration was sufficient to warrant the
         application of the enhanced test (on the basis that the claimant
         fell within the 'maybe' category identified in Warsame at [9] and
         [10]). It was accepted by Mr Jarvis that, if the claimant's account
         of his residence in the UK was accepted, he would have resided in
         the UK for 12 years prior to his imprisonment. Nor was there said
         to be any satisfactory evidence before the judge that the claimant
         had been residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA regulations.
         It was further submitted that, despite making several references to
         the low risk assessment of the claimant re-offending, the judge did
         not actually make any specific finding as to whether the claimant
         posed a genuine and present risk to the fundamental interests of
         society.


     13. Ms Mallick adopted the Rule 24 response drafted by her colleague
         and submitted that the claimant had resided in the UK for a
         continuous period of over 10 years and that, although the SSHD took
         issue with whether the claimant himself was exercising Treaty
         rights, no challenge had ever been mounted to the assertions that
         his family were living and working in the UK in accordance with the
         2006 Regulations. Ms Mallick accept that the judge did not
         specifically find that the claimant had obtained permanent
         residence in the UK as a result of being a family member of a
         qualified person. It was however submitted that the judge had
         reasonably assumed this as his starting point. It was submitted
         that the judge's findings at [25], relating to the claimant's
         integration, were sufficient to sustain the decision, and the
         position of the victim and her mother, as disclosed in the
         sentencing remarks, further supported the evidence relating to the
         claimant's integration. It was contended that the judge had engaged
         in an 'overall assessment' as required by MG.

Discussion

     14. It is extremely unfortunate that neither the Upper Tribunal case of
         MG, nor the Court of Appeal decision in Warsame, were brought to
         the attention of the First-tier Tribunal judge. This resulted in
         the judge applying the 'imperative grounds' test by reference to a
         Court of Appeal decision that had been overturned (see Warsame, at
         [10]).


     15. At [23] of his determination the judge found that the claimant had
         resided in the UK for a continuous period of 10 years prior to the
         SSHD's expulsion decision and that such a decision could only be
         taken if there were imperative grounds of public security. The
         judge did not consider whether the claimant's incarceration of 3
         years broke the continuity of his residence counting backwards from
         the date of the expulsion decision. The judge was required to do so
         following MG and Warsame. The judge misdirected himself on the
         appropriate law and this constituted an error of law.


     16. Ms Mallick, in reliance on the Rule 24 response, submitted that any
         such error was not material as the claimant has resided in the UK
         for a continuous period of more than 10 years prior to his
         incarceration and because the judge found that the claimant had
         integrated into UK society. I cannot accept this submission. The
         claimant could only have availed himself of the highest level of
         protection if the judge was satisfied that he had 'sufficiently
         integrated' into UK society. The headnote of MG refers to a tension
         within the judgment of the CJEU in Case C-400/12 Secretary of State
         v MG in respect of the meaning of the "enhanced protection"
         provision. Having carefully analysed the judgement of the CJEU the
         Upper Tribunal concluded that a period of imprisonment during the
         relevant 10 years does not necessarily prevent a person from
         qualifying for enhanced protection if that person was 'sufficiently
         integrated'. The Upper Tribunal noted however that, according to
         the same judgment, a period of imprisonment must have a negative
         impact in so far as establishing integration is concerned. In
         Warsame counsel for the Respondent accepted that there is a "maybe"
         category of cases under MG where a person has resided in the host
         state during the ten years prior to imprisonment, depending on an
         overall assessment of whether integrating links have been broken,
         and that in such cases it might be relevant to determine, by way of
         overall assessment, the degree of integration in the host member
         state or the extent to which links with the original member state
         have been broken.


     17. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain
         an adequate analysis of whether the claimant's integration was of a
         degree sufficient to attract the operation of the highest level of
         protection, notwithstanding his incarceration for a period of three
         years which, in principle, would have interrupted the continuity of
         the 10 year period of residence. At [22] the judge satisfied
         himself, based on the documentary in the supplementary bundle and
         the evidence from his sister, that the claimant has resided in the
         UK since 2001 when he was approximately 8 years old. Than at [25]
         the judge finds the claimant has integrated "into society ad [sic]
         life in the UK" based on his age when he entered the UK, his
         exposure to primary, secondary, and to some extent, tertiary
         education, and the fact that he had only left the UK for a short
         holiday. With respect, this is an entirely deficient analysis when
         one considers what was contemplated in MG. The judge's analysis is
         a bare backbone without any detailed assessment of the actual
         nature and quality of the claimant's integration. There is no
         sufficient assessment of the personal, family, cultural, social and
         occupational roots developed by the claimant since his arrival in
         the UK. The failure by the judge to undertake this vital
         consideration, necessary to ascertain whether the claimant's
         integration is sufficient to attract the highest level of
         protection, renders his decision unsustainable.


     18. Nor am I satisfied that the judge has actually made a finding in
         respect of rule 21(5)(c) of the 2006 regulations as to whether the
         claimant's personal conduct represents a genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
         interests of society. Although the judge refers to extracts from
         the sentencing remarks suggesting the sentencing judge did not
         anticipate any further criminality by the claimant, and also
         referred to the NOMS 1 assessment that categorised the claimant as
         being at low risk of re-offending, the decision does not contain a
         clear finding with respect to rule 21(5)(c).


     19. As the rule 24 response acknowledges, the judge did not go on to
         consider the second and 3rd levels of protection. The judge found
         that the claimant had resided in the UK since the age of 8, and it
         is not disputed that the claimant and his family were issued with
         Residence Permits in December 2004 valid until December 2009. The
         issuance of a Residence Permit does not however bestow a right of
         residence under EU law. Although it is quite possible that the
         claimant has been residing in the UK in accordance with the 2006
         Regulations (probably as a dependent of his father, who may have
         been a qualified person) for a continuous period of 5 years, there
         was no evidence to that effect before the First-tier Tribunal and
         the SSHD, in her Reasons For Refusal Letter, specifically rejected
         the claimant's assertion that he had obtained a permanent right of
         residence based on an absence of satisfactory evidence.

Conclusion

     20. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that the First-tier
         Tribunal judge did materially erred in law. There are however
         aspects of the determination that are unaffected by the judge's
         errors. These relate to his primary factual findings, contained at
         [22], relating to the length of time the claimant has lived in the
         UK, and [26], relating to his genuine regret and remorse for his
         offending and his acceptance of the aggravating features of his
         conviction.


     21. Ms Mallick invited me to remit the appeal back to the First-tier
         Tribunal given the need for a much fuller investigation of the
         nature and degree of the claimant's integration into UK society,
         and in light of the further evidence that would be required for
         such an investigation. I consider it appropriate to remit the
         appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal in these circumstances.

     22. The First-tier Tribunal will have to consider whether, by overall
         assessment, the nature, quality and length of the claimant's
         residence prior to his incarceration is sufficient to catapult him
         into the 'maybe category' identified in MG, with reference to
         Warsame (at [9] and [10]), such that he is still entitled to the
         enhanced category of protection.

     23. The First-tier Tribunal will also need to consider whether the
         claimant had been residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA
         regulations, either as a qualified person in his own right, or as a
         result of being a dependent family member of a qualified person,
         since his arrival in the UK. This is relevant both to whether the
         claimant is entitled to the highest form of protection (on
         imperative grounds), but also whether he is entitled to the medium
         level of protection (that his removal can only be justified on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security) as a result of
         having obtained permanent residence. Relevant to this assessment is
         the existence of evidence that he and/or his parents were
         exercising free-movement rights since their arrival in the UK and
         that the claimant was dependent on his parents.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.
The  matter  will  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
reconsidered in light of the conclusions of  this  decision,  with  reserved
factual findings contains in paragraphs 22 and  26,  before  a  judge  other
than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moore.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 14 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               14 June 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
