
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2015                   |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                               DARIUSZ TOBOLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A B Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on  26  October  1971,  is  a  national  of
    Poland.  He was previously in the United  Kingdom  as  a  self-employed
    painter and decorator but now is on Employment Support Allowance. It is
    his case that he entered the United  Kingdom  on  4  April  2003  as  a
    visitor because, at that point, Poland was not in  the  European  Union
    and did not join it until 1 May 2004.   He has  committed  19  offences
    since 28 November 2004 and was sentenced to twelve months  imprisonment
    on 10 August 2005, three months and 20 days  on  11  October  2013  and
    twelve weeks on 24 February 2014. These offences  include  shoplifting,
    assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm,  criminal  damage  and  going
    equipped for theft.

2.   On 23 April 2014 the Secretary of State for the Home Department made  a
    decision to deport him on the basis that he posed  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy if he
    were to be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom. He was also  served
    with a one stop notice on 28 April 2014 and he  appealed  on  30  April
    2014.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffiths dismissed his appeal on 3  February
    2015. In particular, in paragraph 46 the judge said:
         "I am unable to find that the document from the Department of  Work
         and  Pensions  is  determinative  in  the  absence  of   additional
         documentation.  Therefore I am not satisfied that the appellant can
         show he has lived  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  ...  relevant
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years."

4.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and on 4 March  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baker  gave  him  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was unreasonable to give no weight to the
    letter from the Department of Work and Pensions.  He  also  found  that
    there was merit in the Appellant's submission that he had lived in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of more than ten years before  a
    decision was made to deport him.

5.   The Respondent sent in a Rule 24 response on 20 March 2015.

Notice of Decision

6.   The Appellant did not appear at the hearing but a  friend  attended  on
    his behalf. He explained that the Appellant  wanted  to  apply  for  an
    adjournment of the error of law hearing.  He submitted  a  letter  from
    Wandsworth Medical Centre, dated 6 November 2015, which stated that the
    Appellant had been diagnosed with depression in  August  2014  and  had
    been prescribed an anti-depressant. It also said that the Appellant had
    asked for his hearing to be rescheduled for a later  date  as  he  felt
    that his mood was currently too low to attend. He submitted a Statement
    of Fitness to Work. It said that the Appellant was not fit to work from
    8 November  2015  and  8  December  2015.  However,  neither  of  these
    documents said that he was not fit to attend the hearing.  I  was  also
    informed that the Appellant  could  not  afford  to  instruct  a  legal
    representative. The Respondent opposed an adjournment.

7.   I considered whether to exercise my case management powers  under  rule
    5(3)(h) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and
    adjourn the hearing and decided that it was not  in  the  interests  of
    justice to do so as it was unclear when the Appellant would be  fit  to
    attend the error of law hearing and it was not likely that he would  be
    able to address the legal issue in question even if he did attend.

8.   There was no  dispute  between  the  parties  that  the  Appellant  had
    committed a  significant  number  of  offences  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom. However, in order to justify his  deportation  the  Respondent
    had to decide how long he had lived in the United Kingdom and if he had
    a right of  permanent  residence.  Regulation  21  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 provides for three  different
    tests dependent on an individual's status and length  of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.

9.   When the Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal he asserted that he had lived here for more than ten years and
    that, therefore, he could only be deported  on  imperative  grounds  of
    public  security  in  accordance  with  regulation  21(4)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. However, the Respondent correctly relied on the case of C-
    400/12 in which the Court of Justice of the European  Union  held  that
    the proper construction of the Directive is that the ten year period of
    residence referred to in an application must in principle be continuous
    and must be calculated back by counting from the date of  the  decision
    ordering an expulsion. Given the periods of  imprisonment  referred  to
    above, it is  clear  that  regulation  21(4)  does  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant.

10.   At  the  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Griffith,   the
    Appellant relied on a letter from the JobcentrePlus, dated 27 May 2014,
    which confirmed that he had commenced work as a self-employed person on
    24 September 2006 and had subsequently been in receipt of ESA and  that
    it was accepted that he had acquired a permanent right of residence  in
    the United Kingdom under regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations.

11.  In paragraph 46 of her decision and reasons First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith found that she was unable to find that the document  from  the
    DWP was determinative in the absence of additional documentation.   But
    when doing so she failed to take into account the fact that it  can  be
    presumed that the DWP had ready access to the  national  insurance  and
    benefit records, which would have confirmed  that  he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence. She also failed to take into account  the
    fact  that  the  Respondent  regularly  relies  on  such  records  when
    assessing an applicant  or  appellant's  entitlement  to  residence  or
    leave.

12.  As a consequence, I find that the approach by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to the letter from the DWP  amounted  to  an  error  of  law.  In
    addition, it vitiated the rest of her decision and reasons as  she  did
    not go on to consider whether there  were  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security to justify his deportation,  as  required  by
    regulation 21(3) of the EEA  Regulations,  if  he  was  entitled  to  a
    permanent right of residence.

Conclusions

1.   For all of these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  there  were  material
    errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  and  reasons
    and that it should be set aside.

2.   The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith is set aside.

3.   The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith.

    Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 9 November 2015
