
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00874/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Promulgated on               |
|3 June 2013                                   |6 June 2013                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President



                                   Between

                                ALFRED PRIFTI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant, whose nationality is disputed, appealed  to  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  making   a
    deportation order against him.  His appeal was heard by Judge Easterman
    and Mr Armitage.  A determination was issued that was expressly that of
    Judge Easterman alone.

 2. On 10th May I wrote to the parties as follows:

        "This appeal was heard by a panel consisting of Judge Easterman and
        Mr Armitage.  The judge drafted and issued  a  determination  under
        the mistaken impression (a) that Mr Armitage had resigned from  the
        Tribunal, and (b) that a person who has resigned  cannot  take  any
        part in the completion of a decision following a hearing before his
        resignation.  Neither proposition is true.


        Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted  solely
        on the basis of unfairness or procedural irregularity arising  from
        the issuing of a determination by one person  following  an  appeal
        heard by two people.  It seems to me that in the circumstances  the
        appropriate course of  action  is  for  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal to be allowed and for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal with a direction that the latter make and issue
        a determination that is the determination of both those  who  heard
        the appeal.  If that is done, the new determination will of  course
        carry a right of appeal under s 11 of the 2007 Act.


        Any proposal to the contrary must be made within seven days of  the
        date of this letter."


 3. No response has been received.

 4. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The appeal is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Judge Easterman and Mr Armitage are directed to issue  a  determination
    that is the determination of the panel that heard the appeal.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 3 June 2013
