
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00348/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                                  jason [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appellant is a Portuguese national.  He was born in the  UK  on  14
    November 1995.  Both of his parents originate from Angola.  On 30  July
    2015 the Secretary of State decided to make a deportation  against  the
    appellant on imperative grounds of public security.

2.   The appellant's criminal history is fully and conveniently set  out  in
    a determination of Upper Tribunal Judge  Craig  of  8  August  2016  at
    paragraphs 2 to 6 which are in the following terms:

         "2.  Regrettably, from the age of about 15 the appellant appears to
             have been out of control.  His first recorded  conviction  was
             on 2 March 2011 when he was convicted at  Barnet  Magistrates'
             Court of common assault, for  which  he  received  a  referral
             order for twelve months and was ordered to pay costs of  �150.
             Thereafter, he persistently offended, notching up a  multitude
             of convictions over the following  three  and  a  half  years,
             including a very nasty offence of wounding/inflicting grievous
             bodily harm coupled with causing a man  to  engage  in  sexual
             activity without consent (see paragraph 12 below), for  which,
             just short of  his  16th  birthday,  he  was  sentenced  to  a
             detention and training order for a total of twelve months, and
             also made the subject of a restraining order which was to last
             for three years.  This sentence would  undoubtedly  have  been
             significantly longer but for the  appellant's  youth.  He  was
             also on that occasion sentenced to  a  consecutive  period  of
             four months' detention and a training order in  respect  of  a
             previous conviction also at Barnet Juvenile Court of theft and
             theft from a person.  By this time (that is 2  November  2013)
             he had accumulated some seven convictions plus  one  reprimand
             in respect of  various  offences,  including  robbery,  theft,
             battery and possessing cannabis.

         3.   The following year he was convicted on another four  occasions
             for offences  including  selling/transferring  an  air  weapon
             unlawfully (for which he was again sentenced  to  a  detention
             and training order for four months) and then in July 2012  for
             failing to comply with the detention and training  order  (for
             which he was returned to detention for  six  weeks)  and  then
             again in October 2012 for failing to comply with the detention
             and training order for  which he was returned to detention for
             eight weeks and then in November of that year for resisting or
             obstructing a constable.

         4.   The following year he was convicted on two occasions on counts
             of possessing cannabis again, for which he was also  convicted
             in August of the following year, 2014.

         5.    He  apparently  did  not   comply   with   the   notification
             requirements which had been imposed in 2011 under  the  Sexual
             Offences Act, for which he was fined and then  on  6  November
             2014, he was convicted at Wood Green Crown  Court  of  affray,
             for which he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.

         6.   Following this last conviction (in respect of which it is  now
             said on his behalf that he was not in fact guilty and had only
             pleaded guilty because he was wrongly advised so  to  do)  and
             after he had previously  been  notified  of  the  respondent's
             intent to make a deportation order against him, subject to any
             representations he might make, and following consideration  of
             these representations,  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to
             deport him, which is dated 30 July 2015.   This  decision  was
             made  pursuant to  the  2006  Immigration  (European  Economic
             Area) Regulations 2006 on the  basis  that  the  decision  was
             justified on  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security",  it
             having been  considered  (at  paragraph  30  of  the  decision
             letter) that the appellant  met "the  integration  factors  as
             set out in [the CJEU case  of]  Tsakouridis."   It  was  noted
             within this decision that the affray of  which  the  appellant
             had been convicted in November 2014 (the offence  having  been
             committed on 1 March  2014)  had  involved  both  bottles  and
             knives and that during the  incident  three  people  had  been
             stabbed. It was also noted that the OASys  assessment  of  the
             appellant found "that you posed a high risk  of  harm  to  the
             public and a medium risk of harm to  children"  (at  paragraph
             36).  The respondent also noted that the offender manager  who
             had written the OASys assessment had noted not only  that  the
             appellant  had  an  extensive  criminal  record  but  that  he
             "associated with criminally minded  individuals"  and  had  "a
             predatory lifestyle".  For the  reasons  set  out  within  the
             Decision letter, the respondent  considered  that  deportation
             was justified on imperative grounds of public security."

3.   The appellant appealed the decision of the  respondent  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and in a decision promulgated on 7 March 2016 the  First-
    tier Tribunal refused that appeal.  Thereafter the appellant sought  to
    appeal that decision and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
    granted on 13 July 2016.  The matter then came  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Craig.  For reasons set out in his determination, which it is not
    necessary for the purposes of this decision to detail here, he  decided
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal required to be  set  aside
    and remade.  However, he did not seek to remake the decision.   Rather,
    so far as relevant for the present proceedings, he directed as follows:

         "1.  This  appeal  will  be  relisted  for  hearing  in  the  Upper
             Tribunal, when the Tribunal will determine

             (a)   whether  the  respondent  is  required  to  justify  his
                  deportation on imperative grounds of security, and if so

             (b)  whether this is made out."

4.   On the matter coming before us Mr Avery, on behalf of  the  respondent,
    conceded that the respondent did require  to  justify  the  appellant's
    deportation on imperative grounds of security.

5.   Given the above concession the only matter before  us  was  the  second
    question which Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Craig  had  directed  should  be
    decided.

The Evidence Presented on Appeal

6.   The appellant appeared at the appeal hearing  and  gave  evidence.   We
    also heard evidence from [H], the  appellant's  partner  and  [P],  the
    mother of [H].

7.   In addition to the evidence of the above three witnesses we had  before
    us the OASys Report and it sets out inter alia the following:

8.   First, at (I7) it detailed the circumstances of the  index  offence  as
    follows:

         "The events of affray - the CPS stated it is  not  a  gang  related
         incident.

         On 1 March 2014 at 1638  police  are  called  by  London  Ambulance
         Service to an incident where a person named JM has been stabbed  in
         the armpit and chest.  Police attended this  call  and  established
         that a total of three persons had  been  injured  in  nearby  areas
         linked together.  LN was with another LAS crew and he  had  a  stab
         wound on the top of his hand.  He was at a nearby  Tesco  car  park
         and the third victim JT had received a stab  wound  to  his  thigh.
         None of the injuries were life threatening or life changing at  the
         time.

         Officers established that an incident had occurred and was recorded
         on CCTV ... .  They were informed by the  shopkeeper  that  several
         youths had been in the shop and caused  a  disturbance  inside  and
         outside ... .

         CCTV revealed: Four persons were seen in an altercation  with  four
         other males in and out  of  the  shop  and  some  were  armed  with
         bottles.  The group was seen having an altercation and some  picked
         up bottles in  the  shop  and  leave.   The  altercation  continues
         outside with pushing and shuffling.   They  all  go  slightly  off-
         screen and four of them seen running  back  out  of  view.   It  is
         believed that a stabbing occurred when all males  were  off-camera.
         None of the males with stab wounds made any allegation  of  assault
         with one stating he fell on  glass,  they  were  all  arrested  for
         affray.

         Jason [S] was indentified as one of the males found with  two  wine
         bottles fighting."

9.   With respect to the appellant's lifestyle the assessment states,  first
    at (I8), para 2.8:

         "The lifestyle that Mr [S]  leads  appears  to  be  a  contributing
         factor to his offending.  Police intelligence  shows  that  he  has
         links with gangs in Brent, although he denies this to be  the  case
         telling me now that they  are  'just  boys'  aged  16  and  he  has
         outgrown the gang culture.  The gang lifestyle  was  often  closely
         linked with drugs which Mr [S] also has previous  convictions  for.
         Mr [S] also stated that he thinks everyone smokes cannabis and  did
         not see cannabis use as  a  problem.   However,  Mr  [S]'s  partner
         informs me she has very different views on this,  would  not  allow
         cannabis (or indeed any cigarettes) to be smoked in her company.

         The CPS paperwork states that Mr [S]'s involvement in this  offence
         was gang  related  although  clearly  there  were  eight  offenders
         involved in  the  affray,  with  three  of  them  needing  hospital
         treatment for stab wounds."

10.  Secondly at (I10) the assessment  turns  to  the  issue  of  risk  with
    respect to the appellant and states this:

         "I have assessed Mr [S] as posing a risk of serious harm  based  on
         the current available information as  I  am  of  the  view  that  a
         serious incident could happen at any time and Mr [S] is capable  of
         causing serious harm.

         Mr [S] is assessed using the Offender Group Reconviction Scale  ...
         as posing a very high risk of reoffending within  two  years.   The
         likelihood of further violent  offending  is  assessed  as  medium.
         This is based on actuarial factors such as age, gender,  number  of
         previous convictions and age of first conviction.   I  concur  with
         this  in  my  assessment.   The  risk  areas  are  his   lifestyle,
         associates, cannabis use and thinking and behaviour  pertaining  to
         serious group offending."

11.  Turning to accommodation issues the following observations are made  at
    [I12] of the assessment:

         "Previously Mr [S] has been evicted from a property in  London  for
         not paying rent.  Prior to that Mr [S] resided with his mother  and
         younger sister but this  has  been  problematic  due  to  his  gang
         involvement.  An incident at his mother's  address  where  a  large
         group of youths targeted him at the house and as a  result  he  was
         stabbed.  Owing to his link with gangs and the risk  of  him  being
         targeted, I have assessed this section as being linked  to  serious
         harm to both himself and family....

         I then referred Mr [S] to Penrose another accommodation agency  but
         again, he failed to engage with them.  Mr [S] has consistently been
         late for his appointments with myself and housing.  He was  advised
         to go to Luton Borough Council and speak to the Homeless Department
         but he failed to do so.  As a result of his non-compliance and  the
         fact that he had no permanent address,  a  decision  was  taken  to
         recall."

12.  The appellant did not complete his school education as  he  received  a
    custodial sentence and therefore did not sit his  GCSEs.   He  did  not
    return to education on completing his sentence.

13.  The appellant's mother told his offender  manager  that  his  home  had
    been vandalised by members of rival gangs and  consequently  she  would
    not be able to accommodate the appellant.

14.  At (I18) of the assessment it was recorded that the appellant  accepted
    that in the past he had associated with the  "wrong  group"  which  had
    contributed to his  offending  behaviour  and  cannabis  use.   He  now
    claimed that the "gang" was just kids aged about 16  and  that  he  had
    moved on from this  behaviour.   He  denied  there  being  any  further
    threats as a result of living with his mother.  It is recorded that the
    circumstances surrounding  the  sexual  conviction/GBH  also  indicated
    significant issues with regard to a predatory lifestyle.  According  to
    an assessment prepared in June 2013 the victim was repeatedly  targeted
    in the build-up to the offence.

15.  At (I20) of the assessment the following  was  set  out  regarding  the
    appellant's drug taking:

         "Mr [S] has smoked cannabis heavily from the age of  around  14/15.
         This seems to coincide with him starting to associate with negative
         peers before coming to the attention of the Criminal Justice System
         when he was 15 years old.  He said that his use  increased  due  to
         feeling stress around his family situation and being  around  like-
         minded peers.  He admitted that at his worst, he  would  smoke  all
         day.  He maintained that he would buy it, but so would his friends.

         Mr [S] said that using cannabis relaxes him and allows  him  to  be
         creative and could offer no negatives about smoking it.  This leads
         me to question whether he is motivated to address it.  He  did  say
         that he has started to reduce the amount that  he  smokes  and  has
         never used any other types of drug.  His current  partner  ...  has
         informed me that she will not permit Mr [S] to smoke when he is  in
         her company, she does not like  cigarettes  smoke  and  claims  she
         would not tolerate cannabis use.

         ...

         Recall - 25/3/15 - Mr [S] told me that he did not  think  drug  use
         was problematic and stated that  'everyone  smokes  cannabis'.   An
         appointment was made for a WDP although Mr [S] did not attend and a
         further appointment could not be made due to his recall period.

16.  So far as emotional well-being is  concerned  the  appellant  told  his
    offender manager this:

         "Mr [S] told me that he does  not  have  any  current  or  previous
         mental health  issues  and  has  never  self-harmed  or  considered
         suicide."

17.  The following comments were made in the assessment at (I24):

         "Mr [S]'s offending history from a  young  age,  coupled  with  his
         lifestyle choices and cannabis misuse indicates issues with  regard
         to his awareness of consequences, both impulsive  and  instrumental
         use of violence and problem solving skills.  I understand  that  Mr
         [S] has previously been sentenced to complete thinking skills but I
         cannot see that he has completed this.  Unfortunately Mr [S]  would
         not have long enough on his licence to complete the programme  now.
         Work  and  supervision   should   address   problem   solving   and
         consequential thinking.  Whilst he has been in a relationship  with
         [H], Mr [S] has looked into education/apprenticeship  opportunities
         which  may  indicate  he  is  matured  enough  although   from   my
         understanding,   it    would    seem    [H]    has    made    these
         enquiries/applications."

18.  The antecedents indicated that the appellant  had  a  history  of  non-
    compliance with youth offending rehabilitation orders and  licences  to
    the Youth Offending services resulting in him breaching the  conditions
    of those orders and/or being recalled on numerous occasions.

19.  Looking at the appellant's offending the assessment at (I36)  made  the
    following observations:

         "With regard to the sexual offence/GBH and Mr  [S]'s  most  serious
         previous conviction, Mr [S] denied being involved and said that  it
         was a mistaken identity.  He  pleaded  not  guilty  but  was  found
         guilty at trial.   According  to  the  Assett  assessment,  Mr  [S]
         punched the victim and fractured his  eye  socket,  forced  him  to
         strip and  do  star  jumps  in  public  and  made  him  masturbate.
         Somebody else is reported to have filmed this and  put  it  on  the
         internet.  He said that he knew the victim and did not get on  with
         him, but denies the offence."

20.  We noted that at (I36) it is recorded that on 4 May 2014 the  appellant
    was returning to his home address in Barnet when he was attacked  by  a
    large number of youths who were waiting for him in  the  vicinity.   He
    was chased round a neighbour's and then round his own house.   This  is
    the address where at the time of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he was residing.  There  were  also  incidents  of  him  being
    attacked or involved in incidents on 27 April 2014, 1 May 2014  and  10
    July 2014.

21.  At (I40) the assessment returned to the issue of risk:

         "The risk to Mr [S], his family,  being  victims  of  reprisals  or
         targeting by rival gang members.  Mr [S] has been stabbed  and  was
         confronted on his mother's doorstep and so the risk to  the  family
         is that they could either be caught up in an incident  or  targeted
         on purpose.  ...

         The risk to Mr [S] would have reduced as he no longer  is  residing
         in London but would escalate again if he were to return to  certain
         areas.

         The risk posed by Mr [S] would include him becoming involved in any
         offence that his associates were involved in.  It is clear that  Mr
         [S] is still involved in cannabis use and if  he  returns  to  gang
         membership/drug dealing then the risk of further offending would be
         raised."

22.  The appellant was assessed in terms of the  said  assessment  where  he
    was in the community as being at a medium risk to children and  a  high
    risk to the public (see: (I41).

23.  The assessment concluded its  observations  on  risk  in  this  way  at
    (I44):

         "ROSH - High to public, specifically young males in rival gangs.

         Risk areas: Gang members, cannabis user.

         OGRS3 - Probability of proven reoffending - very high.

         OGP - Probability of proven non-violent offending - very high.

         OVP - Probability of proven violent type offending - medium.

         Mr [S] has been recalled  for  lack  of  compliance/engagement  and
         concerns about where he is  staying.   He  failed  to  engage  with
         accommodation advocacy and reported  that  he  is  staying  at  his
         mother's house in London and returning to Luton on a daily basis to
         be with his partner (who is in full-time employment).

24.  We also had before us the sentencing remarks made  by  the  judge  with
    respect to the index offence which were these:

         "LN, Jason [S], JM, JT, you have all  pleaded  guilty  to  offences
         which arose out of what  was,  on  any  view,  a  most  disgraceful
         incident that took  place  in  public,  in  broad  daylight,  on  a
         Saturday afternoon.  People going about  their  lawful  business  -
         shop staff, customers, passers-by, were forced to witness what must
         have been a very frightening  spectacle  as  you  pursued  whatever
         grievances you had without thought or concern for  the  safety  and
         comfort of others, both inside shop premises  and  outside  on  the
         street.  There were punches thrown; there were kicks  aimed;  there
         were shop displays knocked over;  there  were  bottles  brandished;
         there were shop staff pushed and shoved and someone -  not  in  the
         dock before me today, I accept -  was  armed  with  a  knife.   The
         potential for serious injury,  including  to  those  who  may  have
         become innocently caught up in what was taking place, is clear  and
         obvious.  It was sheer mindless hooliganism on all of your parts.

         Furthermore, I do not accept for a moment this consensus  that  now
         seems to have broken out amongst you that nobody knew anybody  else
         and that there were no prior grievances or grudges.  Nobody who has
         viewed that footage and seen how quickly that  situation  escalated
         could accept that this was in any way an accidental coming together
         of strangers.  Indeed, were that to be the case, I  would  be  even
         more alarmed to think that the level  of  violence  and  aggression
         displayed on that footage could have possibly resulted from someone
         having his path into the shop blocked  by  people  who  were  total
         strangers to him.  It is  a  ludicrous  suggestion  and  I  totally
         reject it and I am satisfied that this court has not  been  frankly
         informed as to the cause of what took place that day ...

         ... Jason [S], you are 19 years of age today and you too have a bad
         record before the court for offences involving violence.   You  too
         have demonstrated a past disregard for court orders  and  sentences
         that have been passed upon you.  You and  your  group,  the  others
         which have never been apprehended, followed the  other  group  into
         the shop that  day  at  close  quarters.   At  least  one  of  your
         companions was armed with a knife but I have no evidence before  me
         to suggest that you would have known that.

         Inside the shop, once trouble had broken out, you took the decision
         to arm yourself with two bottles.  In fact you can  be  seen  quite
         clearly on the footage returning to the back of the shop  in  order
         to do just that.  Had you wanted to avoid any further  trouble  you
         could have asked the shopkeeper to lock the  door  and  called  for
         assistance from the police and remained inside in  safety  but  you
         clearly wanted trouble that day.  You resisted the efforts  of  the
         shop staff to retrieve those bottles from you.  You went outside to
         where you knew potential trouble was  waiting  and  you  brandished
         those bottles.  I have no evidence that you  were  responsible  for
         causing any actual injury but the potential was clearly there".

25.  Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant relied  on  the  following
    points as to why he should be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom:

         (i)  he was born in London at the Royal Free Hospital;

         (ii) he has lived in the UK for his whole life;

         (iii)    he attended primary  school  and  played  for  the  school
                football team;

         (iv) he attended London Academy from year 7 to year 11 and he  also
                played for the school football team there;

         (v)  he played for Norwich and then began training with Luton  Town
                football club when he was scouted;

         (vi) he has taken it upon himself to move out  of  London  to  live
                with his partner [H] in  order  to  avoid  bad  company  and
                reoffending behaviour;

         (vii)    he has no family or people known to him in Portugal;

         (viii)   his father is  a  British  citizen  (born  in  Angola  and
                previously a citizen of Portugal);

         (ix) he has changed his life with the help of positive  peers  such
                as his girlfriend and her mother;

         (x)  he has realised that he does not want to live a life of  crime
                and it is not for him;

         (xi) he  has  attended  North  West  College  in  Willesden  for  a
                mechanics course;

         (xii)    he was supposed to start an  apprenticeship  at  Barnfield
                College but was recalled due to a breakdown in communication
                with probation;

         (xiii)   Since moving to Luton he has not reoffended;

         (xiv)    the offence of affray "only occurred as  I  was  defending
                myself against three older men that were drunk";

         (xv) he has a good life ahead of him and wants to succeed  in  life
                together with his partner [H];

         (xvi)    [H]'s mother has  managed  to  get  him  a  job  in  motor
                mechanics pending his release;

         (xvii)   he would like to  continue  playing  football  and  forget
                about his previous life of faults;

         (xviii)  his mother suffers from high blood pressure and needs  his
                support, in a letter sent from  prison  the  Appellant  says
                that he has all the support he now needs and he would like a
                last chance to make a fresh start."

26.  In addition to the matters as set out  above  we  also  heard  evidence
    from the appellant.  He adopted the terms of statement contained in the
    appellant's supplementary bundle at pages 1  to  7.   This  in  summary
    stated that the First-tier Tribunal was  wrong  to  hold  that  he  had
    broken up  with  [H]  at  the  time  of  that  hearing.   He  had  only
    temporarily separated.  They were now back together.  [H] was  pregnant
    by him and he wished to be an involved father.  He was staying with [H]
    in Luton, in a house provided by her parents, which is situated in  the
    garden of her parents' home.  He is now staying well away from the area
    where he previously lived and accordingly no longer  saw  his  previous
    associates.  Further there was no risk of him running into persons  who
    had any issues with him.  He denied now using  drugs.   He  denied  any
    gang connections.  So far  as  living  in  Portugal  was  concerned  he
    advised that he did not speak Portuguese and had no family  members  in
    that country.  He denied being a threat to  public  security  and  said
    that [H] had helped him to control his temper and he had  not  offended
    since the index offence.

27.  In his oral evidence with respect to the most serious previous  offence
    he continued to deny doing anything to the victim other  than  punching
    him once and making him strip.

28.  He was asked about the First-tier Tribunal's findings at paragraphs  50
    and 51.  He denied that any such incident had taken place.

29.  [H] gave evidence and adopted her statement which is at pages 8  to  10
    of the supplementary appellant's bundle.  Her position in  summary  was
    this: Her previous breakup with the appellant had been  temporary;  the
    appellant had now totally changed and had matured into a young man; she
    did not believe in drug taking,  and  as  far  as  she  was  aware  the
    appellant no longer uses cannabis; she described issues  with  her  own
    health and how the appellant had helped her with these issues;  if  the
    appellant was deported she would be forced to bring up her child  as  a
    single mother.

30.  In expansion of the position which she had set out  in  her  statement,
    during the course of  her  oral  evidence,  she  said  this  about  the
    appellant:

    (a)  His life had completely changed since he had met her.

    (b)  He was concentrating on their having their first baby.

    (c)  He wanted a future.

    (d)  He had left behind the people he had previously associated with.

    (e)  His life now was entirely different to what it had been.

31.  The final witness was [P].  She  adopted  her  statement  which  is  at
    pages 11 to 13 of the appellant's supplementary bundle.   Her  position
    in the statement was that her  daughter  and  the  appellant  had  gone
    through a rocky period  but  were  now  back  together;  she  felt  the
    appellant had worked hard to turn his life around; he very much wanted,
    she believed, to be a part of her daughter's pregnancy.   She  did  not
    tolerate drug taking and believed the appellant was  no  longer  taking
    drugs.  She felt that the support of her daughter and her  own  support
    would materially assist in keeping the appellant on the right path.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

32.  Mr Avery accepted that the test which had to be met  was  a  high  one.
    However, it was his position that in the circumstances of this case the
    test had quite clearly been met.

33.  In support of the above submissions he relied on a number of factors:

34.  The first factor upon which he placed reliance was  the  level  of  the
    appellant's offending and  the  seriousness,  of  at  least  a  certain
    number, of the matters for which he had been convicted.

35.  Secondly he pointed to the whole terms of the  OASys  Report  which  he
    submitted supported the position of the respondent.  He  in  particular
    pointed to the risk of further offending; the gang associations of  the
    appellant; his unwillingness to accept responsibility for offending and
    his drug taking.  He characterised the content of that report as  being
    very revealing with respect to the core issues before this Tribunal.

36.  He in addition relied on the judge's sentencing remarks  in  the  index
    case.

37.  He described the appellant as a liar and said that  he  had  sought  to
    deceive the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and this  Tribunal.   This
    submission  was  made  under  reference  to  the  appellant's  evidence
    regarding the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  set  out  at
    paragraphs 50 and 51 of its determination.

38.  He submitted that the appellant's evidence with regard  to  the  issues
    raised in those paragraphs could only amount to  lying.   He  submitted
    that it  was  noteworthy  that  the  appellant  had  been  contradicted
    completely regarding these matters in the course of the evidence  given
    by his partner.

39.  He argued that the importance of making a  negative  finding  regarding
    the credibility of the appellant was this: such a finding would  go  to
    whether this Tribunal should accept his evidence when he said  that  he
    had given up cannabis and alcohol.   It  also  went  to  the  issue  of
    whether the Tribunal should accept that he had turned a corner  in  his
    life and would not further offend.  It was his position that his denial
    of the incident referred to within these paragraphs was in order to try
    and hide gang associations.  In the whole circumstances, if  the  court
    were not to  find  him  credible  in  relation  to  these  matters,  he
    submitted that it could  not  hold  that  rehabilitation  was  properly
    underway as had been urged upon us by the appellant's Counsel.

40.  Mr Avery concluded by saying this:

         "Having regard to the foregoing sooner or later the  appellant  was
         going to severely injure or kill a member of the public."

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

41.  Ms McCarthy's submissions concentrated on the very high test  that  had
    to be met in order for the appellant to be deported.   She  pointed  to
    the decision of the Grand Chamber of the ECJ that measures may only  be
    taken on  "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  in  "exceptional
    circumstances" (see: Land Baden-Wurttemberg  v  Panagiotas  Tsakouridis
    case-145/09 [2011] 2 CMLR 11) at paragraph 40.

42.  She submitted that domestic jurisprudence was to the  same  effect  and
    that in LG (Italy)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  190  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    emphasised that "imperative" must "connote a very high threshold" (see:
    paragraph 32).

43.  She submitted that although the appellant's offending was both  serious
    and persistent, his deportation came nowhere close to meeting the level
    of "imperative  grounds  of  public  security".   In  support  of  that
    submission she referred to the following:

    .    The appellant's position in evidence to the  effect  that  he  had
         genuinely turned his life around since meeting his girlfriend  [H].
         He had moved away from the area of his former  associates  and  was
         looking forward to becoming a father in January 2017;

    .    The  appellant  had  shown  genuine  insight  into  his  offending
         behaviour and the effect of that behaviour on others, including the
         sexual offence.  She submitted that he was not a risk  to  children
         and that the motivation for that particular offence was humiliation
         of a peer, not a sexual motive.  She observed that he had completed
         his time in the Sex Offender Register without any further  incident
         and the evidence was to the effect that he did not pose any kind of
         sexual risk to children;

    .    The appellant had  been  helped  by  his  girlfriend  and  by  his
         girlfriend's mother  to  address  his  temper  and  to  manage  his
         emotions;

    .    The appellant had explained his past gang connections, how he came
         to be involved, and  how  he  had  extricated  himself  from  these
         associations.  He now lived far away from his former estate and his
         girlfriend was now his focus in his life along with looking forward
         to the birth of his first child;

    .    Many of the appellant's convictions related to his former  use  of
         cannabis.  He no longer used cannabis and this was supported by the
         evidence of both his girlfriend and his girlfriend's  mother,  both
         of whom were strongly opposed to the use of drugs and believed that
         they would smell it on him if he were smoking it.

44.  She submitted that the above evidence showed that  the  risk  level  as
    set forth in the OASys Report was likely to be overstated and that  the
    appellant was genuinely being supported by his  positive  relationships
    to turn his life around.

45.  Ms McCarthy in the course of her submissions went beyond the above  and
    submitted this: Even if we did not believe a word  that  the  appellant
    had said in his evidence the case still  did  not  come  anywhere  near
    meeting the very high test for his deportation.

Discussion

The Regulatory Framework

46.   The  respondent's  decision  was  made  under  the  framework  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

47.  For the purposes of this hearing the parts thereof which  are  material
    are to be found within Part 4 and in particular Regulation 19(3)  which
    provides:

         "Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who has entered
         the United Kingdom or the family member of such a national who  has
         entered the United Kingdom may be removed if -

         (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have a right to  reside
             under these Regulations;

         (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
             is justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health in accordance with Regulation 21; or

         (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
             is justified on grounds of abuse of rights in accordance  with
             Regulation 21B(2)."

48.  The  discrete  topic  of  decisions  taken  on  public  policy,  public
    security and public health grounds is addressed within  Regulation  21,
    which provides, in material part as follows:

         "(1) In this Regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  under the age of 18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
                  necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in  the
                  Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                  General Assembly of the  United  Nations  on  20  November
                  1999.

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  Regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles -

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  of
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in relation to  a  person  whose  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the  decision-maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

The Meaning and Scope of the Imperative Grounds Test

49.  Guidance on this issue is given by the Court of Appeal in LG (Italy)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.

50.  Lord Justice Carnwath at paragraph 32 observes  that  when  considering
    the test the following points should be taken into account:

         "1)  Weight must  be  given  to  different  tests  within  the  new
             hierarchy.  The words "imperative grounds of public  security"
             at the third level are clearly intended to embody a test which
             is both more stringent and narrower  in  scope  than  "serious
             grounds of public policy or public  security"  at  the  second
             level.

         2)   "Public security" is a familiar expression, but  it  does  not
             appear to have been subject of judicial definition.  I see  no
             reason to equate it with "national security".  That expression
             was discussed in Secretary of State v Rehman [2001]  UKHL  47,
             where Lord Slynn said:

                  "There must be some possibility of risk or danger  to  the
                  security or well-being of the nation which  the  Secretary
                  of State considers makes it desirable for the public  good
                  that the individual should be deported..." (para 15)

             "Public security" to  my  mind  is  a  broader  concept.   The
             earlier version of the manual referred in this connection to -

                  "... national security matters,  or  crimes  that  pose  a
                  particularly serious risk to the safety of the public or a
                  section of the public".

             The words "risk to the safety of the public or  a  section  of
             the public" seem to me reasonably consistent with the ordinary
             understanding of "public security".   In the latest version of
             the manual,  the  utility  of  that  description  is  reduced,
             because it is used for the second  level,  "public  policy  or
             public security", without distinction between the two parts.

         3)   The word "imperative", as  a  distinguishing  feature  of  the
             third level, seems to me to connote  a  very  high  threshold.
             The earlier version of the manual treats it as  equivalent  to
             "particularly serious".  In the latest version, the expression
             "particularly serious risk" is used for the second level.  The
             difference between the two levels, that is, between  "serious"
             and "imperative", is said to be "one of severity",  but  there
             is no indication why the severity of the offence in itself  is
             enough to make removal "imperative".

         4)   The same thinking is reflected in  the  examples  of  offences
             given in the manual.  Both levels require  a  serious  offence
             linked to a propensity  to  re-offend.  The  second  "serious"
             level  encompasses  "a  violent  offence  carrying  a  maximum
             penalty of 10 years"; the third  "imperative"  level  requires
             not only a maximum penalty of 10  years  but  also  an  actual
             sentence of at least five years.  It is not clear why the mere
             fact that a five year sentence has been  imposed  should  make
             removal "imperative".

         5)   Neither version of the Manual seems to  me  to  give  adequate
             weight to the distinction between levels two and three, or  to
             the force of the word "imperative".  To my mind there  is  not
             simply a difference of degree, but a  qualitative  difference:
             In other words, level three requires,  not  simply  a  serious
             matter  of  public  policy,  but  an  actual  risk  to  public
             security, so compelling  that  it  justifies  the  exceptional
             course of  removing  someone  who  (in  the  language  of  the
             Preamble to the Directive) has become  "integrated"  by  "many
             years" residence in the host state."

51.  It is  clear  from  the  above  observations  that  the  test  requires
    something  more  than  the  ordinary  risk  of  a  convicted   criminal
    committing further offences.  Mr Ockelton (Vice-President of the  Upper
    Tribunal) in MG and VC (EEA Regulations 2006; "conducive"  deportation)
    Ireland [2006] UKAIT 00053 states this at paragraph 26:

         The term "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"  must  require
         something more than "even a serious risk of the commission of  even
         quite serious criminal offences;."

    He goes on at paragraph 34 to observe:

         "The test of "imperative grounds of public security" is at the very
         highest level of the calculus introduced by  the  2006  Regulations
         and Directive 2004/38/EC."

52.  Lastly we would observe  that,  public  security  considerations  carry
    considerably less weight in cases of very long  residence  where  there
    are few links with the country of origin: See  LG  and  CC  (EEA  Regs)
    [2009] UKAIT 00024 paragraph 117 and VP (Italy) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ
    806 at paragraphs 21 and 25.

Decision and Reasons

53.  Against the foregoing  regulatory  background  and  the  guidance  with
    respect thereto we turn to consider the question before us: Whether the
    deportation has been made out on imperative grounds of security?

54.  We are persuaded that the above question  should  be  answered  in  the
    negative.  We believe that there are no  such  grounds  justifying  the
    removal of the appellant.

55.  We have reached the above conclusion for the following reasons:

56.  First the appellant has not  been  convicted  of  any  further  offence
    since the index offence.

57.  Secondly he has separated himself from his  former  associates  and  is
    now living in Luton  a  material  distance  from  where  he  previously
    resided.

58.  Thirdly he is in a relationship with [H] which  appears  to  be  stable
    and to have had a significant steadying effect on him.  He now  appears
    to have her support and also the support of her parents.  We found both
    [H] and her mother to be reasonably impressive witnesses whose evidence
    was to the effect that the appellant had been able to turn  around  his
    life as a result of his relationship with [H].

59.  We accept the evidence that the appellant has given up taking drugs.

60.  We believe that the foregoing factors place the  appellant  in  a  very
    different position from that which  he  was  in  at  the  time  of  the
    preparation of the OASys Report.  We believe  that  many  of  the  risk
    factors which were identified within that report and in particular  his
    residence in a particular part of London; his association  with  people
    within that area; his problems with other  people  in  that  area;  his
    taking of drugs; his not having secure and safe accommodation no longer
    exist.  We are  satisfied  that  in  these  circumstances  the  various
    triggers for his risk to the public have to a significant  extent  been
    addressed.  We are persuaded that in these circumstances  his  risk  of
    causing harm to the public is now at a materially lower level than  was
    identified in the said report.  We broadly accept the position advanced
    by Ms McCarthy that there have been  material  changes  in  respect  to
    important  aspects  of  the  appellant's  life  which  have  materially
    decreased the risk he poses to the public.

61.  Fourthly Mr Avery raised the  issue  of  the  appellant  lying  in  the
    course of his evidence.  As we above referred to  this  submission  was
    broadly based on the appellant's position  regarding  the  findings  at
    paragraphs 50 and 51 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  These
    paragraphs were in the following terms:

         "50. I have taken into  account  the  appeal  statement.   I  heard
             evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  from  his  father.    The
             Appellant arrived at the appeal hearing with a  bandaged  arm.
             In his appeal statement he said  that  he  was  assaulted  and
             robbed by unknown males on Sunday 31st January 2016.  He  said
             they robbed him of his iPhone and some cash he had on him.  He
             was knocked unconscious and left with a fractured right wrist,
             left cheekbone and left jaw.  He was asked whether he had made
             a complaint about this incident to the police and he said that
             he had, although I had no documentary evidence  before  me  of
             this.

          51. The Appellant told me that this incident took place in the B&Q
             car park at Cricklewood when he was going into  the  store  to
             buy something for his mother's garden.  He said he  could  not
             really say what had happened because he was drunk and woke  up
             in the back of an ambulance.  �40 was taken from him  as  well
             as his house keys."

62.  The appellant's position initially before us was that no such  incident
    had occurred.  His explanation regarding how he  had  injuries  at  the
    time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  was  this:  He  had
    been in a car accident following being chased by other persons in a car
    who after the accident had broken the windows of his vehicle.

63.  The difficulty with this position was that he had signed and adopted  a
    statement for the purposes of the First-tier Tribunal which  said  this
    at paragraph 11:

         "I was seriously assaulted and robbed by unknown males on Sunday 31
         January 2016 who robbed me of my iPhone and some cash I had on  me.
         I was knocked unconscious and left with a  fractured  right  wrist,
         left cheekbone and left jaw."

64.  His explanation as to how such a statement could  have  been  submitted
    on his behalf and signed by him where the events had never taken  place
    was somewhat confused.  He appeared to blame his representatives at the
    First-tier Tribunal (who no longer represented him) for the lodging  of
    this statement which was incorrect.   He  explained  that  he  had  had
    difficulties with his said representatives.  However, this did  not  in
    our judgment explain how this statement came to be signed  by  him  and
    nor did it explain where the information had come  from.   Ms  McCarthy
    sought to persuade us that the appellant was perhaps  not  telling  the
    entire truth in this matter and was to some extent trying  to  minimise
    the position.

65.  We did not find the appellant's evidence in  relation  to  this  matter
    satisfactory.  We are satisfied that he was not telling the whole truth
    about this incident.

66.  With that in mind we turn to consider the  question  whether  as  urged
    upon us by Mr Avery this should cause us not to believe the core of the
    appellant's evidence that he was a person who  in  essence  had  turned
    around his  life,  was  no  longer  taking  drugs  and  was  no  longer
    associating with persons who might be described as "gang members".   We
    have carefully considered this question and  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant's unwillingness to put before this Tribunal the  whole  truth
    regarding the above  incident  does  not  undermine  the  rest  of  his
    evidence and in particular the core factors to which  we  have  earlier
    referred.  We believed that looking to his evidence as a whole  he  was
    telling the truth in relation to all other  matters.   We  particularly
    noted that there was independent evidence to support his position  that
    he was no  longer  taking  drugs,  he  had  moved  from  where  he  had
    previously resided; and was no longer associating with  "gang  members"
    namely: the evidence of his girlfriend and her mother.  As we  observed
    above we accepted their  evidence  and  found  them  to  be  impressive
    witnesses.  Moreover it does appear to us, from all  of  the  evidence,
    that he is now in a stable relationship.  Finally it is clear  that  he
    has not committed any further offences since the index offence.  We are
    accordingly prepared to accept the core of his evidence.

67.  Further, turning to the  issue  of  his  previous  offending,  although
    properly described as persistent it is not at the  higher  end  of  the
    spectrum.  We do not, in saying this, in any way wish to  minimise  the
    seriousness of the offences which he has committed.  However, given the
    very high bar which requires to be surmounted for his deportation to be
    justified we are clearly of the view  that  the  appellant's  offending
    when taken as a whole is not of a level of seriousness which comes near
    meeting this test.

68.  Even if we were to approach the matter on the basis of the  appellant's
    admitted persistent offending  and  were  prepared  to  hold  that  the
    position was in all material respects the same as is set out within the
    OASys Report we are persuaded that this very high  test  would  not  be
    met.  We believe there is considerable force in the submission made  by
    Ms McCarthy that even  taking  every  negative  finding  regarding  the
    appellant that was relied upon by Mr Avery  it  does  not  justify  the
    appellant's deportation, given the nature of the test which requires to
    be met.  Such findings would not meet the high threshold of the test.

69.  Another factor which we are persuaded has to be had regard to is  this:
     the strategy for managing the appellant has been assessed as a  "MAPPA
    Level 2" and we note from the determination  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Craig that this is not the highest level, that being a Level  3,  which
    will only apply to a small number  of  people  who  may  require  extra
    resources which are not normally available for their management.  Level
    1 we understand  is  for  people  who  could  be  managed  with  normal
    licensing procedures, while Level 2, said to apply to  this  appellant,
    is where various agencies are required to meet in order to agree a risk
    management plan.  Once more when one is considering the very high  test
    applicable here, it is another factor which points  against  that  test
    having been met and being able to hold that the need for deportation is
    "imperative" as distinct from being justified on very serious  grounds.



70.  Lastly we observe that the  appellant  was  at  a  young  age  when  he
    committed his various offences.

71.  We conclude against that background that we cannot  identify  a  threat
    or risk which is so exceptionally serious as to justify deportation  on
    imperative grounds.

72.  Beyond the above we have to have regard to the  various  considerations
    set out in Regulation 6(6).  We have in the instant case  an  appellant
    who has been in the UK his whole life.  He speaks  no  Portuguese.   He
    has no family connections  in  Portugal.   Despite  his  offending,  it
    cannot be said that he is not well integrated into UK society.  All  of
    the foregoing support the appellant's position.



Decision

73.  For the foregoing reasons we sustain the appellant's appeal.

74.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

