
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00240/2019 V


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3rd August 2021                   |On 27th August 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             LLOYD JUNIOR MORGAN
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Symes, of Counsel, instructed by David & Vine
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1987. He arrived in the
       UK on 16th July 2001. He was granted an EEA residence  card  as  the
       dependent of his Dutch grandmother  on  22nd  October  2003,  and  a
       permanent residence card on 5th February 2010.

    2. The claimant has three convictions since coming to  the  UK,  and  a
       caution. The index offence was committed on 13th April 2012 when the
       claimant was convicted of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily
       harm  and  conspiracy  to  rob.  He  was  sentenced  to   12   years
       imprisonment on 3rd December  2012.  On  the  16th  April  2019  the
       Secretary of State made a decision  to  deport  the  claimant.   His
       appeal against the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
       NM Paul in a determination promulgated on the  11th  December  2019.
       Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Grant Hutchinson on 15th January 2020. On
       15th September 2020 Upper Tribunal Coker found, in a decision  under
       Rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       without a hearing, that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did
       not involve the making of an error of a point of law and upheld that
       decision allowing the appeal. On 29th September 2020  the  Secretary
       of State appealed to the Court of Appeal against  the  decisions  of
       Judge NM Paul and Judge Coker.

    3. On 7th October 2020 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  made  a  decision
       provisionally setting aside the decision of Judge Coker on the basis
       that it was vitiated by procedural irregularity under Rule  43(1)(d)
       of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  This  was
       because Judge Coker dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal on the
       basis that the claimant had been sentenced to 12 months imprisonment
       because this was the sentence stated in  the  Secretary  of  State's
       grounds. In fact, the  claimant  had  been  sentenced  to  12  years
       imprisonment for the index offence.  Judge  Bruce  permitted  either
       party to make any submissions within 14  days  and  directed  if  no
       submissions were received  the  decision  would  be  set  aside  and
       relisted for an error of law hearing. On  4th  February  2021  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  made  a  decision  setting  aside  the
       decision of Judge Coker, and directed that a hearing  be  listed  to
       decide whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and  whether
       it's decision should be set aside. On 29th June 2021  the  Principal
       Resident Judge transferred the matter to a  differently  constituted
       Tribunal.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  firstly  not  taking
       into account the high risk of harm to the  public  recorded  in  the
       OASys report and the fact that the claimant  refused  to  take  into
       account responsibility for his actions and minimises  his  role  and
       use of a weapon. Secondly, it was found  to  be  arguable  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal erred  by  failing  to  take  into  account  the
       seriousness of the offending in line with  Kamki  [20178]  EWCA  Civ
       1715. Thirdly, it was found to be arguable that there was a  failure
       to consider matters at Schedule 1 of paragraph 7 of the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2016.

    5. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. In light of the need to take  precautions
       against the spread of Covid-19 and with  regard  to  the  overriding
       object set out in the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules  this  hearing
       took place via Microsoft Teams, a  format  to  which  neither  party
       raised objection. There were no significant issues  of  connectivity
       or audibility during the hearing.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. The grounds  of  appeal  argue,  in  summary,  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law due a legal misdirection. This is because,  it
       is argued, that there was a failure to factor into the findings that
       it was not proportionate to deport the claimant the fact that he did
       not accept responsibility for  his  actions  and  had  continued  to
       minimise his role in the robbery and use of a weapon which  resulted
       in life-threatening injuries  to  the  victim.  It  is  argued  that
       although the  First-tier  Tribunal  weighed  the  finding  that  the
       claimant presents a high risk of harm to the public, from the  OASys
       report, this was not sufficient and that ultimately  the  First-tier
       Tribunal failed to consider the seriousness of the offending in line
       with the decision in Kamki. As set out in SSHD v Robinson  (Jamaica)
       [2018] EWCA Civ 85 at paragraphs 84 to 86 (relying upon the decision
       of CJEU in Bouchereau) whilst the court  must  look  for  a  present
       threat to the public policy requirements in  an  extreme  case  that
       threat might be evidenced by past  conduct  which  has  caused  deep
       public revulsion. Mr Tufan added in oral submissions that the  crime
       committed by this claimant was such that it was so repugnant  in  of
       itself that like that in R v SSHD ex p Marchon  [1993]  Imm  AR  384
       (where a doctor had imported a substantial amount  of  heroin)  that
       there  were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy   justifying   his
       deportation simply based on this past conviction as a result. In the
       grounds this approach, it is argued, is supported by a  recent  case
       in CJEU, K (and allegations de crimes de guerre) (Citizenship of the
       European Union  -  Right  to  move  and  reside  freely  within  the
       territory of the Member States -  Restrictions  -  Judgment)  [2018]
       EUECJ C- 331/16. It is additionally argued that there was a  failure
       to have regarding to Schedule 1 of paragraph 7  of  the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2016, Mr Tufan expanded this submission by arguing
       that matters under Schedule 1 paragraph 3 and  paragraph  7(f),  (g)
       and  (j)  were  not  properly  and  explicitly  considered  in   the
       conclusions.

    7. Mr Tufan added an additional extension to  the  grounds  by  arguing
       that the assessment of low risk by the Offender Manager was not  one
       which necessarily meant there was  only  an  insignificant  risk  of
       reoffending. He relied upon MA (Pakistan v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  163
       at paragraph 19, and argued that the percentage risk of  reoffending
       in this case meant it was  therefore  a  significant  risk  for  the
       public.

    8. In a Rule 24 response dated 30th January 2020, drafted by Mr G Symes
       of Counsel, it is argued, in summary, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge does not err in law. Proper  consideration  is  given  to  the
       Offender Manager's comments, the whole OASys report and the evidence
       of the claimant before him. It is further argued that Kamki  is  not
       authority for the proposition that the seriousness of the offence is
       in itself indicative that the claimant may reoffend.  The  appellant
       in Kamki lost his appeal because he posed a high risk to  vulnerable
       young females and had not engaged in courses designed to address his
       sex-offending or minimise the risk he posed. The  claimant  here  is
       not a high risk of reoffending in relation  to  any  subset  of  the
       population and has been found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
       making efforts to rehabilitate himself. The authority of  Bouchereau
       only holds that a previous conviction may be taken into  account  in
       considering whether there is personal conduct  which  constitutes  a
       threat to public policy;  and  any  Bouchereau  exception  does  not
       survive following  the  decision  of  the  President  of  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Arranz (EEA Regulations -  deportation  -  test:  Spain)
       [2017] UKUT 294. In any event,  even  if  it  were  found  that  the
       Bouchereau exception survived, it was clear from Robinson  that  the
       crime in this case although very serious was not in the category  of
       very grave sexual abuse or a doctor who imported heroin, and so as a
       sole factor it was not  capable  of  providing  serious  grounds  of
       public policy to justify deportation.

    9. It is argued by Mr Symes that it was not an error of law to fail  to
       refer to  Schedule  1  of  paragraph  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2016, as the First-tier Tribunal  refers  to  Regulation
       27, of which this is a part, and sets out  a  summary  of  the  Home
       Office's full guidance, and this in itself  refers  to  Schedule  1.
       There is no error of law to have simply  failed  to  reference  this
       particular part of Regulation 27, as all material matters raised  in
       the Schedule are dealt with in the decision. It is  clear  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal took into account the seriousness of the offence
       and the fact that this was relevant to the risk to public policy  as
       required by Schedule 1 paragraph 3, and that all relevant factors in
       paragraph 7 had been explored in the decision.

   10. Mr Symes submitted in response to Mr Tufan's additional ground  with
       respect to whether the OASys evidence really  showed  this  claimant
       had a low risk of reoffending that the finding in MA (Pakistan)  was
       that a 17% chance of reoffending was not insignificant.  However  it
       is not  the  case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that  the
       claimant's percentage risk is insignificant so there is no error  to
       be found by reference to this  authority.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       takes all the evidence into account and concludes that there  is  no
       sufficiently serious present threat to public policy in  a  decision
       which is not irrational and should therefore be upheld.

   11. In conclusion Mr Symes argued that the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was entirely lawful as a proper exercise had been conducted
       in which, as is stated explicitly at paragraph 28 of  the  decision,
       all factors had been placed in the mix and the conclusion  that  the
       claimant was a low risk of reoffending, based on the opinion of  the
       offender manager's report, was entirely rational and fully reasoned.



Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. It is unchallenged by the Secretary of State that  the  claimant  is
       entitled to "serious grounds" protection as a result of  his  having
       permanent residence in the UK, as set out  at  paragraph  5  of  the
       decision.

   13. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal errs in law  for  failure
       to set out the entirety of Schedule 1 paragraphs  3  and  7  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016. This is simply not  required  in
       any decision writing. The  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  references
       Regulation 27 when directed itself on the law at paragraph 12 of the
       decision. As Mr Symes has pointed out Schedule 1 relates  solely  to
       this provision so it can be understood as part  of  that  provision.
       The decision then sets out extracts of the Home Office Guidance "EEA
       decisions on grounds of public policy and public  security,  version
       3.0 dated 14th December 2017. There was no submission from Mr  Tufan
       that this was not relevant up to date guidance on which  the  First-
       tier Tribunal was entitled to rely.  The  guidance  which  is  cited
       specifically draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  low  risk  of
       reoffending is not automatically determinative of the appeal  in  an
       appellant's favour and that the seriousness of the offence  must  be
       considered. The Secretary of State has failed to identify any factor
       relevant on the facts of this case in Schedule 1 paragraphs 3 and  7
       which was not considered in the decision-making (for instance  there
       is clear consideration of the length of the sentence, issues of harm
       and protecting the public) and I find therefore there is no error of
       law on this ground.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal correctly records the sentence as being  one
       of 12 years at paragraph 3 of the decision and gives details of  the
       extremely serious and life-threatening  injuries  sustained  by  the
       victim. This is reiterated at paragraph 22 of the conclusions as the
       starting point for the decision-making, at  which  point  weight  is
       also placed on the OASys report which states that the claimant is  a
       high risk of harm to the public, and thus it is  concluded  that  it
       could be the case that the claimant might present a genuine, present
       and sufficiently serious threat affecting a fundamental interest  of
       society. At paragraph 28 of the decision it is also stated that  the
       claimant was involved with offending at the highest possible  level.
       I find therefore that the First-tier Tribunal gives  weight  to  the
       offence as a strong indicator of a potential serious risk to  public
       policy, and I find that in all of the  circumstances  of  this  case
       that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has   given   lawful   and   proper
       consideration to the past offending. There is no attempt to minimise
       that offending at all at any stage, and I thus do not find that  the
       decision errs in  law  by  reason  of  failing  to  place  the  past
       offending properly and accurately in the balance when considering if
       the test for deportation is met.

   15. It was not part of Secretary of State's decision or submissions  (as
       recorded at paragraphs 5 -11 of the decision) that the offence alone
       was one which had caused such deep public revulsion that absent  any
       future risk his deportation was  justified  on  serious  grounds  of
       public policy, as per  the  Bouchereau  exception  (which  I  accept
       survives as held by the Court of Appeal in Robinson   at  paragraphs
       84 -86, contrary to the submissions of Mr Symes). I do not find that
       this was a matter which the First-tier Tribunal needed,  absent  the
       matter being raised before it by the Secretary  of  State,  to  make
       findings on given the  type  of  offending  required  to  make  this
       justification for deportation applicable.  Although  the  claimant's
       offending was very serious  it  did  not  involve  violence  against
       children or grave sexual offences or drugs, and it did  not  involve
       him holding a position of trust such as a doctor and then  offending
       in a way clearly contrary to that position as had the doctor who was
       convicted of the importation of a large amount of  heroin  in  ex  p
       Marchon.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal then goes on to consider the factors in  the
       claimant's  favour  at  paragraphs  23  to  28  of   the   decision.
       Consideration is given to his offender manager's conclusion that  he
       is a low  risk  of  re-offending  and  the  fact  that  he  has  not
       reoffended in the 12 months he has been  out  of  custody  (although
       care is taken to consider that he is on licence and has  deportation
       proceedings hanging over him). As Mr Symes has submitted  there  was
       no conclusion by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  low  risk  of
       reoffending was insignificant and  did  not  need  to  be  seriously
       explored however, so I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       fall into any error as per MA (Pakistan).  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge then considers the evidence of the  claimant  before  him  and
       concludes that he is a "man chastened by his experience of 6  years'
       imprisonment", and the fact that he  had  managed  to  keep  out  of
       serious trouble whilst in prison and accepts his  evidence  that  he
       wants to avoid gang  contact  and  his  previous  associations;  the
       claimant's commitment to his son and ensuring that he did  not  fall
       into the same criminal errors as him; and his strong family support.
       The First-tier Tribunal concludes that the claimant does indeed pose
       a low risk of re-offending as a result of  a  consideration  of  all
       material evidence. The First-tier Tribunal also  concludes  that  it
       would not be proportionate given the other  matters  (which  include
       his length of  residence  in  the  UK,  his  key  family  ties  here
       including his son and his mother, and his lack of family in Jamaica)
       to deport him.

   17. In Kamki the OASys evidence showed that the appellant  had  posed  a
       high risk of reoffending in relation  to  serious  sex  offences  in
       relation to vulnerable young females and so whilst he was  generally
       at low risk of reoffending he was high  risk  in  relation  to  this
       particular group, and the Court of Appeal found that this  had  been
       properly considered by the First-tier Tribunal in concluding that he
       was a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  a
       fundamental interest of society, and so his  appeal  was  dismissed.
       There is no evidence, as Mr Symes has submitted, in this  case  that
       this claimant poses a higher risk of reoffending to  any  subset  of
       the population, so I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not
       fallen into error in this way.

   18. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has directed itself lawfully  in
       the determination of this appeal. It has fully  and  properly  given
       weight to the serious offending of the claimant. It  has  considered
       and  answered  the  reasons  for  deportation  put  forward  by  the
       Secretary of State. It has weighed all of the evidence before it, as
       explicitly stated at paragraph 28 of  the  decision,  and  concluded
       that the claimant is a low risk of reoffending and that the decision
       to deport him is not lawful as the Secretary of State has not  shown
       serious  ground  of  public  policy  and   the   decision   is   not
       proportionate in all of the circumstances.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal
      against deportation under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  4th August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

