
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00586/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2013                            |On 29 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                           mr edward kabetu gitau

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Okungbowa, Solicitor, of Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
     (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 11 March 1974, is a national  of  Kenya.
    He appeals with leave against a decision of a panel of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian and Mr A E Armitage,  Non-
    Legal Member) which in a determination promulgated on  13  August  2013
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 31 July 2013 had  dismissed  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision dated 7 March 2013 refusing to
    revoke a deportation order which had been made against him.

 2.  The  appellant's  immigration  history  was  set  out  in   both   the
    respondent's letter dated 21 March 2013 and the  panel's  determination
    and is summarised below.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 4 March  1998,  claiming  asylum  on
    arrival in a false name (Edward G Kabetu, who was  said  to  have  been
    born on 17 March 1980).  This asylum claim was refused on 28 July  1999
    and a subsequent appeal was dismissed on 17 November 2000.  Thereafter,
    it appears that he avoided the attention of  the  respondent  (and  the
    immigration authorities) although he did not escape  the  attention  of
    the courts, because he was convicted of a number of offences, including
    arson, for which he was sent to prison.

 4. On 20 February 2004, the appellant made a claim under Article 3 of  the
    ECHR, but his application was refused on 21 June 2004  and  his  appeal
    against this refusal was dismissed on 25 October 2004.

 5. Then, on 4 March 2005 the appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under the Family Exercise, still using the false name  in  which
    he had originally applied for  asylum.   On  1  February  2006  he  was
    granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  that  false  name  (Edward  G
    Kabetu).

 6. The appellant continued committing criminal offences and  on  24  April
    2006, he was convicted  at  Stratford  Magistrates'  Court  of  various
    motoring offences (including driving with excess alcohol, which was not
    the first time he had been convicted of this offence).   The  appellant
    was sentenced to six months' imprisonment, suspended for two years,  in
    respect of these offences on 6 May 2006, but then on 7 November 2006 at
    Barking Magistrates' Court he was convicted of other  offences,  making
    him in breach of the suspended sentence and he  was  sentenced  to  six
    months' imprisonment.  He did not appeal against either  conviction  or
    sentence.  By this time, it appears that since arriving in  the  United
    Kingdom, in a false name and having given a false date  of  birth,  the
    appellant had accrued  a  total  of  seven  convictions  for  seventeen
    offences including driving with excess alcohol, no  insurance,  driving
    other  than  in  accordance  with  his  licence,  and  also  arson  and
    destroying or damaging property.  I note that his  sentence  for  arson
    was 18 months' imprisonment,  having  been  reduced  from  the  initial
    sentence of 30 months' imprisonment by the Court of Appeal.  His prison
    sentences totalled three years.

 7. It appears that on 20 July 2006 the appellant changed his name by  deed
    poll from Geoffrey Edward Kabetu Gitau (not the name in  which  he  had
    been given indefinite leave to remain) to Edward Kabetu Gitau.

 8. On 2 February  2007  the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  of  the
    respondent's decision to make a deportation order against him in  light
    of his criminal convictions in the UK.  He was due to be released  from
    prison at the end of his  custodial  sentence  three  days  later,  but
    instead on 5 February 2007 he was placed into immigration detention.

 9. The appellant's appeal against the deportation decision was lodged on 7
    February 2007  but  dismissed  a  month  later  on  8  March  2007.   A
    deportation order was signed on 23 March 2007 and a High  Court  review
    was sought.  This review was refused on 3 April 2007 and a further High
    Court review was  refused  on  10  October  2007.   On  that  date  the
    appellant's appeal rights became exhausted.

10. The appellant was released on immigration and asylum bail on 24 October
    2007, but he was re-detained on 26 November  2007,  removal  directions
    having been set for 5 December 2007.   These  removal  directions  were
    later cancelled on 4 December 2007 and re-set for 11 December,  a  week
    later.  Because the appellant applied for an injunction,  that  removal
    did not take place and he was released from detention  on  12  December
    2007.

11. On 11 June 2008, the respondent was informed that an application  which
    the appellant had made under Rule 39 of the Rules of the European Court
    of Human Rights had been refused and there  were  no  barriers  to  his
    removal.  He was accordingly again detained on 7 July 2008 and  removal
    directions set for four days after, on 11 July 2008.  However,  further
    representations were made on  his  behalf  which  were  treated  as  an
    application to revoke the  deportation  order.   This  application  was
    considered under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules and was refused
    on 10 July 2008.

12. The following day, an application for judicial review  was  lodged  and
    removal directions were deferred.  The appellant was then released from
    immigration detention on 15 July 2008.

13. On 15 April 2009 the judicial review application was withdrawn  on  the
    basis  that  the  respondent  would  reconsider  the  submissions   the
    appellant had made.  Accordingly, the submissions were again treated as
    an application to revoke the deportation order,  but  this  application
    was refused on 14 August 2009, under Section 96(3) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended, thereby removing his  right
    of appeal.  However, due to an administrative error, on 28 October 2009
    the deportation order was revoked, but a fresh  deportation  order  was
    signed on 30 October 2009.

14. Another application for judicial review was lodged on 13 November 2009,
    which was withdrawn on 4 March 2010 on the basis that the  decision  to
    refuse to revoke  the  deportation  order  dated  14  August  2009  was
    replaced as withdrawn and  a  fresh  decision  served  granting  an  in
    country right of appeal.  On 17 March 2010 a fresh decision  to  refuse
    to revoke a deportation order was made, and  a  subsequent  appeal  was
    dismissed on 14 July 2010.   Further  applications  for  permission  to
    appeal were refused on 9  August  2010  and  26  August  2010  and  the
    appellant's appeal rights became exhausted on 26 August 2010.

15. The respondent then made arrangements to detain the  appellant  pending
    removal, but was unable to do so because the appellant failed to adhere
    to his reporting restrictions from September 2010  and  absconded.   He
    remained out of sight of the immigration authorities until 6  September
    2012 when he resumed reporting.  Following  a  letter  written  to  the
    appellant to enquire as to whether there had been any  claimed  changes
    in his circumstances during the time when  he  had  absconded,  further
    representations were received on 6  November  2012,  which  were  again
    treated as an application to revoke the deportation order.  It was  the
    refusal of this application on 7 March 2013 which was appealed  to  the
    panel, and it is the panel's decision dismissing this appeal which  has
    given rise to this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

16. The foundation of the appellant's appeal is that his removal  would  be
    in breach of his Article 8 rights, because he is married to  a  British
    citizen (the marriage had taken  place  in  September  2004,  before  a
    number of the decisions rejecting the appellant's various  applications
    and appeals had been made)  and  on  16  April  2009  they  had  had  a
    daughter, Eliza, who is now 4 years old and  a  British  citizen.   The
    appellant has claimed that the interference with his  family  life  and
    the interference with the Article 8 rights of his daughter and wife are
    such that his removal would be disproportionate.

17. The panel set out the background to the application fully,  as  I  have
    done above.  The panel also heard evidence both from the appellant  and
    his  wife,  but,  as  the  panel  remarks  at  paragraph   6   of   its
    determination, it "did not consider the  appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness".  There were a number of inconsistencies between the  evidence
    which he gave and the evidence given by his wife, and  the  panel  took
    into account not only that he had absconded, but also that he had  been
    arrested for travelling on a bus without a ticket and  with  intent  to
    avoid  payment.   The  panel  considered  the  explanation  which   the
    appellant gave was dishonest, and  that  there  was  no  legitimate  or
    credible reason for his absconding.  Having noted that  the  sentencing
    judge in 2006 had found that there was a high risk of the appellant re-
    offending unless he controlled his abuse of alcohol, the panel observed
    that the appellant still drank alcohol,  even  though  he  said  he  no
    longer drank in the  quantities  that  he  had  drunk  before.   Having
    considered all the evidence in the round, and having in mind  that  the
    appellant's evidence before the Tribunal had been untruthful,  that  he
    had absconded and that he had been arrested for a further offence (even
    if not as serious as  some  of  the  offences  of  which  he  had  been
    convicted before) the panel, at paragraph 12, found that "we  take  the
    view that the appellant is still at high risk of committing offences in
    the UK".

18. At paragraph 13 the panel  stated  that  it  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the appellant's child  in  light  of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, but noted  that  "whilst
    we accept that  the  child's  welfare  and  interests  are  of  primary
    consideration, they are  not  an  overriding  consideration  above  all
    else".  The panel then continued as follows:

         "In these circumstances, the appellant's blatant lies  before  this
         Tribunal outweigh in our view the  interests  and  welfare  of  the
         child to the extent that it would be proportionate under Article  8
         and in the interests of the public good for this  appellant  to  be
         removed from the UK.  There is private  and  family  life  in  this
         case, but we consider such interference to be  lawful  in  all  the
         circumstances and also proportionate."

19. The panel did not accept that there were "such serious obstacles to the
    exercise  of  family  and  private  life  in  Kenya  to  make   removal
    disproportionate", but in any event:

         "It must also not be  forgotten  in  assessing  the  likelihood  of
         further risk to consider the  appellant's  character  generally  as
         someone who is prepared to go to any  length  no  matter  what  the
         outcome to achieve his desired result.  In that regard  he  made  a
         single application for asylum to come to the UK  and  utilised  his
         intervening years to exhaust his rights under the  appeal  process,
         needless to say he did not rely on any asylum reason in the  appeal
         before us."

20. The panel also noted, still at paragraph 13, that the Court  of  Appeal
    had said in the case of Richards [2013] that:

         "There is a strong public interest in  removing  foreign  nationals
         convicted of serious offences and not only lest  they  commit  like
         offences in future.  A further important asset is  the  role  of  a
         deportation order  as  an  expression  of  society's  revulsion  at
         serious crimes and in building public confidence in  the  treatment
         of foreign citizens who have committed serious crimes."

    The panel considered in this case that:

          "It is the UK government's duty to maintain law and order  and  in
         the circumstances of this case it is  therefore  proportionate  for
         the appellant to be removed.  We accept there may well  be  certain
         disruptions in the UK whilst the  appellant's  daughter  and  to  a
         lesser extent his stepson Napoleon are in the UK,  but  we  do  not
         find such disruption disproportionate in terms of the balancing  of
         a state's right to order a fair controlled immigration."

21. As already noted, the appellant has appealed against this decision, and
    the grounds can be summarised as follows.  First it is  said  that  the
    panel, when considering the risk of the appellant re-offending,  failed
    to take into account all of the material evidence.  It is submitted  in
    the grounds that the panel should have placed weight on the  fact  that
    the appellant had not been charged with  travelling  without  buying  a
    ticket or with the offence of absconding.  It is  suggested  that  this
    must be because the authorities had not considered  it  to  be  in  the
    public interest to pursue a criminal charge against the appellant.   It
    is further argued that even though the appellant's evidence might  have
    been inconsistent with  that  of  his  wife,  the  panel  still  placed
    excessive weight on these offences, especially as a decision  had  been
    taken not to prosecute him in respect of them.

22. It is said that the contention that the panel had not taken account  of
    the fact that his last serious offending was six years ago went to  the
    core of his claim and was not just  a  disagreement  with  the  panel's
    findings.

23. The second ground of appeal is that  the  panel  also  failed  to  take
    account of all  material  evidence  when  considering  the  appellant's
    family life in this country.  It should not have considered whether  or
    not there was "serious obstacles" to the appellant's daughter going  to
    Kenya and in particular placed undue weight on its finding that she was
    able to speak some of the native language of Kenya.  It is argued  that
    the panel should have placed  greater  weight  on  the  fact  that  her
    primary language was English,  that  her  ties  to  this  country  were
    "extremely significant" and that she had a  genuine  relationship  with
    her father.



The Hearing

24. Before me, on behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Okungbowa  relied  on  the
    grounds.  The panel's finding that the appellant  was  a  risk  to  the
    public was based on the pre-sentence report which had been written many
    years previously.   Weight  was  also  placed  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had not been found credible in terms of  issues  relating  to
    his not paying his bus fare.  The appellant had never been charged with
    not paying his bus fare; he had gone to the police station and released
    without penalty.

25. The other issue was  to  do  with  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    absconded for two years.  However, that was not an  offence  which  was
    before the court.  In terms of re-offending, he had not offended  since
    2006.  In answer to an  observation  from  the  Tribunal  that  he  had
    offended by absconding, Mr Okungbowa responded by saying  that  if  the
    respondent had felt this was sufficiently serious, the appellant should
    have been charged.  The approach of the panel was  one-sided.   It  did
    not consider properly the facts relating to the risk of re-offending.

26. With regard to the second ground, the panel had applied the wrong  test
    when deciding what was in the best interests of the appellant's  child,
    at paragraph 13 of the determination.  When the panel  found  that  "we
    cannot accept that there are such serious obstacles to the exercise  of
    family life and private life in Kenya to make removal disproportionate"
    this was the wrong test.  The relevant test was whether or not  it  was
    in the child's best interests either to relocate to a  foreign  country
    or to lose a father for ten years.  Nowhere in  the  determination  had
    the panel articulated what was in that  child's  best  interests.   The
    panel did not consider that the child's primary  language  is  English,
    that her ties to the UK were extremely significant and that she  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her father.  That was accepted
    in the respondent's refusal letter.  More  importantly,  the  appellant
    was responsible for the day-to-day care of his child, although  it  was
    accepted he was not her primary carer.  However his wife was  a  social
    worker and went to work and the panel did not consider  the  impact  of
    his removal on his family.

27. Other than his problems in terms of not paying his bus fare, he had not
    been in trouble, and for the panel to conclude that he had a propensity
    to commit further offences and  was  a  risk  to  the  public  was  not
    sustainable.

28. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Deller submitted that the Tribunal  was
    of course entitled to set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination
    if it found an error of law such that it was right to do so.   However,
    in this particular instance the key question was whether the First-tier
    Tribunal had identified and weighed all the relevant issues.  Of  these
    issues, propensity  to  re-offend  was  a  significant  one,  the  best
    interests of the child in  the  case  were,  as  is  known,  a  primary
    consideration,  but  they  were  both   components   in   the   overall
    consideration of the case.

29. Taking these two factors in turn, the panel's reasoning appeared to  be
    that despite the appellant's protestations that he would not re-offend,
    and had not offended since the birth of his daughter, first there  were
    reasons why his evidence should be disbelieved and secondly  there  had
    been further offending by virtue of his travelling without paying for a
    ticket and also absconding.  These were offences, even though they  had
    not been prosecuted.  It was possibly considered that the best  use  of
    public  funds  and  resources  would  be  to  remove  him  rather  than
    prosecuting him.   Taking  these  factors  into  account,  it  was  the
    respondent's position that the First-tier Tribunal had  given  adequate
    reasons for disbelieving the appellant and had been  entitled  to  find
    that a propensity to re-offend should inform the weight to be given  to
    the public interest aspect, when enforcing the deportation order.

30. The other significant factor in this appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    the approach the panel took to the best interests of the child,  Eliza.
    The panel found that although the child's welfare and interests were  a
    primary consideration, nonetheless these interests were  outweighed  by
    the other factors.  The respondent's position overall was that this was
    a decision properly open to the panel and that accordingly,  there  had
    been no material error of law in its determination.



Discussion

31. As can be seen from  the  chronology  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history which has been set out above, on 17 March 2010 a fresh decision
    to refuse to revoke a deportation order  was  made,  and  a  subsequent
    appeal was dismissed on 14 July 2010.  This was the latest  in  a  long
    succession of applications and appeals, all of  which  were  ultimately
    rejected.  Further applications for permission to appeal  were  refused
    and the appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 26 August 2010.  At
    that stage the respondent's arrangements to detain him for removal were
    frustrated because the appellant absconded.  Had he  not  done  so,  he
    would have been deported then.

32. Accordingly, what is effectively being argued on the appellant's behalf
    is that because he managed to avoid being deported  by  absconding  and
    during the period he has subsequently,  unlawfully,  remained  in  this
    country he has not got into any further serious trouble, he should  now
    be allowed to remain.  His daughter (who  was  alive  when  his  appeal
    rights were exhausted) is now 2 years older, and he  has  not  actually
    been charged with any further criminal offences.

33. The panel was not impressed with this argument, and in  particular  did
    not consider that the appellant had turned over a new leaf.  There were
    three main reasons why the panel was sceptical of the appellant's claim
    to be a reformed character.  In the first place, it  was  not  accepted
    that he had kept out of trouble during  the  period  in  which  he  had
    remained in this country as an absconder.  First, he had been  arrested
    for evading his fare on the bus.  While this  might  not  be  the  most
    serious offence which this appellant has committed, it  was  compounded
    by his lying about it to the Tribunal.  The  second  factor  which  the
    Tribunal took into account was that the absconding itself was  criminal
    behaviour, which, as it noted, cannot be excused.  As the panel  stated
    at paragraph 6:

         "...He was an absconder as  he  failed  to  report.   He  tried  to
         justify these actions by saying that he had a  housing  problem  at
         that time and for the sake of his family he did not report  because
         he was afraid of being removed from the UK if  he  reported.   That
         was not a credible reason for not reporting and breaching the  law.
         He could have mentioned  his  difficulties  about  housing  to  the
         immigration authorities.  He could have written and asked to report
         at other times and at longer intervals  until  he  sorted  out  his
         housing problem, but he chose to flout the law and simply  took  it
         upon himself not to report and go to ground."

34. The other reason why the panel did not accept that he was no  longer  a
    risk to the community was because of what they refer to as his "blatant
    lies before this Tribunal".

35. In my judgment, the  panel  was  entirely  justified  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that it did that this appellant was someone "who is prepared
    to go to any length no matter what the outcome to achieve  his  desired
    result", which was to remain in this country.

36. It is in the context of this finding that the panel considered  whether
    or not the interests of the appellant's child were sufficiently  strong
    as to outweigh the reasons why it was in the public interest to  remove
    him.  In my judgment, the panel  was  entitled,  when  considering  the
    weight to be given to these interests, to take account of the fact that
    Eliza did in fact speak the  language  native  to  Kenya  (yet  another
    matter about which the panel found the appellant had tried  to  deceive
    the Tribunal).  On this matter, the panel noted  that  the  appellant's
    wife had confirmed that their daughter understood the  native  language
    and spoke to her grandmother, the appellant's wife's mother  in  Kenya,
    in that language.

37. The panel was also entitled to take account of  the  fact  that  (again
    contrary to what the appellant had told the Tribunal)  the  appellant's
    mother had a number of relatives in Kenya as well as her mother.

38. The panel was also, in  my  judgment,  both  entitled  and  correct  to
    consider the need to  build  public  confidence  in  the  treatment  of
    foreign citizens who had committed serious crimes as a weighty  factor.
    This is a case where undoubtedly public confidence in the  efficacy  of
    this country's immigration control would  be  seriously  diminished  if
    this appellant were now to be allowed to remain.  Effectively, it would
    be giving a green light to any foreign criminal who  was  about  to  be
    deported that if he or she absconded, there might be a good  chance  of
    being allowed to remain after all.

39. These were all factors which  the  panel  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account and in my judgment  its  determination  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law.  It follows that this appeal must  be  dismissed
    and I will so order.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.



Signed:                                 Dated: 18 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

