
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00113/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 19 January 2016                 |On : 22 January 2016                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             zahid sheikh masood
                            (NO aNONYMITY oRDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud, instructed by Mellor & Jackson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing his appeal against the decision to deport  him  from  the  United
Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations").  Permission  to
appeal was granted on 4 November 2015.

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 19  September  1965.  As  is
recorded in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  first
entered the United Kingdom in 1998 using a passport in a different name.  He
obtained a provisional driving licence in  that  name  and  resided  in  the
United Kingdom using that identity.

On 3 November 2003 the appellant collided with a car which had  broken  down
on the motorway, at a time when he was using his mobile telephone  and  when
he had no proper driving licence in his own name, had not  taken  a  driving
test in the United Kingdom and had  no  insurance,  which  resulted  in  the
death of the driver of the car. He was not arrested at the time  and  before
a formal interview took place he fled the country in December 2003  and  was
placed on the Police National Computer as a wanted person. He  travelled  to
Pakistan and then went to Romania after two months. He had already  met  his
wife, a Romanian national, in the United Kingdom in  2002  and  in  February
2004 he married her in Romania.

In August 2004 the appellant came to the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor,  in
his real name, returning to Romania in June 2005 and  then  coming  back  to
the United Kingdom in November 2007  on  an  EEA  family  permit  issued  in
September 2007, since when he claims to have remained here. On 12  May  2008
he was issued with an EEA residence card valid until 12  May  2013.  He  did
not surrender himself to the police, but was  eventually  arrested  in  2012
when caught by the police.

On 3 May 2013 the appellant was convicted  of  causing  death  by  dangerous
driving and committing an act with intent to pervert the course of  justice.
He was sentenced to 4 years'  imprisonment  for  the  first  offence  and  9
months for the second, to  run  consecutively,  and  was  disqualified  from
driving for 7 years and until an extended retest had been passed.

On 8 July 2013 the appellant was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
deportation and he returned the enclosed questionnaire and provided  details
of his wife, their two children and his  wife's  daughter  from  a  previous
marriage, all of whom were Romanian nationals.

On 26 March 2015 a deportation order was signed and the  respondent  made  a
decision to deport the appellant under the EEA Regulations.  In  making  her
decision, the respondent did not accept that the appellant  had  acquired  a
permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and  considered  that  he
posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  interests
of public policy pursuant to Regulation 21(5).  It  was  considered  further
that his deportation would not breach his Article 8 rights under the ECHR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard on  17
August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Walters.

Judge Walters heard from the appellant and his wife and  gave  consideration
to the documentary evidence produced to the respondent and  at  the  hearing
in relation to his claim to have acquired permanent residence following  the
period 7 November 2007 to 7 November 2012.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
appellant had been present  in  the  United  Kingdom  between  those  dates.
However he found there to be  insufficient  evidence  that  the  appellant's
wife had been exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  five
year period and thus insufficient  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  been
living in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
continuous period of five years.  He  therefore  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was entitled to a permanent right of residence and he  found  that
the correct test was  therefore  under  Regulation  21(1)  and  went  on  to
consider Regulation 21(5). With regard to Regulation 21(5)(c) he found  that
there was a real risk of the appellant re-offending. He concluded  that  the
respondent's decision was justified  on  grounds  of  public  security.  The
judge went on to consider Regulation 21(6) and Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  He
considered that it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant's wife  and
children to live in Pakistan but that  they  could  reasonably  relocate  or
remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant and that the decision  to
deport the appellant was proportionate. The judge accordingly dismissed  the
appeal under the EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge had erred in law in finding that he and his wife  had
not acquired a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom, that  the
judge had failed in his assessment under Regulations 21(1), 21(5) and  21(6)
and that he had erred in his assessment under Article 8 and  had  failed  to
consider the best  interests  of  the  children  under  section  55  of  the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

Permission to appeal was granted on 4 November 2015 on the grounds raised.

Appeal hearing and submissions

Mr Mahmud requested an adjournment of the  proceedings  on  the  basis  that
clarification  needed  to  be  sought  from  counsel  who  represented   the
appellant at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  which
documents were before the First-tier Tribunal. The judge's decision  at  [3]
referred to three appellant's bundles, but he did not have any  instructions
on three bundles having been produced or what they contained.  He  only  had
one  bundle  (which  had  been  named  by  Judge  Walters  as  bundle   A1).
Furthermore, the appellant claimed to have  produced  documents  before  the
judge which had not been considered or  referred  to  in  his  decision.  Mr
Mahmud produced a further 8 documents which the appellant claimed  had  been
produced to the First-tier Tribunal but which did not appear  on  the  court
file. Clarification was  also  required  to  address  paragraph  17  of  the
grounds, whereby it was asserted that both  the  judge  and  the  presenting
officer had accepted, at the hearing, that additional documents produced  at
that time by the appellant were sufficient to  support  the  acquisition  of
permanent residence, but which had then been  contradicted  by  the  judge's
adverse finding at paragraph 48 of his decision.

At this point I took both parties through the documents and  bundles  I  had
on file, which Judge Walters had identified as bundles A1,  A2  and  A3.  Mr
Norton  helpfully  produced  the  presenting   officer's   record   of   the
proceedings which he said clarified matters. It was noted  that  the  record
listed the documents produced at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
and that those documents corresponded exactly to those in bundle A2.

I rose for some time for Mr Mahmud to take  further  instructions  from  the
appellant and for myself to consult Judge Walters'  record  of  proceedings.
Having done so, I advised Mr Mahmud that I did not consider  an  adjournment
would take matters any further forward and I considered there to be no  need
to obtain a typed copy of  Judge  Walkers'  record  of  proceedings,  as  he
suggested, since the respondent's record was very  clear  and  comprehensive
and  Judge  Walters'  record  was  sufficiently  legible  to  ascertain  the
submissions made and the absence of  any  concession  on  the  part  of  the
presenting officer. I considered that there had been plenty of time for  the
appellant's previous counsel to  be  approached  for  clarification  of  the
matters and it was not appropriate that this was being raised at  this  late
stage. I indicated that  the  matters  could  in  any  event  be  raised  in
submissions and that I would consider everything as part of my error of  law
decision. It was agreed that the bundle of  documents  which  the  appellant
claimed had been before the First-tier Tribunal but which were  not  on  the
court file would be referred to as "bundle A4".

Mr Mahmud submitted that it had  been  accepted  at  the  hearing  that  the
appellant had resided in the United Kingdom for five  continuous  years.  He
sought to amend the grounds to include the fact that  there  were  documents
before the judge that had not been  considered  (bundle  A4)  and  that  the
judge had misguided himself by considering facts he  was  not  supposed  to.
With regard to the latter the judge had erred  by  taking  into  account  at
[37], when considering the risk of reoffending, the fact that the  appellant
had a Romanian driving licence and had speculated about  him  attempting  to
drive on that licence. He had also failed to take account of the  fact  that
the appellant had never been offered an  opportunity  to  participate  in  a
victim awareness programme. With  regard  to  the  former,  the  documentary
evidence demonstrated that the appellant's wife had been  exercising  Treaty
rights for the five year period. Mr Mahmud submitted further that the  judge
had failed to consider proportionality and had erred  in  his  consideration
of Regulation  21(5)  and  (6).  The  judge  had  wrongly  made  an  adverse
credibility finding against the appellant with respect to being  interviewed
for the  OASys  report.  The  judge  had  erred  by  having  regard  to  the
Regulations rather than the Directive. He had failed to engage with  section
55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,  he  had  not
considered the effects on the children of the family breaking up and he  had
failed to consider section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002.

Mr Norton submitted that the presenting officer's record made it very  clear
which documents had been produced before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
bundle A4 had not been part of those documents.  The  judge  made  clear  at
[44] which documents he had before him. However he had no objection  to  the
documents in A4 being included, since they did not assist the  appellant  in
meeting the requirements of  Regulation  15  in  any  event.  The  documents
showed no more than that the appellant's wife had  had  some  employment  in
2013/2014 but had also received six times her  earnings  in  state  benefits
and that she had had some employment in 2015. They did  not  show  that  she
had been exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years  and
there was a gap between 2009 and 2103. The judge was  therefore  correct  in
concluding that  the  appellant  had  not  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
residence. The judge properly considered  proportionality  under  Regulation
21(5) and the relevant factors in Regulation 21(6), he was entitled to  rely
on the OASys report, and he was entitled to conclude as he did on  the  risk
of reoffending. With regard to Article 8, the judge considered  section  117
in substance, applying the lower test in section  117C(5),  and  considering
whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to go  to  Romania  or  be
separated from the appellant. His findings were sustainable.

Mr Mahmud reiterated the submissions he had made previously.

Consideration and findings.

I turn first of all to the assertion made at [17] of the grounds,  that  the
judge had indicated that there was sufficient  evidence,  in  the  documents
submitted at the hearing, to show that the appellant had acquired  permanent
residence and that the presenting officer had conceded  that  that  was  the
case. I can find nothing in the papers and  records  before  me  to  support
that assertion. Other than the bare assertion made in the grounds  there  is
nothing from the appellant, such  as  his  representative's  record  of  the
proceedings or a statement from his representative, to  support  the  claim.
However, and on the contrary, there is evidence from  the  respondent  which
directly contradicts that assertion. Mr Norton was able to produce the  very
clear record made by the presenting officer at the hearing before the First-
tier Tribunal, specifically stating that no concessions were made.

It appears from that record that a  preliminary  point  was  raised  by  the
appellant's representative, that  the  evidence  produced  at  the  hearing,
which the appellant was claiming had been  submitted  to  the  Secretary  of
State but had not been considered, clearly demonstrated that there had  been
five continuous years of residence in the United Kingdom between 7  November
2007 and 7 November 2012 and that the appellant's wife had  been  exercising
Treaty rights throughout that period. It was therefore submitted  on  behalf
of the appellant that there were two options, that the  judge  accepted  the
acquisition of permanent residence  and  considered  the  matter  under  the
"serious grounds" test or the matter be remitted to the Secretary  of  State
to reconsider the matter applying the "serious grounds"  test.  It  is  very
clearly recorded by the presenting officer that she  did  not  concede  that
the evidence showed five years of exercising  Treaty  rights  and  that  the
judge did not agree to remit the  matter  to  the  Secretary  of  State  but
decided to consider the whole case himself without making  any  concessions.
That is consistent with what appears in the Tribunal's record and  with  the
judge's comments at paragraph 4 of his decision. Accordingly  I  reject  the
assertion in  the  grounds  that  there  was  any  concession  made  by  the
respondent or the judge. It is clear that the judge proceeded  to  hear  the
evidence  before  making  any  findings  on  the  acquisition  of  permanent
residence and that he reserved his decision at the end of the hearing.

As regards the documentation before  the  judge,  the  presenting  officer's
record again makes it very  clear  which  documents  were  produced  at  the
hearing. These are listed on the first page and correspond exactly with  the
documents in the bundle which the judge named A2.  The  originals  of  those
documents were produced to the judge and appeared on  the  court  file,  but
were returned to the appellant after the  hearing  before  me.  The  judge's
findings at [44] to [46] also clearly refer to the documents in the  bundles
named A2 and A3. There is nothing in the judge's record, in his findings  or
in the presenting officer's records to  support  the  appellant's  assertion
that the documents now produced in bundle A4 (other than pages 6,  7  and  8
which  appear  in  the  respondent's  bundle)  were  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal. I therefore reject his claim  that  the  documents  were  produced
before the judge.

Turning, therefore, to the documents that  were  before  the  judge,  it  is
clear from his findings at [44] to [46] that he gave  careful  consideration
to all the evidence before him in assessing whether or not  the  appellant's
wife had been exercising Treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
years such as to entitle the appellant to permanent residence in the  United
Kingdom. He noted at [44] the evidence of earnings from  employment  in  her
P60 for 2014/2015 and her payslip  for  22  June  2015.  He  referred  to  a
payslip dated 29 August 2008, but that was in fact the appellant's  payslip.
He noted that the appellant's  wife  had  never  asserted  in  her  oral  or
written evidence that she had been exercising Treaty rights for five  years.
Whilst there were also the three HMRC documents at pages D44 to D46  of  the
respondent's bundle, for the years 2009/10, 2010/11 and 2011/12  which  were
not specifically mentioned, they all confirmed that no tax was  payable.  Mr
Mahmud argued that that was because the  appellant's  wife's  earnings  were
below the tax threshold  but  still  demonstrated  that  she  had  earnings.
However I do not agree, since the documents, without  the  accompanying  tax
returns or other evidence of income, do not demonstrate that there were  any
earnings during those  periods.  Accordingly,  on  the  basis  of  the  very
limited  evidence  before  him,  the  judge  could  have  reached  no  other
conclusion than that there was no evidence of the  appellant's  wife  having
exercised Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

Mr Norton submitted that even  if  the  documents  in  A4  were  taken  into
account, they also failed to demonstrate five  years  of  exercising  Treaty
rights and I would agree with that submission. There  is  nothing  in  those
documents to show that the appellant's wife was in receipt of earnings  from
employment or self-employment or was exercising Treaty rights in  any  other
way, for a continuous period of five years. Indeed, as Mr Norton  submitted,
it is relevant to note that the document at page  4  of  that  bundle  shows
that she was in receipt of state benefits in the year 2013  to  2014,  which
amounted to six times her  earnings  in  that  year.  In  any  event,  those
documents were not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Mr Mahmud also took issue with the judge's findings on the  appellant's  own
continuous residence in the United  Kingdom  which  he  submitted  had  been
conceded but which the judge appeared to dispute  in  his  decision.  It  is
clear from [41] that there was a  concession  made  as  to  the  appellant's
presence in the United Kingdom between  November  2007  and  November  2012.
What is not entirely clear from [45]  to  [47]  is  whether  the  judge  was
doubting  whether  the  appellant  had  shown  five  years   of   continuous
residence, or  whether  he  was  doubting  that  there  was  five  years  of
continuous residence in accordance  with  the  Regulations,  where,  in  the
latter case, the appellant's own employment record and  economic  activities
was of no relevance, the exercise of Treaty rights being relevant only  with
respect to the EEA national. In  any  event  nothing  material  arises  from
that, given that, on the findings he  made  in  regard  to  the  appellant's
wife's activities, the judge was entitled to conclude, and  indeed  properly
concluded, that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that  he  had  acquired
permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

Mr Mahmud made a further point, relying on [10] of the grounds. He  asserted
that Article 16 of the Directive 2004/38/EC was  wider  than  Regulation  15
and did not require that the acquisition of  permanent  residence  be  based
upon anything other than five years residence. He submitted that  the  judge
had erred by considering the more  restrictive  Regulation  15,  which  also
required that the residence  be  "in  accordance  with  these  Regulations",
rather than the Directive, which did not, and that the  appellant  succeeded
on the basis that he had continuously resided in  the  UK  for  five  years.
However that is plainly wrong, as such an assertion  ignores  the  reference
to the word "legally" in Article 16 and the requirements of Article 7,  that
a right of residence of more than three months, in order to be lawful,  must
be based upon the exercise of Treaty rights.

Accordingly, the  judge  properly  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
acquired  permanent  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  proceeded  to
consider the matter on the basis of the lower threshold at Regulation  21(1)
and (5).

Contrary to the assertion in the grounds and to Mr Mahmud's submissions,  it
seems to me that the judge plainly gave full and  careful  consideration  to
all relevant factors in Regulations 21(5) and (6).

With regard to Regulation 21(5), the judge considered the  personal  conduct
of the appellant and the relevant offences and  noted  at  [38]  that  there
were no previous convictions. His consideration of Regulation  21(5)(c)  did
not merely amount to the findings in [51] but  was  based  upon  a  detailed
assessment of the question of risk of re-offending, at [20] to [40]. He  was
entitled to rely upon the OASys report, which he  considered  in  detail  at
[26] to [38], taking account of factors in favour of the appellant  as  well
as those against. Mr Mahmud submitted that the appellant stood by his  claim
not to have been interviewed for the OASys report  and  submitted  that  the
judge ought not to have relied upon the report. However  it  is  clear  from
the OASys report that it was an ongoing assessment based to a  large  extent
upon the appellant's own statements and referring  specifically  at  section
11 to the appellant having  been  interviewed.  The  judge  was  accordingly
perfectly entitled to place the weight that he did upon the  report  in  his
consideration of the appellant's propensity to re-offend  for  the  purposes
of Regulation 21(5(c). He was, likewise, entitled to  take  account  of  the
fact that the  appellant  had  a  European  driving  licence  and  draw  the
conclusions that he did in that regard. The appellant complains that he  was
never offered a victim awareness course, but whether or  not  that  was  the
case, the judge was entitled to place weight  upon  the  fact  that  he  had
demonstrated a failure to take responsibility for his crime by  fleeing  the
country after the incident and failing to surrender to  the  authorities  on
his return to the United Kingdom.  For  the  reasons  clearly  and  cogently
given, the judge was entitled to reach the conclusions that he  did  on  the
appellant's propensity to re-offend.

Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, the  judge  plainly  gave  careful
consideration to the principles  of  proportionality  and  to  the  relevant
factors in Regulation 21(6).  The fact that he did so  within  his  findings
on Article 8 does not detract from his consideration and  awareness  of  the
requirements in Regulation 21(5) and (6). The judge's conclusion,  that  the
respondent's decision to deport the appellant was  justified  on  ground  of
public policy and security, was one that was entirely open  to  him  on  the
evidence.

The grounds challenging the judge's findings on Article 8, and  Mr  Mahmud's
submissions in that regard, were little more than  an  attempt  to  re-argue
the appellant's case and a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  decision.  The
judge's decision on Article 8 was a detailed and careful one. Whilst he  did
not specifically cite section 117 of the 2002 Act, I agree  with  Mr  Norton
that he considered the substance of the relevant  provisions  and  gave  the
appellant the benefit of applying  the  lower  test,  despite  his  sentence
having been  in  excess  of  four  years.  He  specifically  considered  the
relevant exceptions in section 117C(5) in regard to whether  the  effect  of
deportation would be unduly harsh on the appellant's partner  and  children,
giving careful consideration to the best interests of the children, at  [67]
to [70] and taking account of concerns about their education  and  language.
Whilst the appellant's removal was to be to Pakistan,  since  that  was  his
country of nationality, the judge gave cogent reasons  for  concluding  that
he could reasonably relocate to Romania, as  he  had  done  previously  when
fleeing the United Kingdom after committing the  index  offence,  where  his
wife and children could join him.  The  judge  also  concluded,  as  he  was
entitled to do, that his wife  and  children  could  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom without him. There is no merit in the assertions made on  behalf  of
the appellant that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  all  relevant
matters, when he clearly did.

The judge's decision is a careful and thorough one, taking  account  of  all
relevant matters and all the evidence, both oral and  documentary.  He  gave
full and cogent reasons  for  making  the  findings  that  he  did  and  the
conclusions that he reached were entirely open to him on the evidence.

For all of these reasons I conclude  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
disclose any errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  requiring
the decision to be set aside.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's deportation appeal therefore stands.




                               Signed   Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
