
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00491/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th November 2019                |On 5th February 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 DANIEL [L]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N Garrod, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr [L].
    However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I adopt
    the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to Mr [L] as the
    appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot
    promulgated on 29th July 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA
    Regulations") against the respondent's decision to refuse to revoke an
    extant deportation order.


Background


 3. The appellant is a dual national of Bulgaria and Albania.  He first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2000 and claimed asylum,
    claiming to be a Kosovan national. That claim for asylum was refused on
    26th August 2000 and an appeal against the refusal was dismissed by the
    First-tier Tribunal on 29th September 2000. The appellant was removed
    to Kosovo on 11th November 2000. The appellant returned to the UK in
    October 2003, and in March 2004, he applied for a residence document as
    the spouse of a Spanish national exercising treaty rights in the UK. He
    was issued with a residence document on 14th September 2005, valid
    until 11th May 2009.  In February 2008, the appellant applied for an
    EEA Residence Card as the spouse of an EEA national. On 13th August
    2008 he was issued with a residence card valid until 13 August 2013.


 4. On 20th August 2009 the appellant was convicted at Wood Green Crown
    Court for false imprisonment. He was sentenced to 15 months
    imprisonment. Following that conviction, a deportation order was signed
    against the appellant on 16th December 2009 and he was deported to
    Albania on 25th December 2009. The appellant made three unsuccessful
    attempts to enter the United Kingdom, unlawfully, and in breach of his
    deportation order. The first was on 10th April 2013, the second on 15th
    January 2015 and the third on 19th March 2015. After each attempt, the
    appellant was removed to Albania.


 5. The appellant returned to the UK unlawfully at the end of May 2015 and
    on 10th August 2016, the appellant's representatives applied for a
    revocation of the extant deportation order. The respondent refused the
    application for reasons set out in a decision dated 24th February 2017
    and an appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
    17th November 2017.  The case advanced by the appellant at the hearing
    of his appeal is summarised at paragraph [12] of the decision of Judge
    Sweet as follows:


         "... The appellant had departed the UK voluntarily at his own
         expense and he has not committed any further offences since his
         conviction on 20 August 2009. He now held Bulgarian nationality and
         had the right to enter the UK as an EEA worker in his own right. He
         has a three-year-old son with his Bulgarian partner, Ana [I], and
         he is the father of an EEA dependent."


 6. Judge Sweet heard evidence from the appellant's partner who confirmed
    that the relationship between the appellant and his son is very good.
    She gave evidence that she has known the appellant since 2006 but she
    had left him in 2013. She had visited the appellant in August 2017, and
    he had unlawfully returned to the UK to see his son.  At paragraphs
    [26] to [28] of his decision, Judge Sweet stated:


         "26. The application for revocation of the deportation order has
         been made on the basis of a change of the appellant's
         circumstances. Firstly, he claims that he is now an EEA national,
         being a citizen of Bulgaria - but that is not a change of
         circumstances because he was treated as the partner of an EEA
         national when the revocation order (sic) was made in December 2009.
         Secondly, he submits that there is a change of circumstances,
         because his son [J] was born on 14 July 2013 in the UK and he
         claims that he has a relationship with him. There was evidence from
         his former partner, the mother of his children, Ana [I], that he is
         in contact with his son, and there was a meeting in Albania in
         August 2017. I accept that he appears to have a relationship with
         his son, but it is equally clear that he does not have an ongoing
         relationship with Ana [I], the mother of their son. This is
         confirmed in her witness statement made on 31 October 2017
         (paragraph 8) - and in the appellant's own statement - and
         confirmed again in her oral evidence today. I accept that this is a
         material change in circumstances, but I am not persuaded that the
         respondent's decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order
         does not comply with the requirements of Regulation 27(5) of the
         EEA Regulations.


         27.  I conclude that the respondent's decision does comply with the
         principle of proportionality, and it is based exclusively on the
         appellant's personal conduct. His personal conduct includes, not
         only the offence for which he was convicted in August 2009 (though
         I accept that the conviction is spent now that 4 years has passed),
         but also his other breach of the immigration requirements of the
         UK. He made 3 unauthorised attempts to return to the UK in April
         2013, January 2015 and March 2015. He came to the UK illegally at
         the end of May 2015, and it appears that he was still in the UK in
         August 2016 in order to sign his name on their son's birth
         certificate and to make his current application. I accept that the
         best interests of the child are a primary consideration, but the
         public interest in his deportation outweighs the interests of the
         child. In my view there is a significant risk that the appellant
         will reoffend and that he presents a genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious threat to a fundamental interest of society
         and poses a risk to the safety of the public or a section of the
         public. I reached this decision, taking into account all the facts
         and evidence in this case including the email of 31 March 2017 from
         his former partner Marjeta [L] ([D]), who states that they are now
         on good terms with each other and with his family.


         28.  Nor, for reasons set out in the refusal letter, do I consider
         that there is any breach of the appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights,
         whether in respect of his family life or his private life. He was
         not lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, nor was he
         socially and culturally integrated into the UK, and there are not
         very significant obstacles to his integration in the country where
         he currently lives."


 7. On 27th March 2018 the appellant's representatives again applied for
    revocation of the extant deportation order. The respondent refused to
    revoke the deportation order for reasons set out in a decision dated
    10th July 2018 and it was that decision that was the subject of the
    appeal before FtT judge Talbot.  Judge Talbot allowed the appeal.


The decision FtT Judge Talbot


 8. Judge Talbot sets out the relevant history at paragraph [3] of his
    decision and at paragraph [7] of his decision, he summarises the
    evidence of the appellant set out in his witness statement.  At
    paragraph [9], summarises the evidence of the appellant's partner Ms
    [I].  The submissions made by the parties are referred to at paragraphs
    [10] and [11] of the decision.  Judge Talbot notes, at [11], the
    submission made on behalf of the appellant that the EEA Regulations do
    not fully implement Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and
    of the Council of 29 April 2004. It was submitted on behalf of the
    appellant that the EEA Regulations are silent with regard to Article
    27(3) of the Directive.


 9. At paragraph [13], the judge noted that Regulation 27 of the EEA
    Regulations sets out the general principles as to how a decision to
    remove should be exercised.  The judge noted that the burden of proving
    that a person represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society rests on
    the respondent and the standard is that of a balance of probabilities.
    The judge noted, at [14], the principles referred to in Regulation 27
    apply to exclusion and removal decisions taken on the grounds of public
    policy, public security or public health.  The Judge noted that a
    deportation order remains in force (a) until the order is revoked under
    the regulations; or (b) for the period specified in the order, and the
    Regulations prohibit a person whose exclusion is justified on the
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health in
    accordance with Regulation 27 from entering the United Kingdom until
    (a) the order is revoked; or (b) for a period specified in the order.
    The judge noted that here, no period has been specified by the
    respondent.


10. At paragraph [15], the judge referred to the guidance set out in
    Devaseelan and noted that the relevant findings in the previous
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet form his starting point.
    The judge noted that Judge Sweet had accepted the relationship that the
    appellant now appears to have with his son, is a material change in
    circumstances since the deportation order was made, but nevertheless,
    dismissed the appeal because the deportation remained justified on the
    grounds of public policy and public security taking account of the
    factors set out in Regulation 27(5). The Judge found that the appellant
    has maintained a relationship with his son, via indirect contact and
    direct contact when his son has visited him in Albania. The judge
    stated, at [16], that "This continues therefore to constitute a
    material change in circumstances since the making of the deportation
    order.".  At paragraphs [17] and [18], the judge concluded:


         "17. I now turn to the key issue as to whether the factors in
         Regulation 27(5) continue to apply to the appellant. Judge Sweet
         considered that there was a significant risk that the appellant
         would re-offend and that he continued to constitute a risk to
         public safety. However, Judge Sweet does not appear to have had
         sight of the certificates that were before me from the Bulgarian
         and Albanian authorities (dated respectively 6.6.19 & 29.3.19),
         confirming that the appellant had never been convicted of any
         offence in either country. The fact that the appellant has not re-
         offended in the period of over nine years since his deportation is
         a significant factor affecting the future risk. With regard to the
         index offence itself, I did not have the benefit either of the
         Judge's sentencing remarks or of a risk assessment report from the
         probation service. However, there was a PNC indicating that this
         was the Appellant's only offence in the UK. Given these facts, I am
         unable to conclude that some 10 years after his offence and some 9
         �  years after his removal there continues to be a significant risk
         that he will re-offend on the basis of the conviction in 2009.


         18.  I note that the respondent relies on his behaviour since his
         removal in entering the UK illegally in breach of the deportation
         order. Whilst such behaviour is of course to be deplored, I have to
         bear in mind that the justification for exclusion of an EEA
         national has to be the future risk. If the deportation order were
         to be revoked, the appellant (as a Bulgarian national) would have
         all the rights of admission available to EEA citizens. There would
         therefore be little or no risk of him entering the UK unlawfully.


The appeal before me


11. The respondent claims First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot erred in his
    approach as to the application of the guidance set out in Devaseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The respondent claims that there has been no
    change in circumstances such as to undermine the conclusion reached in
    November 2017, that there is a significant risk that the appellant will
    reoffend and that he presents a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat to a fundamental interest of society.  It is said that
    insofar as FtT Judge Talbot relied upon the certificates that were
    before him from the Bulgarian and Albanian authorities confirming that
    the appellant had never been convicted of any offence in either
    country, as a justification for departing from the previous conclusion,
    that is irrational because FtT Judge Sweet was aware that there was no
    evidence of any convictions other than the offence for which the
    appellant was convicted in August 2009.  FtT Judge Sweet accepted the
    conviction is spent, but had properly considered the appellant's breach
    of the immigration requirements of the UK, whereas judge Talbot failed
    to take a holistic approach without adequate regard to the conviction
    and the appellant's continued and numerous attempts to enter the UK
    unlawfully, that demonstrate a disregard for the law.


12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on
    22nd August 2019.  In response to directions made by the Tribunal, the
    parties have filed skeleton arguments which helpfully formed the basis
    of the submissions made before me.


13. At paragraph [8] of her skeleton argument, the respondent claimed FtT
    Judge Talbot erred in giving insufficient weight to the public interest
    in maintaining the deportation order and has failed to consider the
    deterrent effect that would be weakened by revocation.  At the outset
    of his submissions, Mr Lindsay confirmed the respondent does not
    maintain that submission.  He accepts the appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal was an appeal under the EEA Regulations.


14. The respondent maintains that as recently as 17th November 2017, FtT
    Judge Sweet had found there is a significant risk that the appellant
    will re-offend and that he presents a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat to a fundamental interest of society, and poses a risk
    to the safety of the public or a section of the public.  The respondent
    submits that there has been no material change in the appellant's
    circumstances since that decision, and FtT Judge Talbot fails to
    identify any good reason for departing from that previous conclusion.
    Mr Lindsay submits FtT Judge Talbot erred in failing to apply the
    Devaseelan principles properly and the judge should have taken the
    decision of FtT Judge Sweet as the starting point and should only have
    departed from the previous decision, for good reason.


15. The respondent claims the only additional evidence before FtT Judge
    Talbot was the two certificates confirming the appellant has not
    committed any offences in Bulgaria or Albania.  That was entirely
    consistent with the claim made by the appellant and referred to in
    paragraph [12] of the decision of FtT Judge Sweet, that the appellant
    has not committed any further offences since his conviction on 20th
    August 2009.  Mr Lindsay submits that the certificates confirming that
    there was no further offending in Albania or Bulgaria did not advance
    the appellant's case any further and did not amount to a change of
    circumstances.


16. Mr Lindsay submits the judge erred in his consideration of 2 material
    matters.  First, at paragraph [16], the judge found the evidence
    relating to the continuing relationship between the appellant and his
    son to be a material change in circumstances since the making of the
    deportation order.  Mr Lindsay submits the judge should have considered
    whether there had been a change since the decision of FtT Judge Sweet.
    Second, at paragraph [17], the judge found the fact that the appellant
    has not reoffended in the period of over nine years since his
    deportation, is a significant factor affecting the future risk.  Mr
    Lindsay submits the judge should have considered whether there had been
    further offending during the 2 years since the decision of FtT Judge
    Sweet in November 2017.


17. The respondent submits that FtT Judge Talbot simply substituted his own
    assessment of the risk of reoffending and whether the appellant
    presents a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to a
    fundamental interest of society, to the assessment made by FtT Judge
    Sweet.  The respondent submits that in reaching his decision, FtT Judge
    Talbot failed to take a holistic approach to the evidence and in
    considering the future risk and fundamental interests of society,
    failed to have proper regard to the conduct of the appellant since his
    deportation, and the numerous attempts made by him to enter the UK
    illegally, and in fact, to have entered the United Kingdom unlawfully
    between 2015 and 2016.


18. The respondent submits the fundamental interests of society include the
    prevention of unlawful immigration and abuse of immigration laws and
    maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration control
    system; Schedule 1, Paragraph 7(a) of the EEA Regulations.  The
    respondent submits that in reaching his decision FtT Judge Talbot fails
    to provide reasons explaining why the conduct of the appellant in
    entering the UK illegally and in breach of a deportation order, did not
    undermine the fundamental interests of society.  Mr Lindsay submits
    that at paragraph [18], the judge refers to the appellant's conduct but
    simply concludes that if the deportation order were to be revoked,
    there would be little or no risk of the appellant entering the UK
    unlawfully. Mr Lindsay submits the appellant has shown utter disregard
    to the immigration laws and the judge did not engage with paragraph
    7(a) of Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations.  The judge failed to
    consider the appellant's conduct as a whole, in considering whether the
    personal conduct of the appellant represents a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
    of society.


19. The respondent submits the judge erred in concluding that the
    continuing exclusion of the appellant from the UK is not proportionate
    (not least in the light of his relationship with his son) and the
    appellant would not pose a sufficiently serious threat to the
    fundamental interests of society.  The respondent claims the conclusion
    reached by FtT Judge Talbot is at odds with the decision of FtT Judge
    Sweet, who had found in November 2017 that the best interests of the
    child are a primary consideration, but the public interest in maintain
    the appellant's exclusion outweighed the interests of the child.  The
    respondent submits the appellant has been able to maintain relationship
    with his son and there was no evidence before FtT judge Talbot to
    undermine the finding made previously.


20. In reply, Mr Garrod submits that Devaseelan is an authority relating to
    appeals unconnected to the EEA Regulations, and the application of the
    guidelines is not as comprehensive as claimed by the respondent,
    because Devaseelan is specifically envisaged as addressing issues
    raised in human rights appeals.  Here the appeal arises from the
    appellant's rights as an EEA national under the EEA Regulations, and
    Devaseelan has no direct application.   Mr Garrod accepts there are
    difficulties with the proposition that Devaseelan does not apply at
    all, but even if the guidance does apply, he submits, it is the
    starting point and not determinative.


21. Mr Garrod submits it was open to FtT Judge Talbot to reach his own view
    of the appellants future conduct based on the greater evidence before
    him, taking account of matters including the effects of the simple
    passage of time.


22. Mr Garrod submits the appellant's application made on 27th March 2018
    for revocation of the deportation order was made on the basis that the
    respondent had not properly complied with Article 27 of Directive
    (2004/38/EC) of the European Parliament on the right of citizens of the
    union and their family members to move and reside freely within the
    territory of Member States.  Mr Garrod submits Article 27 of the
    Directive outlines the approach to be taken by Member States where the
    host nation perceives there to be an issue that could be resolved, in
    particular, to ascertain whether the person concerned represents a
    danger for public policy or public security.


23. He submits that in reaching his decision, FtT Judge Talbot assessed the
    evidence "through a different legal prism", because FtT Judge Sweet had
    not previously taken Article 27 of the Directive into account.  He
    submits the appellant's circumstances can change over time, and
    likewise, an assessment of his possible future conduct can also change
    over time.


24. Mr Garrod submits there is no material error of law in the decision of
    FtT Judge Talbot.  He submits there had been changes since the decision
    of FtT Judge Sweet and the findings made by him at paragraphs [26] and
    [27] of the decision promulgated in November 2017.  Mr Garrod submits
    the passage of time, the continuing relationship between the appellant
    and his son and the contact that the appellant has maintained are all
    relevant factors that FtT Judge Talbot was entitled to consider in
    reaching his decision.


25. Mr Garrod submits the respondent's reliance upon the conduct of the
    appellant in seeking to return to the UK, do not provide the respondent
    an opportunity to say that the appellant is a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting on of the fundamental interests
    of society when Article 27(2) of the Directive is carefully read.  He
    submits that at paragraph [18] of his decision, FtT Judge Talbot
    considers the appellant's conduct and he reaches a decision that was
    open to the Tribunal.  Mr Garrod submits the findings and conclusions
    reached by FtT Judge Talbot are neither irrational nor unreasonable and
    they were open to the judge.


26. In reply to submissions made by Mr Garrod, Mr Lindsay submits the
    appellant's reliance upon Article 27(3) of the Directive is
    misconceived.  He submits Article 27(3) does not place a duty or
    obligation upon a Member State to request information concerning any
    previous police record the individual concerned may have.  Article
    27(3) is framed in discretionary terms by the use of the word "may",
    not "will", and in any event Article 27(3) provides that "Such
    enquiries shall not be made as a matter of routine.".   Here, the
    respondent did not consider it essential to seek information from the
    authorities in Albania or Bulgaria. Mr Lindsay submits that in any
    event, the certificates that FtT Judge Talbot was provided with,
    confirm that there has been no offending by the appellant in Albania or
    Bulgaria.  The absence of further evidence regarding offending since
    the appellant left the UK is positive evidence of no further offending,
    and that is the proper approach to the evidence adopted by FtT Judges
    Talbot and Sweet.  The Tribunal could only consider proven conduct
    contrary to public policy.


Discussion


27. It is convenient to set out, at the outset, Article 27 of Directive
    (2004/38/EC) of the European Parliament:


         'General principles


         1.   Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, Member States may
         restrict the freedom of movement and residence of Union citizens
         and their family members, irrespective of nationality, on grounds
         of public policy, public security or public health. These grounds
         shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.


         2.   Measures taken on grounds of public policy or public security
         shall comply with the principle of proportionality and shall be
         based exclusively on the personal conduct of the individual
         concerned. Previous criminal convictions shall not in themselves
         constitute grounds for taking such measures.


         The personal conduct of the individual concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society. Justifications that are
         isolated from the particulars of the case or that rely on
         considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted.


         3.   In order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents
         a danger for public policy or public security, when issuing the
         registration certificate or, in the absence of a registration
         system, not later than three months from the date of arrival of the
         person concerned on its territory or from the date of reporting
         his/her presence within the territory, as provided for in Article
         5(5), or when issuing the residence card, the host Member State
         may, should it consider this essential, request the Member State of
         origin and, if need be, other Member States to provide information
         concerning any previous police record the person concerned may
         have. Such enquiries shall not be made as a matter of routine. The
         Member State consulted shall give its reply within two months.


         4.   The Member State which issued the passport or identity card
         shall allow the holder of the document who has been expelled on
         grounds of public policy, public security, or public health from
         another Member State to re-enter its territory without any
         formality even if the document is no longer valid or the
         nationality of the holder is in dispute.'


28. Article 27(3) was relied upon extensively by the appellant at the
    hearing of the appeal before FtT Judge Talbot.  At paragraph [12] of
    his decision, the judge stated:


         "This appeal is under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and Mr
         Garrod has correctly pointed out that if the Regulations failed to
         apply the relevant provisions of EU law in the form of Directive
         2004/38, the Directive itself has direct effect in domestic law in
         that regard."


29. That is, as Mr Lindsay accepts, entirely correct as a legal
    proposition.  As FtT Judge Talbot noted at paragraph [13], the decision
    to remove an EEA national or a family member must be justified on the
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health. Regulation
    27 sets out the general principles as to how a decision taken on
    grounds of public policy public security and public health, should be
    reached.  Regulation 27(5) of the EEA Regulations state:


         5)   The public policy and public security requirements of the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-


             (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking into account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need
             to be imminent;


             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
             which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
             justify the decision;


             (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision;


             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
         resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


30. It is also convenient to set out Schedule 1 insofar as it is relevant
    to this appeal.


         7.   Fundamental interests of society


         For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
         society in the United Kingdom include-


             (a)  preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the
             immigration laws, and maintaining the integrity and
             effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
             under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;


             ...


             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused,
             public offence) and maintaining public confidence in the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;


31. I accept, as Mr Lindsay submits, the appellant gains no assistance from
    Article 27 of Directive (2004/38/EC).  Article 27 permits a Member
    State, should it consider this essential, to request the Member State
    of origin and, if need be, other Member States to provide information
    concerning any previous police record the person concerned may have in
    order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents a danger to
    public policy or public security. It does not place an obligation upon
    the host Member State to make enquiries of other Member States
    concerning any previous police record the person concerned may have. In
    fact to the contrary, Article 27 uses the words "should it consider
    this essential" and expressly provides that "Such enquiries shall not
    be made as a matter of routine.".  The language of the Directive
    demonstrates that such enquiries should only be made where there are
    genuine concerns that the person concerned represents a danger for
    public policy or public security and enquiries will be the exception
    rather than the norm.


32. I reject the submission by Mr Garrod that FtT Judge Talbot assessed the
    evidence "through a different legal prism".  The appellant had
    maintained before FtT Judge Sweet that he has not committed any further
    offences since his conviction on 20th August 2009.  FtT Judge Sweet
    accepted that conviction is spent, and there is nothing in his decision
    to suggest that FtT Judge Sweet doubted the appellant's claim that he
    has not committed any further offences.  FtT Judge Sweet was however
    undoubtably entitled to consider, as he did, the fact that the
    appellant had made three unauthorised attempts to return to the UK in
    April 2013, January 2015 and March 2015. He was also undoubtably
    entitled to consider the fact that the appellant appeared to have been
    in the UK in August 2016 in order to sign his name on his son's birth
    certificate and to make the application for revocation of the
    deportation order that was made in August 2016, as relevant to the
    assessment of whether there is a significant risk that the appellant
    will reoffend and that he  presents a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat to a fundamental interest of society.


33. I reject the submission made by Mr Garrod that Devaseelan has no direct
    application.   Mr Garrod is right to acknowledge that there are
    difficulties with the proposition that Devaseelan does not apply at
    all.  In Aina [2016] CSIH 39 it was effectively accepted that
    Devaseelan applies in a case concerning EU law. It was held that where
    a second Tribunal relied on the conclusions of an earlier Tribunal in
    relation to a point which had in effect been overturned by the UT, that
    was contrary to the principle established in Devaseelan. In my
    judgement, the guidelines set out in Devaseelan properly apply to the
    determination of a factual issue, the dispute as to which has already
    been the subject of judicial determination in an appeal against an
    earlier immigration decision involving the same parties, regardless of
    whether that is a human rights decision or an immigration decision
    concerning EU law.


34. FtT judge Talbot stated at paragraph [15] of his decision that he must
    follow the judicial guidance given in Devaseelan and his starting point
    should be the relevant findings made in the previous decision of FtT
    judge Sweet. It was, as Mr Garrod submits, a starting point and not
    determinative of the appeal.  Like FtT Judge Sweet, FtT Judge Talbot
    considered the appellant's relationship with his son and found there
    continued to be a material change in circumstances since the making of
    the deportation order.  It was open to him to do so.  I reject the
    submission made by Mr Lindsay that taking the decision of FtT Judge
    Sweet as the starting point, FtT Judge Talbot should have considered
    whether there had been a change since the decision of FtT judge Sweet.
    Regulation 34(3) and 34(5) of the EEA Regulations are clear.  A person
    who is subject to a deportation or exclusion order may apply to the
    Secretary of State to have it revoked on the basis that there has been
    a material change in the circumstances that justified the making of the
    order.  The Secretary of State must revoke the order if the Secretary
    of State considers that the criteria for making such an order are no
    longer satisfied.  The focus is clearly upon the change in
    circumstances that justified the making of the order.


35. FtT Judge Talbot considered the factors set out in Regulation 27(5) of
    the EEA Regulations at paragraphs [17] and [18] of his decision.  The
    issue was whether the appellant's personal conduct establishes that he
    represents a "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
    account his past conduct; and if his conduct does represent such a
    threat, whether the decision to maintain his deportation and refuse to
    revoke the order complies with the principle of proportionality (reg
    27(5)(a)).


36. In reaching his decision as to whether there has been a material change
    in the circumstances that justify the making of the order, FtT Judge
    Talbot was plainly entitled to have regard to the passage of time and
    note that the appellant has not re-offended in the period of over nine
    years since his deportation, as a significant factor affecting the
    future risk. FtT Judge Talbot stated, at [17]:


         "... given these facts, I am unable to conclude that some 10 years
         after his offence and some 9� years after his removal there
         continues to be a significant risk that he will re-offend on the
         basis of the conviction in 2009."


37. FtT Judge Talbot refers, at paragraph [18], to the respondent's
    reliance on the appellant's conduct since his removal in entering the
    UK illegally in breach of the deportation order.  He concludes that if
    the deportation order were to be revoked the appellant, as a Bulgarian
    national, would have all the rights of admission available to EEA
    citizens and there would therefore be little or no risk of him entering
    the UK unlawfully.


38. The question was whether there has been a material change in the
    circumstances that justified the making of the order. The question that
    arises under Regulation 27(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations is therefore,
    whether the appellant's personal conduct establishes that he continues
    to represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
    account his past conduct.  The 'fundamental interests of society'
    include preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
    laws and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration
    control system (including under the Regulations) and of the Common
    Travel Area.


39. The judge acknowledges the behaviour of the appellant in entering the
    UK illegally in breach of the deportation order is to be deplored.  The
    prevention of unlawful immigration, abuse of the immigration laws, and
    maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration control
    system is one of the fundamental interests of society.  It was however
    open to the Judge, to conclude that the appellant who now also holds
    Bulgarian nationality, would have all the rights of admission available
    to EEA citizens, if the deportation order were to be revoked, and that
    in all the circumstances the continued exclusion of the appellant from
    the UK is not proportionate because of his relationship with his son
    and because the appellant does not pose a sufficiently serious threat
    to the fundamental interests of society.  Whilst Devaseelan establishes
    that the decision of FtT Judge Sweet is the starting point, that
    decision stood as an assessment of the claim the appellant was making
    at the time of that first determination.  Since that determination, it
    was open to FtT Judge Talbot to have regard to the evidence before the
    Tribunal regarding the on-going relationship between the appellant and
    his son, the further passage of time, and the absence of any further
    attempts to enter the UK unlawfully.


40. The conclusion that the appellant does not pose a "sufficiently serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of society", is a conclusion that
    is neither irrational nor perverse and was a conclusion that in the end
    was open to the Judge on the evidence before him.  The matter is finely
    balanced, and I accept, that another judge may have reached a different
    conclusion. That is not however enough to establish a material error of
    law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.


41. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


42. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed, and the decision of FtT
    Judge Talbot shall stand.


Signed                                  Date     23rd January 2020


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

