
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00072/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 10 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ROHAN EVERTON MONTGOMERY WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make,  any  order  restricting  reporting
    about this case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal by the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  2
    December 2013 to refuse to revoke a deportation order.

 3. The case as a protracted procedural history and I do not see any  point
    in listing every twist and turn in the saga that brings the case before
    me.  The claimant was born in 1974.  He has not  always  behaved  in  a
    creditable way and in January 2005, obviously now rather more than  ten
    years ago, he was sent to prison for  two  years  on  eight  counts  of
    possession of class A drugs with intent to supply.

 4. He was given notice of the Secretary of State's intention to  make  him
    the subject of a  deportation  order  in  May  2005.  He  appealed  the
    decision, initially successfully, but the decision to allow the  appeal
    was overturned by the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  in  May  2006.
    Nevertheless the claimant did not leave  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    right to say that some of the time he was in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    with the approval of the authorities because he was a witness  for  the
    prosecution in a criminal case but he remained some years after that.

 5. In June 2013 he made himself known to the Secretary of State and sought
    revocation of the deportation order.  That application was  refused  in
    December 2013 and it is the  refusal  of  that  decision  that  is  the
    subject of the appeal before me.

 6. In brief summary the appeal has already been allowed once by the First-
    tier Tribunal and sent back by the Upper Tribunal. It came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal again  in  accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision on 17 August 2015.

 7. Much has happened since the deportation order was made, not  the  least
    of these things being the claimant now seems to be settled  and  living
    responsibly as a family man and he has children who are dependent  upon
    him.

 8. The law concerning deportation has changed so  that  the  Rules  to  be
    applied now are not the same as the Rules that were applied in December
    2013.  When the case came before the First-tier Tribunal in August 2015
    there was an agreement between the  parties  about  how  it  should  be
    considered. On that occasion  the  claimant  was  represented  by  very
    experienced counsel  and  the  Secretary  of  State  represented  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  As is explained at paragraph 8 of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, it was agreed quite clearly then  that  "the  best
    course of action would be to allow the appeal as not in accordance with
    the law and remit the matter to the Home  Secretary  to  take  a  fresh
    decision, including for consideration of section 55." That is plainly a
    reference to Section 55 of the Citizenship Immigration and Borders  Act
    2009 which in common language, although not strictly the law,  requires
    the best interests of the children to be primary consideration.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did precisely as it  was  agreed  by  the
    parties he should do and he made a  decision  in  accordance  with  the
    Secretary of State's concession. That was promulgated on 19 August 2015
    and on 1 September 2015 the Secretary of State, having  agreed  to  the
    disposal in a particular way, sought permission to appeal the  decision
    to do as she had agreed. The thrust of the appeal was  that  there  was
    nothing wrong in the consideration of Section 55 by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The fact that the disposal had been agreed before the First-tier
    Tribunal seemed a matter of complete indifference  to  the  person  who
    settled the grounds of appeal who was neither  the  Presenting  Officer
    before the First-tier Tribunal nor Miss Fijiwala who,  presumably,  was
    expected to defend her colleague's grounds.

10. Before considering whether or not the concession  ought  to  have  been
    made or whether the First-tier Tribunal  had  identified  correctly  an
    error of law I asked  for  guidance  on  the  proper  approach  to  the
    concession.  Miss Fijiwala clearly had time to  consider  the  position
    and did not overstate her case when she said she was in difficulties.

11. Mr Slatter referred me to  a  decision  of  Carcabek  and  Bla  v  SSHD
    (00/TH/01426) which was decided  in  May  2000.   Although  rather  old
    jurisprudence by the standards of this Tribunal it is a decision of the
    then president, the Honourable  Mr  Justice  Collins,  and  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, so it might be thought to be particularly authoritative.

12. I find that the position is as follow. Parties cannot agree the law  so
    concessions on matters of law do not bind anyone.  Concessions on  fact
    can be retracted but not without the  consent  of  the  Tribunal.  Here
    there was a concession of fact and I do not  see  any  just  reason  to
    allow the Secretary of State to resile from  the  concession  that  was
    made. All that will follow from the decision to require  the  Secretary
    of State to remake the decision is that there  will  be  an  up-to-date
    decision made in light of the law that is now applicable.

13. I would have thought would have been fair to everyone. It would  enable
    the  Secretary  of  State  and,  if  necessary,  the  Tribunal  in  any
    subsequent appeals, to apply the up-to-date law in a case involving the
    welfare of quite young children. That seems to  be  something  that  is
    desirable. It is something  that  was  agreed  and  I  see  no  justice
    whatever in allowing the Secretary of State to go behind the  agreement
    that she made.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was in these terms "The  appeal
    is allowed as not being in accordance with the law to the  extent  that
    it is remitted to the Home Secretary for a fresh decision".  I  dismiss
    the Secretary of State's appeal against that decision.  It might be  in
    everyone's interest if she does as the Presenting  Officer  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicated she ought to do.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 December 2015                |

