
IAC-fH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00199/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2015                   |On 27 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     C C
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, instructed by UK Migration Lawyers Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. Although not sought, I have  made  an  anonymity  order  as  this  case
    involves a child. Accordingly, the disclosure  or  publication  of  any
    information relating to these proceedings or any matter likely to  lead
    members of the public to identify  any  person  referred  to  in  these
    proceedings is prohibited.

 2. In my decision dated 12 November 2014 I gave  my  reasons  for  finding
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  Tribunal)  had  erred  in  law  in
    allowing the appeal  by  the  respondent  (the  claimant)  against  the
    decision to make  a  deportation  order  dated  16  January  2014.   My
    decision which gives the detailed history of this matter is set out  as
    follows:

         "1.  The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal
             against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  T   R
             Hollingworth who sitting in a panel with Sir Jeffrey James KBE
             CMG allowed the  respondent's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
             Rules and on human rights grounds against the decision to make
             a deportation order dated 16 January 2014.

          3. The respondent (referred to as the claimant) is a national  of
             Turkey where he was born in 10 March 1974.   The  decision  he
             appealed against stems from a conviction in  Nottingham  Crown
             Court of offences of sexual assault on a female on 14 February
             2011 and for which he was sentenced  on  8  March  2011.   The
             three offences occurred in January, February  and  April  2010
             and involved victims aged 16 and 18�.  A  sentence  of  twelve
             months' imprisonment was imposed made up  of  six  months  and
             eight months on counts relating to one of the complainants  to
             run concurrently and four months in  relation  to  the  second
             complainant to run consecutively.  The claimant was subject to
             notification requirements of the Sexual Offences Act.

          4. As to his immigration history, the  claimant  claims  to  have
             entered the United Kingdom in or around 1994.  He came to  the
             attention of the authorities in November 1997 after an  arrest
             by the police.  On 15 August 2001  he  was  granted  leave  to
             remain for twelve months as a spouse and in the light of this,
             the claimant withdrew an earlier protection claim that had not
             been resolved.  A child to that relationship was born in April
             2002 and in October 2003 the claimant was  granted  indefinite
             leave to remain.  That marriage broke down.   Since  2008  the
             claimant has been in a relationship  with  another  who  is  a
             British citizen.

          5. On 1 May 2012 the Secretary of State made a deportation  order
             under s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  A judge of the  First-
             tier Tribunal  considered  the  provisions  of  the  2007  Act
             (s.38(1)(b)) had been misapplied by the Secretary of State and
             concluded that the deportation order  was  not  in  accordance
             with the law.  The Secretary of  State  did  not  appeal  that
             decision.

          6. On 26 July 2012 she made a further decision this time to  make
             a deportation order.  In a  determination  dated  19  December
             2012 another judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  an
             appeal against that decision as not  in  accordance  with  the
             law.  It is unnecessary to carry out a  detailed  analysis  of
             that decision which  includes  in  part  a  concern  expressed
             regarding the Secretary of State's approach to Article 8 based
             on a misconception that  s.32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
             applied.

          7. Among her reasons for the decision giving rise to the  instant
             appeal the Secretary of State contended that paragraph  398(c)
             applied because the three  offences  of  sexual  assault  came
             within Schedule 15 of the Criminal Justice  Act  2003.   As  a
             consequence paragraph 399(a) and (b) was considered as well as
             399A.  In short the Secretary of State did not accept that the
             claimant came within any of these provisions  and  furthermore
             there were no  exceptional  circumstances  which  would  cause
             deportation to be a breach of Article 8.

          8. In allowing the appeal , the judge made these findings:

               i) The claimant was liable to deportation as the Secretary of
                  State had warranted that his continuing  presence  in  the
                  United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.

              ii) The claimant was not a credible or  reliable  witness;  it
                  appeared to  the  panel  that  the  sentencing  judge  had
                  erroneously regarded the claimant as someone  of  previous
                  good character having been convicted for dishonesty in  or
                  around 2005.

             iii) A pre-sentence report had assessed the claimant  as  at  a
                  low risk of  serious  harm  to  the  public  but  that  he
                  presented a medium risk  of  harm  to  children  and  non-
                  adults.

              iv) The claimant has not re-offended.  He has  maintained  his
                  innocence.

               v) The fact that the claimant received twelve months sentence
                  in total failed to satisfy paragraph 398(b).

              vi) Schedule 15 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 is in respect
                  of offenders who are dangerous  as  defined  by  that  Act
                  requiring them to  be  remanded  in  custody  indefinitely
                  until they no longer present a risk of harm to the public.
                   The claimant was not in such a category as  the  sentence
                  indicated.

             vii) The Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  apply  paragraph
                  398(c) correctly having regard to her  own  guidance  when
                  evaluating "serious harm".

            viii) The claimant could not be said to  be  in  a  genuine  and
                  subsisting relationship with his child with  reference  to
                  paragraph 399(a).

              ix) As to paragraph 399(b), the expectation for the claimant's
                  partner  to  accompany  him  to  Turkey  would  result  in
                  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.   Expulsion   of   the
                  claimant on the basis of the  conducive  provisions  would
                  lead to his family relationship ceasing.   The  individual
                  circumstances of the claimant's partner and her mother did
                  not result in a finding of exceptional circumstances.

          9. Having set out the above matters, the tribunal stated that the
             appeal  was  allowed   "in   respect   of   the   respondent's
             interpretation of the Immigration Rules".

         10. The tribunal then turned to Article 8.  Although  it  was  not
             accepted that the claimant had arrived in the  United  Kingdom
             in 1994, to expect his partner to move to  Turkey  would  have
             unjustifiably harsh consequences and  taking  account  of  the
             offence, the public interest did  not  require  expulsion  and
             thus the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

         11. The grounds of challenge are that-

               i) The panel had materially misdirected itself in respect  of
                  its consideration of paragraph 398(c).

              ii) The insurmountable obstacles found under paragraph  399(b)
                  reflected the challenges any couple would face in choosing
                  to establish themselves in a new  country.   The  claimant
                  had  failed  to  establish  that   relocation   would   be
                  exceptionally difficult for him and his partner.

             iii) The findings on Article 8 failed to afford  proper  regard
                  to the public interest.  The risk of re-offending had been
                  acknowledged but the tribunal had  failed  to  acknowledge
                  that deportation is not one  dimensional  and  that  there
                  were other legitimate aims engaged such as deterrence, the
                  maintenance of public confidence in a  system  of  control
                  and expression of societal abhorrence to criminality.

         11. By way of a rule 24 response, it  is  argued  that  the  first
             ground is misconceived.  The  only  reason  the  Secretary  of
             State had given  for  concluding  that  the  offending  caused
             serious harm was because it fell within  Schedule  15  of  the
             2003  Act.   The  panel  had  correctly  identified  that  the
             schedule referred to related to offenders who  were  dangerous
             as defined in the 2003 Act.  The claimant was not  in  such  a
             category  as  indicated  by  his  sentence.   The  panel   had
             identified that the Secretary of State had  failed  to  comply
             with her own guidance and finally the panel had proper  regard
             to the previous determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  of
             December 2012 which had been allowed as the Secretary of State
             had failed to differentiate between the fact of the conviction
             from the consequences and terms of causation of serious harm.

         12. As to the second ground it is argued  that  the  Secretary  of
             State had failed to find an error of  law  and  the  challenge
             amounted to a disagreement.  The reference  to  Gurung  [2012]
             EWCA Civ 62 in the challenge to the third ground was misplaced
             as it concerned automatic deportation under  s.32  of  the  UK
             Borders Act 2007.

         13. I take each ground in turn.

         14. Paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  identifies  three
             categories of criminality.  The  Secretary  of  State  decided
             that the third applied -

             "(c) The deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because in the view of  the  Secretary  of
                  State their offending has caused serious harm or they  are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law."

         15. It  is  correct  that  the  reasons  letter  accompanying  the
             immigration decision relies on  the  status  of  the  offences
             under  Schedule  15  of  the  Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  as
             justification for paragraph 398(c) to apply.  As  accepted  by
             Ms Peterson, an offence under s.3 of the Sexual  Offences  Act
             2003 (Sexual Assault)  is  included  in  Schedule  15  to  the
             Criminal Justice Act 2003  as  a  specified  offence  for  the
             purposes of Chapter 5 of Part  12.   Chapter  5  provides  for
             dangerous offenders.  "Specified offence" is  defined  as  one
             that is "a specified violent offence  or  a  specified  sexual
             offence".   It  further  provides  that  a  "specified  sexual
             offence" means an offence specified in  part  2  of  [Schedule
             15]" specific to the offence of which the  claimant  had  been
             convicted.  The skeleton argument on behalf  of  the  claimant
             before the panel referred to  this  legislation  allowing  the
             sentencing court to impose a sentence for public protection if
             required.  I consider that the tribunal  erred  by  concluding
             that  schedule  15  was  in  respect  of  offenders  who  were
             dangerous as defined.

         16. The tribunal had observed that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
             failed to consider 398(c) adequately.  Whilst such a view  may
             have been open to the tribunal, it was then incumbent upon  it
             to conclude whether 398(c)  was  engaged  notwithstanding  the
             deficiencies in the Secretary of State's own reasoning.  I  am
             unable to accept Ms Peterson's argument that it  was  implicit
             in the tribunal's reasoning that such a  conclusion  had  been
             reached by reference to the earlier decision in December 2012.
              In that decision, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  Hollingworth
             concluded that the Secretary of State had failed to  correctly
             apply 398(c) which led him to his conclusion that the decision
             was not in accordance with the law.  I am  unable  to  discern
             from his decision a clear finding that the  offences  had  not
             caused serious harm anymore than I am able to discern  such  a
             finding in the determination under challenge.

         17. I consider this error material.  I  do  not  accept  that  the
             tribunal was bound to find that the offences  had  not  caused
             serious harm.  The sentencing remarks  refer  to  the  adverse
             effect the assault had on the older of the two victims and the
             obligation felt by the younger to give up her job in order  to
             ensure she was not treated  in  the  same  way  again.   These
             remarks read with the  pre-sentence  report  suggest  that  it
             could certainly be open to a judge to conclude that  paragraph
             398(c) was engaged.

         18. Turning to the second ground, it is unclear why  the  tribunal
             proceeded to consider paragraphs 399(a)  and  (b)  since  they
             were of no applicability if the claimant was outside the reach
             of paragraph 398.  Specifically in respect of paragraph 399(b)
             there was a failure by the judge to consider  the  residential
             requirement of fifteen years valid leave immediately preceding
             the date of decision (paragraph 399(b) (i)).

         19. There appears to me to be no basis on which the claimant could
             have succeeded on paragraph 399(b) as a consequence.

         20. It is not clear from the determination  whether  the  tribunal
             considered  it   was   necessary   to   address   "exceptional
             circumstances" because 398(c) applied  having  regard  to  the
             concluding paragraph of 398 which is in terms...."if  it  does
             not, it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other
             factors".   Or whether it was considered there was a  need  to
             follow this approach in accordance with paragraph 397.  In any
             event I am satisfied that the tribunal erred in its Article  8
             consideration.  At [82] the tribunal correctly  observed  that
             the claimant was not faced with automatic deportation and said



                  '82. Although we have no doubt that the offences committed
                      by  the  appellant  were  serious,  nonetheless,  the
                      respondent has not satisfied the requirements of  the
                      Rules regarding serious harm.  So that, looked at  as
                      a whole, the maximum sentence the appellant  received
                      for the most serious  individual  offence  was  eight
                      months.

                  83.  We understand the appellant to be a  medium  risk  of
                      harm in the community according to the OASYS  Report.
                      But, with respect, that evaluation  is  almost  three
                      years old by the date of the appeal.  In  considering
                      the appellant's risk of re-offending and the  waiting
                      exercise he has not re-offended.'

         21. If paragraph 398(c) applied, the scales would be more  heavily
             weighted in favour of the Secretary of State than if they  did
             not.  The error by the judge  in  failing  to  decide  whether
             398(c) applied materially infects the Article 8 exercise.

         22. Accordingly  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  Ms Peterson acknowledged that no new  evidence  had
             been filed and accordingly the decision will be re-made in the
             Upper Tribunal based on submissions only.   Those  submissions
             will  need  to  include  the  relevant   provisions   of   the
             Immigration Act 2014, the revisions to the  Immigration  Rules
             and the Secretary of State's current guidance in the light  of
             a decision in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292."

RE-MAKING THE DECISION

 2. I am grateful to Ms Isherwood and Ms Daykin for their  submissions  and
    in particular to Ms Daykin's for  her  skeleton  argument  as  well  as
    providing a copy of the Immigration Directorate  Instructions,  Chapter
    13: Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases, Version 5.0, 28  July
    2014.

 3. As I said in  the  concluding  paragraph  of  the  above  decision  the
    amending provisions under the Immigration Act 2014 to the 2002 Act  and
    revisions to the Immigration Rules apply in this case.

 4. The starting point is s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971:

         "A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good...".

 5. This is not an automatic deportation case.  Accordingly s.32 of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 does not apply.  Although the claimant  was  sentenced
    to a total of  twelve  months'  imprisonment,  the  usual  trigger  for
    automatic deportation, it was made up of six months and eight months on
    counts in relation to some of the victims to run concurrently and  four
    months in relation to the other to run consecutively.  Instead, it is a
    decision to make a deportation order.  The Secretary of State explained
    in her decision letter she deemed it to be conducive to the public good
    to make a deportation order against the claimant, hence  the  liability
    under s.3(5)(a) above.

 6. Paragraph 396 of the Immigration Rules (the Rules) provides -

         "396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
             be the public interest requires deportation.   It  is  in  the
             public interest to deport where the Secretary  of  State  must
             make a deportation order in accordance with  s.32  of  the  UK
             Borders Act 2007."

 7. Paragraph 397 of the Rules is in these terms:

         "397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Their
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed."

 8. As was made clear in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the rules
    on deportation comprise a complete code regulating how the question  of
    deportation  should  be  addressed  where  it  is  claimed  that   such
    deportation would  be  contrary  to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  Specific to the circumstances of the case before me 398(c)
    provides:

         "(c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law..."

 9. If the claimant's circumstances are captured by  398(c),  consideration
    needs to be given to whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies. Unless  one
    of the categories is met, the public interest in  deportation  only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraphs  399  and
    399A.

10.  The claimant relies on his relationship with  a  British  citizen  and
    thus 399(b) which provides -

         "(b) the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or  settled
             in the UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status is not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  a
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported."

11. Section EX.2 is in these terms:

         "EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'Insurmountable
         obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."

12. The Immigration Act 2014 amended Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 with the insertion of part 5A:  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR: Public Interest Considerations.   Again,  specific  to  the  case
    before me s.117A(2) is in these terms:

             "117A -

             (2)  In considering the public interest, the court or Tribunal
                  must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117B, and

                  (b)  in all cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117C.

             (3)  In sub-Section (2), 'the public interest question' means
                  the question of whether an interference with a person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is justified
                  under Article 8(2)."

13. Section 117C Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals provides:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  being
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             (1) or Exception (2) applies.

         ...

         (5)  Exception (2) applies where C has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         ...

         (7)  The considerations in sub-sections (1), (2),  (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or Tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

14. Finally, s.117D provides this interpretation of a foreign  criminal  as
    follows:

         "(2) In this part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who -

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."

15. The starting point  is  the  rules  and  the  first  question  is  with
    reference to 398(c) whether the  claimant  has  been  convicted  of  an
    offence that has caused serious harm.  It is not the Respondent's  case
    that he is a persistent offender.  I have  had  careful  regard  to  Ms
    Daykin's argument that the Secretary of State has failed to produce any
    evidence of "serious harm" caused in this  case.   I  accept  that  the
    burden is on the Secretary of State to prove this aspect.

16. It is correct that the author of the pre-sentence report  did  not  see
    the witness statements or the victims' statements despite  attempts  to
    obtain them.  The offences are analysed in paragraphs 4 and  5  of  the
    report which reveals that both victims  worked  as  waitresses  in  the
    claimant's cafeteria.  As to the first victim, the first incident of  a
    sexual nature occurred when she explained that she was not  being  paid
    enough for the tip to be put into the shared  pot.   Quoting  from  the
    report:

         "According to the Crown Prosecution Service evidence Mr [C] made  a
         remark that she could 'earn more money if she gave him a  blowjob'.
         Following this incident Mr [C] is then reported to have touched the
         victim on the bottom and the  breasts  on  a  number  of  occasions
         leading to the current convictions."

17. As to the second victim, the report observes:

         "In respect of the second victim, this is in relation to one  count
         of sexual assault occurring on 5 April 2010.  The Crown Prosecution
         Service case summary outlines that the victim  was  employed  as  a
         part time waitress at the defendant's cafeteria.  On  the  date  of
         the offence Mr [C]  asked  the  victim  to  go  downstairs  to  the
         basement to assist him in washing up.  Once in the basement Mr  [C]
         made the victim an alcoholic drink and began to talk to  her  about
         sex.  He then grabbed the victim, pulling her towards him  so  that
         their groins were touching.  The case summary outlines that Mr  [C]
         then ground his erect penis against the victim's vagina before  she
         was able to push him away and return upstairs.  Within interview Mr
         [C] claims that he simply lifted the victim up so  that  she  could
         'kiss' another employee.  He denies that he touched her in a sexual
         way and denies the offence."

18. The probation officer sets out his view regarding impact on the victims
    at paragraph 6 as follows:

         "6.  At the time of the index offences the victims were employed by
             the defendant in his caf� as waitresses.  As I do not  hold  a
             copy of the witness and victim statements I have  been  unable
             to make direct reference to  the  impact  of  the  defendant's
             actions on the victims.  In my assessment  the  offences  will
             have had an enduring impact  on  the  victim's  emotional  and
             psychological wellbeing.  The victims would have  felt  scared
             and intimidated by the defendant's actions.  This may lead  to
             her struggling to develop  appropriate  relationships  in  the
             future.  She will  undoubtedly  find  it  difficult  to  trust
             future partners due to the breach of trust perpetrated by  the
             defendant."

19. The impact on the victim was  also  considered  in  the  OASys  Report.
    There is no indication that the author had any additional evidence from
    the victims.  The conclusion expressed at paragraph  2.5  is  in  these
    terms:

         "Impact to the Victims

         It was assessed by the previous PSR author that  the  offences  may
         have an enduring impact on the victims' emotional and psychological
         wellbeing.  The victims would have felt fearful and intimidated  by
         Mr [C]'s  actions.   This  may  lead  to  the  victims  finding  it
         difficult to trust people in similar  positions  of  power  in  the
         future and could have an impact on future relationships."

20. His Honour, Judge Stokes QC had this to say in his sentencing remarks:

         "I have considered everything that has been said on your behalf and
         everything that is set out in the report, but it  has  to  be  made
         absolutely clear that men of any age who take  advantage  of  young
         girls, particularly in the employment environment,  it  has  to  be
         made absolutely plain that this  sort  of  behaviour  will  not  be
         tolerated, particularly when it is repeated.

         There has to be, in my judgment, an immediate custodial sentence in
         order to underline the seriousness of this sort of  behaviour.   We
         know in relation to the 18 year old, the adverse effect it has  had
         on her; and the 16 year old felt obliged to  give  up  her  job  in
         order to ensure that she was not treated in this way again."

21. Ms Daykin referred me to the Secretary of State's guidance set  out  in
    chapter 13 - Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases 28 July 2014.
      Serious harm is defined  as  "an  offence  that  has  caused  serious
    physical or psychological harm to a victim  or  victims,  or  that  has
    contributed to a widespread problem  that  causes  serious  harm  to  a
    community or to society in general."

22. The Secretary of State's guidance does not  form  part  of  the  Rules.
    Instead, it is an expression of her understanding of the rules  and  in
    this case, primary legislation.  I  do  not  consider  that  the  words
    however require any elaboration or substitution  as  their  meaning  is
    self evident.

23. Although the author of the pre-sentence report did not see  the  victim
    impact  statements,  he  had  a  clear  picture  of  the  offences  and
    furthermore weight can be legitimately given to the views expressed  as
    to the likely impact in the light of  his  experience  as  a  probation
    officer.  The OASys Report does not add anything  new  of   a  material
    nature but it reinforces the impact view given in the earlier report.

24.  It  is  clear  from  the  sentencing  remarks   that,   although   not
    particularised, there was an adverse effect on the first  victim.   The
    context suggests the possibility of this being serious. To my mind  the
    fact that  the  second  victim  needed  to  change  her  employment  is
    unambiguously indicative of the serious harm that the offending caused.



25. Taking these evidential matters into account and having regard  to  the
    nature of the offences committed, the  ages  of  the  victims  and  the
    circumstances in which this occurred, I am satisfied that the offending
    brought the case within 398(c)

26. The next step is to consider  whether  paragraph  399(b)  is  met.  The
    impact difference between this provision and Exception (2) in s.117C is
    that the rules give rise to the possibility of  specific  leave  (399B)
    whereas Part 5A does not. It seems to me that the  Part  5A  provisions
    take effect if the case does not result in leave under the rules  hence
    the order in which I am to carry out my analysis.

27. Ms Daykin argued that Exception (2) under s.117C was less onerous  than
    paragraph 399(b) when read with EX.2.  The focus of her submissions was
    on Part 5A as she acknowledged that the claimant would  struggle  under
    the rules. Even if this is correct, it does not mean in the absence  of
    a clear concession that I can ignore the rules. In any  event,  if  399
    and 399A do not apply then as 398 concludes, "the  public  interest  in
    deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where  there  are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. Thus the public interest  is  to  be  assessed
    against this testing requirement as well as the provisions in part  5A.
    I do not consider that latter is more generous for the reasons  I  give
    below.

28. The journey  through  the  provisions  of  the  rules  is  as  follows.
    Paragraph  399(b)(i):  it  is  not  in  dispute  that  the   claimant's
    relationship with  Ms  K  began  in  2008,  well  after  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain on 7  October  2003.   Ms  K  is  a  British
    citizen  and  there  is  no  dispute  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.

29. Paragraph 399(b)(ii) and (iii): the Tribunal did not reach a conclusion
    on whether  Ms  K  would  accompany  the  claimant  or  remain  behind.
    According to her statement dated 26 April 2014, his  deportation  would
    mark the end of their relationship as she could not  leave  her  mother
    and children as well as her job behind.  Specifically she explains -

      i) Having had previous health  difficulties,  although  not  seriously
         unwell the claimant resides in a village  23  kilometres  from  the
         nearest hospital in Aksaray.

     ii) Just because Ms K is able to work it does not mean she  is  not  in
         ill-health having regard to  two  heart  attacks  she  suffered  in
         December 2009 and the provision of a coronary artery stint as  well
         as suffering from diabetes, arthritis and eye related problems.

    iii) Ms K's children reside in the UK where she has a job which she  has
         had for a number of years.  She has considerable ties she would not
         want to lose.  She has only ever  visited  Turkey  on  holiday  and
         never resided there for a lengthy period  of  time  where  her  job
         prospects would be very limited.

     iv) She would not have anywhere to live in  Turkey  as  the  claimant's
         parents live in a one-bedroom studio flat and as a consequence they
         would be homeless.

      v) Ms K and the claimant co-habit with her mother who has longstanding
         health  complications  suffering  from  a  prolapsed   bladder,   a
         prolapsed bowel and is currently under regular supervision  with  a
         neurologist as  she  just  had  a  fall  before  the  claimant  was
         imprisoned.  Her father died on 20 September 2013.  The claimant is
         currently the full-time carer for her mother and he had also  cared
         for her father when he was alive.

     vi) Ms K's daughter, although residing in the UK, is unable to care for
         her grandmother as she currently cares for her father, Ms  K's  ex-
         husband  who  suffered  severe  brain  injuries  in  a   motorcycle
         accident. Ms K's brother who also resides in the UK does  not  help
         the claimant care for his mother.  He has never offered  this  help
         and does not want to be burdened with this.  He also has ill-health
         and cannot take care of her.

30. It is correct that the Tribunal considered the expectation for Ms K  to
    accompany  the   claimant   would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences.  Ms Daykin argued that the finding on this aspect  should
    stand as this conclusion had not been vitiated by  any  error  of  law.
    Under the revised provisions in 399(b) whether it would be unduly harsh
    for the partner to live abroad now requires demonstration of compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in EX.2.   It  is  a  more
    demanding test. Ms Isherwood resisted the  argument  that  the  earlier
    finding should be preserved.  That finding had been challenged  in  the
    application for permission to appeal and addressed in my decision.

31. I accept Ms Isherwood's argument.  The grounds  of  challenge  make  it
    clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  accepted   that   the
    circumstances amounted to insurmountable obstacles.  In my  decision  I
    explained the legal error by the Tribunal in its  conclusion  that  the
    claimant could succeed under paragraph 399(b) (see [18] and  [19]).   I
    also explained in [20] that the Tribunal had erred  in  its  Article  8
    consideration.  The re-making of the decision is unarguably  to  be  in
    accordance with the new rules; the findings reached by reference to the
    old test do not have any currency in that exercise.

32. Limited knowledge of the country, unfamiliarity with the  language  and
    culture and uncertainty where the couple might live  would  not  in  my
    view render the option of Ms K accompanying the claimant unduly  harsh.
    Nor would the fact that she has spent the whole  of  her  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Turkey is within reasonable reach of the  UK  and  she
    would be able to travel regularly between  the  countries  to  maintain
    connections which could be maintained in  the  interim  through  social
    media.

33. I turn to the impact on Ms K of separation from her mother.   According
    to her statement she is unable to care for her due to her working hours
    and the financial responsibility she has in discharging the debts  that
    she and the claimant had incurred in running their business.  As to her
    mother's condition, she has explained that she suffers from a prolapsed
    bladder, prolapsed bowel and is  currently  under  regular  supervision
    with a neurologist as she had a  fall  just  before  the  claimant  was
    imprisoned.  She is stated to be at times confused and  suffers  memory
    loss.

34. The  medical  evidence  from  the  GP  and  Sherwood  Forest  Hospitals
    indicates that the  prolapse  had  been  repaired  in  late  2012.   In
    February 2014 the consultant considered there was no indication for any
    surgical treatment and that an appointment was given to  return  should
    there be any  symptoms  within  the  next  six  months.   There  is  no
    indication in the evidence that Ms K's mother has had to  return.   She
    was seen again by a different consultant in the department of neurology
    on 24 March 2014 when she  reported  that  her  symptoms  were  getting
    better.  No routine neurology follow-up was required  unless  the  scan
    came back with abnormal results.  There is no indication  that  further
    treatment has proved to be necessary.

35. The Tribunal acknowledged that in the event of Ms  K  accompanying  the
    claimant to Turkey, social services might be able to assist her mother.
     This was in the context of its consideration under  paragraph  399(b).
    In  respect  of  exceptional  circumstances  the  Tribunal  found   the
    likelihood being that she would be  a  candidate  for  assistance  from
    social services if her daughter is not on hand.  It  was  open  to  the
    claimant's representatives to produce further evidence on  this  aspect
    including an assessment of Ms  K's  mother's  care  needs.   I  do  not
    consider that the evidence of a medical condition  indicates  that  the
    degree of care as the claimant has provided could not be  sourced  from
    social services.

36. Ms K makes it clear in her statement that she cannot relocate with  the
    claimant to Turkey.  That is a matter for her but I am not satisfied on
    the evidence that the option could not be reasonably  exercised.   This
    is not a case where it can be said that very  significant  difficulties
    would be faced by the couple continuing their life in Turkey. If Ms K's
    mother falls ill, it is open to her to return to be with her if that is
    required. Given that the option of relocation to Turkey is open to  the
    parties, it would not be unduly harsh for Ms K to elect to stay here as
    she is unquestionably entitled to as a British citizen.

37. The claimant's relationship with his child who  is  a  British  citizen
    born in 2002 has not been  advanced  under  399(a).  For  the  sake  of
    completeness, I note that on 30 July 2010 a  care  order  was  made  in
    favour of the local authority with a care plan for  her  to  be  placed
    with a Miss P, a family friend, for long-term fostering.  According  to
    a letter from the local  authority  dated  14  September  2012  it  was
    arranged for the claimant to have  direct  contact  twice  a  year  and
    telephone contact once every fortnight.  This was  reduced  to  once  a
    month, being carefully monitored.  The concern appears to  have  arisen
    out of a suggestion the claimant might seek for her to be placed with a
    relative abroad.  On 25 March 2014 the local authority  indicated  that
    the child had articulated a view to commence telephone contact and that
    she had accepted a proposal of five minutes every alternate month.

38. According to the claimant's  statement  he  hoped  to  regain  personal
    contact with his daughter in the near future.  That was in April  2014.
    There is no more recent evidence to indicate that  direct  contact  has
    been implemented.  There is no reason why such telephone contact cannot
    continue from abroad.  In the absence of any clear  indication  on  the
    evidence that direct contact is likely to be resumed, I do not consider
    that the child's best interests are undermined in any  significant  way
    by virtue of the claimant's deportation.

39. The Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  claimant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the child, observing  that  he
    had been denied telephone contact since September 2012.  It  was  noted
    that he had provided evidence  that  contact  had  been  maintained  by
    sending letters.

40. Accordingly a case under 399(b) (or 399(a)) is not  made  out  and  the
    enquiry must whether there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
    above the factors that I have considered above.

41. I drew the attention of the parties to the most recent decision by  the
    Court of Appeal on the approach to Article 8  in  criminal  deportation
    cases. Sales LJ in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ  1636  emphasises
    at [39] the consequence of the Rules operating as a comprehensive code.
     At [40] he observed:

         "The  requirement  that  claims  by  appellants  who  are   foreign
         criminals for leave to remain, based on the  Convention  rights  of
         themselves or their partners,  relations  or  children,  should  be
         assessed under the new rules and through their lens  is  important,
         as the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) has emphasised. It seeks  to
         ensure  uniformity  of  approach   between   different   officials,
         tribunals and courts  who  have  to  assess  such  claims,  in  the
         interests of fair and equal treatment of different appellants  with
         similar cases on the facts...".

42. I do not find that there are  very  compelling  circumstances  in  this
    case. There is no  additional  factor  over  and  above  those  already
    considered under the rules that compels a different outcome.

43. This leaves the question of the impact of Part 5A, s.117C Exception  2.
    There is no dispute that Ms K is a qualifying partner in the  light  of
    her nationality. I have found that it would not  be  unduly  harsh  (as
    defined in the rules) for the couple to live in Turkey as there are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to such a course  being  adopted.   I  am  not
    persuaded that Exception 2 envisages a less  demanding  test  than  the
    rule. The rule specifically defines what  is  meant  by  unduly  harsh.
    Section 117C(2) explains that the more serious the offence, the greater
    the public interest in deportation. Thus consideration  of  whether  it
    would  be  unduly  harsh  must  include  reference  to  the  claimant's
    offending when  measuring  the  effect  on  Ms  K.  The  offending  was
    sufficiently serious to bring him within the  Rules  and  it  would  be
    illogical if, when  considering  proportionality  under  the  Act,  its
    impact is somehow lessened.

44.  Ms K is unquestionably entitled to remain as a British citizen in  the
    UK. It would not be unduly harsh for her to exercise that right as  she
    has the option of going with her husband. Even if she decides  to  stay
    she can visit him on a regular basis. Accordingly Exception  2  is  not
    made out in respect of Ms K.  No case has been argued in respect of the
    claimant's child from whom he is estranged with only limited contact of
    a kind that can continue abroad.

45. By way of conclusion under Part 5A, the interference with the Article 8
    rights in play is justified by the public interest  in  the  claimant's
    deportation.

46. By way of summary therefore the decision of the Tribunal is  set  aside
    for error of law.  I have re-made that decision and dismiss the  appeal
    by the claimant under part 5A of the 2002 Act,  the  Immigration  Rules
    and on Article 8 grounds against the decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order.



Signed   Date 27 February 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

