
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/00456/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 November 2017                        |On 1 May 2018                    |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              Mr Rachid Haddadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. A substantial body of this Decision was prepared immediately  following
    the hearing, but regrettably the file was mislaid before  the  Decision
    was completed, and has only recently come to light.  This Decision  has
    accordingly been delayed for which this Tribunal apologises.   This  is
    particularly regrettable in light  of  the  other  delays  referred  to
    within this Decision.

 2. This appeal has had an unfortunate history which it is not necessary to
    set out fully.  There was an error of law  hearing,  which  took  place
    before Dr Storey, sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal on 26
    May 2017 and in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 6  June  2017  he
    found that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  contained  an
    error of law, in that the judge had not given adequate consideration to
    the facts of this appeal  before  concluding  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to  the  highest  level  of  protection.   Judge  Storey  then
    directed that the appeal be adjourned to be reheard by myself, as I had
    previously given various directions in this appeal.  He made directions
    as to the service of any further evidence or further submissions.

 3. The appeal, as heard before Judge Storey, had been the now respondent's
    appeal (the First-tier Tribunal Judge having found  in  favour  of  the
    original appellant) but as an error of law had been found, I now  refer
    to the parties as they were originally, that is to  Mr  Haddadi,  whose
    appeal this now is, as again "the appellant" and to  the  Secretary  of
    State, who is now again the respondent, as "the respondent".

 4. The appeal came back before me on 24 August 2017  but  regrettably  the
    directions that Judge Storey had made had not been followed, the reason
    given by the appellant's Counsel being that he had not previously  seen
    a copy of the directions which had been made.   Having  considered  the
    decision as to error of law he did  not  seek  to  suggest  that  Judge
    Storey had been wrong to find the error of law in the way he did but he
    would now wish to raise  arguments  with  regard  to  the  question  of
    whether or not the appellant would still be  entitled  to  the  highest
    level of protection under EU law, which, as he put it, would require  a
    very careful and detailed analysis of all the authorities on the point,
    which clearly he was not in a position to undertake on that day.

 5. It appears that the decision of Judge Storey had not been served on the
    respondent  either,  because  Mr  Singh,  who  was   representing   the
    respondent at that  hearing  too,  indicated  that  he  had  also  come
    prepared to argue the case on the basis that it was  an  error  of  law
    hearing and that he personally had not seen a copy  of  Judge  Storey's
    decision   either.    In   these   circumstances,   given   that    the
    representatives of both parties considered that it would be appropriate
    to adjourn the hearing I agreed that it was in the interests of justice
    to do so, because this would allow the  appellant  the  opportunity  of
    having his case properly presented and considered.  I accordingly  made
    a number of directions, with regard to the service of further evidence,
    the preparation of bundles, the preparation of witness statements which
    were capable of standing  as  evidence-in-chief,  and  the  service  of
    skeleton arguments.

 6. Regrettably, none of these directions were complied with.  Although the
    appellant had been directed to prepare a paginated bundle contained  in
    a ring binder, which would have avoided the  necessity  to  search  for
    documents which in certain cases neither parties  had  available,  this
    was not done.  Nor was  further  evidence  supplied  until  eight  days
    before this hearing, and it contained very little new material, relying
    instead on a statement previously made by the appellant in August 2017,
    together with a letter in support from a witness whom it  was  intended
    to call, but he had not made a witness statement capable of standing as
    evidence-in-chief.  There was no evidence in support of this  appellant
    from his wife (from whom he is separated but with  whom  the  appellant
    told the Tribunal he wished to reconcile)  and  nor  had  any  skeleton
    argument been filed with the Tribunal (one was handed to  the  Tribunal
    at the hearing itself).   Mr  Harding,  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
    apologised for the total failure to comply  with  the  directions,  the
    result of which was that court time was expended in  adducing  evidence
    from the appellant's witness which should and could more properly  have
    been contained in a witness statement, that various documents had to be
    searched for amongst the various files  instead  of  being  immediately
    available and, had the appellant wished to make the  submissions  which
    it had earlier been anticipated might be made, there was no authorities
    bundle on which he could rely.

 7. In the event, on behalf of the appellant, Mr Harding did not invite the
    Tribunal to find that this appellant was entitled to the highest  level
    of protection (which, on the  facts  of  this  case,  would  have  been
    extremely  difficult,  if  not  impossible)  and  instead  founded  his
    submissions on the basis that, as had been found by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf in a decision made in  2011,  the  appellant
    was entitled to permanent residence and therefore the middle  level  of
    protection under the EU Rules, which will be discussed below.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing, I heard evidence from the appellant and one witness, Mr
    Lawal, both of whom were cross-examined.  Both were asked a  number  of
    supplementary  questions;  in  Mr  Lawal's  case  because  no   witness
    statement had been prepared on his behalf (although he had  provided  a
    one page letter of support).  I also heard  submissions  on  behalf  of
    both parties and have considered all the  documents  within  the  file.
    Although I will not set out below everything which was said  to  me  in
    the course of the proceedings, whether in the  course  of  evidence  or
    submissions, I have had regard to  all  the  evidence  and  submissions
    which were made, as well as to all the documents contained  within  the
    file, whether or not they are referred to specifically below.

Appellant's Immigration and Criminal History

 9. The appellant is a national of Algeria, who was born in  November  1974
    and claims to have arrived in the UK in 1997, having secured  leave  to
    enter on the basis of an Italian identity card which did not belong  to
    him (as is clear from the decision of Judge Shaerf in 2011 referred  to
    above).  He was arrested in the UK on 3  April  1998  and  admitted  to
    using a false identity.  Apparently he said that  he  had  intended  to
    claim asylum although he had not done so.

10. On 5 October 2001 he married a French citizen who was  then  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK and in 2002 his wife  was  issued  a  residence
    permit and he was issued with a residence document also as  the  family
    member of an EEA national.  Both he  and  his  wife  were  issued  with
    documents confirming their respective rights of permanent residence  in
    this country in May 2007, and although the  appellant  later  separated
    from his wife, who returned to France, it is, as already  noted  above,
    agreed that he has acquired the right of permanent  residence  in  this
    country.

The Appellant's Criminal History

11. Although at paragraph 9 of his  skeleton  argument,  presented  to  the
    Tribunal on the day of the  hearing,  Mr  Harding  suggests  that  "his
    offending, although persistent, is low level  drugs-related"  and  that
    "he has never faced a conviction for supply or anything serious", since
    arriving in this country (on a false identity document to which he  was
    not entitled) the appellant has been convicted on no less than thirteen
    occasions in respect of 26 offences, which  does  in  fact  include  at
    least one offence of supplying drugs (cannabis) with intent to  supply,
    for which he was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment in  November
    1999.  This Tribunal, while recognising that this offence is not at the
    highest level of criminal offending,  nonetheless  does  regard  it  as
    serious.  The defendant's convictions include  two  fraud  and  kindred
    offences in 1998, eighteen theft and kindred offences between 2007  and
    2016, four offences relating to police/courts/prisons (2008 - 2014) and
    two drug offences, as already referred to above, in 1998 - 1999.  These
    are listed in the PNC record,  the  accuracy  of  which  has  not  been
    disputed.  His convictions are as follows:

    28 April 1998:    Possession of cannabis, using a false instrument with
                      intent  for  it  to  be  accepted  as   genuine   and
                      attempting  to  obtain  and  obtaining  property   by
                      deception, for which he received concurrent sentences
                      of imprisonment of four months.

    26 November 1999: For possession of controlled  drugs  (cannabis)  with
                      intent to supply, imprisonment for fifteen months.

    30 April 2007:    Theft from person for which he  was  sentenced  to  a
                      three month period of imprisonment, suspended for one
                      year and ordered to carry out  100  hours  of  unpaid
                      work.

    27 February 2008: For the breach of suspended  sentence  unserved  from
                      his original sentence on  30  April  2007  the  three
                      month suspended sentence was activated.

                      On the same date  he  was  sentenced  for  two  other
                      offences of shoplifting, for which he was  imprisoned
                      for twelve weeks, and also of failing to surrender to
                      custody  when  he  was  supposed  to,  for  which  he
                      received a further consecutive sentence of two weeks'
                      imprisonment.

    24  December  2009:  For  three  separate  offences  of  theft  he  was
                      imprisoned  to  eighteen  weeks'   imprisonment   and
                      consecutive sentences of a further eighteen weeks and
                      sixteen weeks (making one year in total).

    22 February 2010: For an offence of theft (with two other  offences  of
                      theft taken into  consideration)  the  appellant  was
                      sentenced to 26 weeks' imprisonment.

    9 November 2012:   For  four  offences  of  theft,  the  appellant  was
                      sentenced to concurrent sentences of imprisonment  of
                      twelve months.

    28  August  2013:    The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  twelve  weeks'
                      imprisonment, suspended for  one  year,  for  another
                      offence of theft.

    21 November 2013: For another offence of theft (this time from a  motor
                      vehicle, three  months  earlier)  the  appellant  was
                      sentenced to twelve weeks' imprisonment.

    10 November 2014: For an offence of theft together with  a  failure  to
                      surrender to custody the appellant was  committed  to
                      the Crown Court for sentence  where  on  12  December
                      2014 he was imprisoned for  fourteen  weeks  for  the
                      theft and then his previous  suspended  sentence  was
                      activated, to be served concurrently.

    13 June 2015: For attempted theft from the  person  the  appellant  was
                      sentenced to 26 weeks' imprisonment.

    27 July 2016: The appellant was imprisoned for 26 weeks for yet another
                      offence of theft.

12. Thereafter the appellant was in immigration custody, from which he  was
    released only some six months before this hearing in  May  2017,  since
    which time he has not been in any further trouble.

13. Unsurprisingly,  on  3  November  2010,  the  respondent  notified  the
    appellant of her decision to deport him.  As noted  within  the  letter
    giving the  reasons  for  making  this  decision,  the  respondent  had
    previously (on 6 March  2008)  served  the  appellant  with  a  Warning
    Letter, warning  him  of  liability  to  deportation  if  he  continued
    committing offences, but,  as  is  apparent  from  the  record  of  the
    appellant's criminal history set out above, this warning did  not  have
    the desired effect.  The respondent acknowledged that the appellant was
    entitled to permanent residence in the UK as the family member  of  his
    French wife, who was exercising treaty rights in this country, and that
    accordingly "as a  result  it  is  necessary  to  establish  that  your
    deportation is warranted on serious grounds of public policy or  public
    security".

14.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant's  criminal   record
    suggested "an established pattern of behaviour" and that "in  light  of
    the full circumstances of [his offending ... this was] indicative  that
    you pose a significant threat to the safety and security of the  public
    of the United Kingdom".  The respondent went on to  state  within  this
    letter that "Should you reoffend your offence will be of a  similar  or
    more serious nature and ... your deportation is  justified  on  serious
    grounds of public policy".

15. The respondent had regard to the appellant's personal circumstances  in
    accordance with Regulation 21(6)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006,  but
    considered in all  the  circumstances  that  the  deportation  of  this
    appellant was proportionate.

16. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    at Taylor House on 21 December 2010 before Designated Immigration Judge
    Shaerf, sitting in a panel together with a lay member, Mrs A J F  Cross
    De Chavannes.  In a determination promulgated on 6  January  2011,  the
    Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal.

17. As is clear from this determination, at the time of this decision,  the
    last conviction recorded against the appellant was that on 22  February
    2010,  when  he  had  been  sentenced  to  26  weeks'  imprisonment  at
    Horseferry Road Magistrates' Court for three offences of theft.

18. At paragraph 9, the panel noted that the appellant had accepted that he
    had committed the crimes of which he had been convicted, but  expressed
    remorse for them, and had stated that "He now wanted to lead a  'normal
    life' working and living with his wife".

19. The panel had regard to the 2006  Regulations,  and  in  particular  to
    Regulations 19(3)(b) and 21(3), having regard to which his removal  had
    to be justified on serious grounds of public  policy.   The  panel  had
    regard to paragraph 4 of LG and CC (EEA Regs: residence;  imprisonment;
    removal) Italy [2009] UKAIT  00024,  and  noted  that  "the  respondent
    accepted that the threshold for 'serious grounds' was very high".

20. At paragraph 20 the panel found as follows:

         "20. We accept, although it is no excuse or justification, that the
             appellant's earlier criminal activity (leaving aside entry  on
             a false document) appears to have  been  contemporaneous  with
             difficulties he had experienced in finding employment  and  in
             his relationship with his wife, the latter influenced at least
             in part by the former.  The appellant admitted the most recent
             offences had been motivated by a need to fund his drug  habit.
             In oral testimony the appellant had explained the three months
             suspended sentence had been activated because of  his  failure
             to report to his probation officer.  Once he had reported late
             and once he had failed to report because at the  time  he  had
             recently been using drugs.  We  accept  the  appellant's  drug
             habit developed for much the same reasons as already mentioned
             as well as the fact that, as the appellant  himself  accepted,
             he had fallen in with the 'wrong crowd' at  a  time  when  his
             lack of work and deteriorating relationship with his wife  had
             made him vulnerable".

21. The panel although noting that the appellant had  been  issued  with  a
    Warning Letter, nonetheless appeared to accept the explanation given by
    the appellant for his previous offending.  At paragraph 26,  the  panel
    found as follows:

         "26. None of the appellant's offences have been  of  a  violent  or
             sexual  nature.   He  has  given  reasons  why  his  offending
             occurred in 1998/9 and in 2007 and 2009/10.  The  evidence  on
             which a risk of re-offending in the NOMS1 has been made  would
             appear to be historic and of limited value.  Consequently  the
             weight which might be  placed  on  the  risk  of  re-offending
             assessment highlighted in the NOMS1 is much reduced  from  the
             weight which would normally be given to it".

22. Then at paragraph 27, the panel went on to find as follows:

         "27. We are not persuaded that the offences for which the appellant
             has been convicted together with the limited weight which  can
             be attached to the assessment  of  the  risk  of  re-offending
             indicate that the proposed deportation  of  the  appellant  is
             justified by reference to serious grounds  of  public  policy.
             For these reasons we allow the appeal under the 2006 Regs".

23. In other words,  the  panel  was  persuaded  that  notwithstanding  the
    appellant's poor record of previous offending, he had given  sufficient
    explanation as to why his circumstances were now  different  from  what
    they had been when those offences had been  committed  to  justify  its
    conclusion that the appellant did  not  represent  a  serious  risk  of
    reoffending.  As noted, it found in terms that the evidence upon  which
    the risk of reoffending had been made "would appear to be historic  and
    of limited value".

24. Regrettably, and notwithstanding that at the very least  by  this  time
    the appellant must have appreciated that he had come very close  indeed
    to being deported, the Tribunal's confidence in the appellant's ability
    to rehabilitate himself within  society  was  shown  to  be  misplaced,
    because he continued to  offend,  as  recorded  within  this  Decision,
    committing numerous further offences.

25. The appellant continued offending even  though  the  respondent  issued
    further Warning Letters to him,  and  because  of  this  offending  the
    respondent ultimately issued  a  notice  of  intention  to  deport  the
    appellant on 10 September 2015, which was followed  by  a  decision  to
    deport him made on 1 October 2015.  It was noted in this decision  that
    following the letter of 10 September 2015, the appellant had raised  no
    grounds as to why he should not be deported.   The  decision  was  made
    having regard to Regulation 21 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2016,  the  respondent  being  satisfied  that  the
    appellant "would pose  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to the interests of public policy if you were to be  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and that  your  deportation  is  justified
    under Regulation 21".

26. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  19
    January 2016.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated  two  days  later,
    Judge Fox allowed the appellant's appeal.  His reason for doing so  was
    that  he  considered  that  the  appellant  had  "acquired  ten  years'
    continuous residence in the UK on 31 May 2012" (see paragraph 13 of the
    Decision) and that accordingly (at paragraph 15) "The burden  therefore
    lies with the respondent to demonstrate that the appellant's  exclusion
    from the UK is based upon imperative grounds of public security".

27. Although Judge Fox noted that the probation report had  concluded  that
    it was more likely than not that the appellant would reoffend, and that
    he "has demonstrated a persistent disregard  for  law  and  order"  (at
    paragraph 50) nonetheless, at paragraph 52 he concluded that "When  the
    evidence is considered in the round the appellant's conduct falls short
    of requiring his exclusion on imperative grounds of public security".

28. The respondent appealed against  this  decision,  the  main  ground  of
    appeal being that Judge Fox had applied the wrong test.  Following  the
    hearing before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey,  on  26  May  2016,
    Judge Storey concluded, in his Decision made on 6 June 2017,  that  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal had indeed contained  an  error  of
    law, in that Judge Fox had not  given  adequate  consideration  to  the
    facts of this appeal before concluding that the claimant  was  entitled
    to the highest level of protection.  Judge Fox had not appreciated that
    he needed to count back from the date of the respondent's  Decision  at
    the end of September 2015, rather than forward, and,  as  Judge  Storey
    noted at paragraph 6 of his Decision, "Had he done  so  he  would  then
    have had to engage with the fact that in the  previous  ten  years  the
    claimant had had several terms of imprisonment".

29. The appeal then  came  before  me  for  rehearing,  after  the  further
    adjournment which had been necessary, for the reasons which  have  been
    set out above.

30. At the substantive hearing before me on 24 November 2017,  Mr  Harding,
    representing the appellant, informed the Tribunal at the outset that he
    would not be submitting that the appellant was entitled to the  highest
    level of protection.  It was conceded that the appellant could not show
    that his integration  had  reached  such  a  level.   Accordingly,  the
    Tribunal had to decide whether or not the deportation of this appellant
    was justified on "serious grounds of public policy or public security".



31. The relevant Regulations set out within the 2006 Regulations provide as
    follows:

    "Exclusion and Removal from the United Kingdom ...

         19(3)    ... an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom  or
                the family member of such a national  who  has  entered  the
                United Kingdom may be removed if - ...

                (b)    the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                    removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public
                    security or public health in accordance with  Regulation
                    21 ...




    Decisions taken on public policy, public  security  and  public  health
         grounds

         21-(1)   In this Regulation a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
               decision taken on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
               security or public health.

              (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
               ends.

              (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
               person with a permanent right of residence under  Regulation
               15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
               security.

              (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
               grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who
               -

                (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                    decision ...

           (5)    Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
                with the preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken
                in accordance with the following principles -

                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;

                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;

                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;

                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;

                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision.

           (6)    Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                public policy or public security in relation to a person who
                is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must
                take account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of
                health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the
                person's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                person's social  and  cultural  integration  in  the  United
                Kingdom and the  extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
                country of origin ...".

The Evidence

32. As noted above, the Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant and also
    from Mr Lawal, both of whom were cross-examined.  Submissions were also
    made on behalf of both parties.

33. The appellant relied upon the witness  statement  which  he  had  made,
    dated 11 August 2017 and was also asked  supplementary  questions.   He
    claimed not to have taken any "narcotic drugs" since he was arrested in
    2016.  He had previously used cocaine and heroin.  He claimed  that  he
    would "never look back" but that he was "looking forward".

34. The appellant told the Tribunal that his  wife  had  gone  to  live  in
    France in 2008/9, but that she comes and goes because she  is  employed
    as a stewardess by Japanese Airlines.  He now realised, having been  in
    and out of prison that that life was "not for me" and  he  intended  to
    prove to his wife and all the people around him, including his  family,
    that he was a good person, "so that is what I am doing  now".   He  had
    gone back to work and kept himself away from the wrong  people  he  had
    been mixing with and he always went to his appointments.  What  he  was
    looking for now was "a chance to come back to my life".  He had  spoken
    to his wife that morning and he hoped to have a family and children.

35. In cross-examination the appellant was asked if he was  still  married,
    to which he replied that he was  but  that  they  were  separated.   He
    claimed always to have been in contact with her.  She was aware of  his
    appeal.  When asked why she had not made a  statement  to  support  his
    appeal, the appellant said that this  was  "because  I  had  given  her
    trouble before and I didn't want to give her more trouble, so I  didn't
    ask her for a statement".

36. When the question was asked again, his explanation this time  was  that
    his solicitors had not advised him to get a statement.

37. He had no family living in the UK, but he did have family in Algeria, a
    mother, a brother and two sisters.

38. With regard to the appellant's evidence that he now realised that "this
    life is not for you", he was asked whether it was right that as he says
    at paragraph 25 of his witness statement he had sought help  previously
    in 2012 and 2013, and whether he had on that occasion  also  felt  that
    the life he was living was not for him.   The  appellant's  answer  was
    that although in 2011 and 2013 he was saying "enough is enough" he  did
    not really mean it then.  At that time he thought he  would  do  it  by
    himself, but this time he realised he needed support.  I note that this
    answer is not consistent with what was stated at paragraph  25  of  the
    appellant's witness statement which was that "I had  previously  sought
    help with my drug usage in  2011  and  2013,  however  [this]  did  not
    succeed".

39. Mr Lawal, who is described as the Director of  TMP  Projects  Ltd,  had
    written a one page "character reference" for the  appellant  which  was
    included  in  the  appellant's  bundle,  and  was  asked  a  number  of
    supplementary questions.  He said that he had known the  appellant  for
    twenty years, having been the head chef in one of  the  restaurants  in
    Chelsea.  The appellant had come in looking for work and Mr  Lawal  had
    taken a liking to him and they have formed a friendship.

40. When asked whether he was aware that the appellant had had a  difficult
    time in the UK and been in and out of prison, Mr  Lawal  said  that  he
    knew this through mutual friends but that he was "not involved in  that
    part of his life".   He  also  claimed  not  to  have  known  that  the
    appellant had had a drugs problem.  He had employed the appellant since
    May and he was "an all-rounder".

41. When Mr Lawal was asked by the Tribunal as to when he  had  been  aware
    that he had a drug problem, he answered  that  this  was  probably  for
    about two years, before he came to work for him.  He said that  he  was
    now a "changed man", but when asked, he accepted that previously he had
    not seen the other side of him.

42. In cross-examination, Mr Lawal agreed that  he  had  previously  worked
    with the appellant at Chez Gerard in about 2001 for two years, and also
    at the City Brasserie off Fetter Lane for about three years from  2003,
    so about five years in total.  He had however lost contact with him for
    about four or five years while he had been working in Hackney.

43. When it was put to him that the appellant was committing crimes  during
    this time but that in his statement he had said that the appellant "has
    always  displayed  a  high  degree  of  integrity,  responsibility  and
    ambition" and was "definitely a leader rather than a follower" and that
    "in addition to his excellent scholastic accomplishments, he has proved
    his leadership ability by organising mini  cooking  lessons  for  small
    underprivileged children to cook" and was asked  why  it  was  that  he
    thought he had changed, Mr Lawal said that the appellant had encouraged
    him to open a new restaurant and he had always  encouraged  him  "as  a
    friend".

44. Mr Lawal said that the appellant had told him that he had  had  trouble
    with his wife.  He had been the best man at his wedding but he did  not
    have direct contact with her  because  she  was  back  and  forth  from
    France.

45. Mr Lawal then said that he believed that the appellant was now  getting
    on better with his wife but when asked if he knew why she  was  not  at
    the Tribunal for this hearing he said he believed that she was a travel
    agent and had other commitments.  He could not say why it was that  she
    had not written a statement in support.

46. I note that in his character reference Mr Lawal had also said that  the
    appellant's "good judgement and mature outlook  ensure  a  logical  and
    practical approach to his endeavours".

Submissions

47. In his skeleton argument prepared the day before the hearing but  which
    was served at the hearing, Mr Harding sought an adjournment pending the
    outcome of the CJEU in the case of Vomero.   However,  at  the  hearing
    itself Mr Harding did not seek to argue that the respondent  needed  to
    show imperative grounds (for the reasons given by Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Storey when finding an error of law)  and  was  content  for  the
    hearing to proceed on the basis that serious grounds only needed to  be
    established, in accordance with Regulation 21(3).

48. Having set out Regulation  21,  the  appellant's  substantive  case  is
    summarised from grounds 9 to 14, as follows:

         "9.  The appellant argues that his offending, although  persistent,
             is low-level drugs-related.  He has never faced  a  conviction
             for supply or anything serious [my emphasis].

         10.  He has adduced evidence to substantiate the fact  that  he  is
             now drugs-free ... he is in work ...

         11.  The threshold is  high  under  Level  1  and  the  appellant's
             offending is not of a gravity to meet it, let alone Level 2.

         12.  He has reformed and is not a threat and the test in Regulation
             25(5) the threat is a present threat, not a past tense threat.

         13.  Applying the matters  set  out  in  Regulation  26(6),  it  is
             submitted the appellant has been  here  since  1998  (nineteen
             years), he is 43 years old and has spent  most  of  his  adult
             life here,  he  is  married  to  an  EU  national,  he  has  a
             rehabilitative structure in place to facilitate his  continued
             progress and is culturally integrated into the  UK  (also  see
             Vomero, AG opinion however on this question).

         14.  It is submitted if not adjourned the appeal should be  allowed
             in any event".

49. In oral argument, Mr Singh, on behalf of the  respondent,  relied  upon
    the reasons set out within the deportation  order  itself.   After  the
    decision of the Tribunal  in  2011,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the previous deportation order which had been made,  there  had
    been a series of Warning Letters sent  following  further  convictions.
    The 2010 decision had not deterred the appellant from reoffending.   In
    the circumstances it was clear that there was a  serious  risk  of  the
    appellant reoffending, and the  type  of  criminal  activity  which  he
    carries out scares the  public,  especially  where  he  is  challenged.
    Also, on previous occasions he had refused to give himself  up  to  the
    authorities.

50. Although there is no record of violence, his  convictions  were  mainly
    theft-related including  theft  from  the  person.   In  light  of  the
    evidence which had been given to  the  Tribunal,  the  Tribunal  should
    place little weight on his protestations that he was now reformed.

51. So far as Mr Lawal's evidence  was  concerned,  he  apparently  had  no
    knowledge of what the appellant did outside his limited times  of  work
    and had only very recently become aware of his drugs convictions.   The
    appellant himself had said that he had tried to stop in 2011  and  2013
    and that he had "sought help", but there was no more reason to  believe
    that he would stop offending now than there had been then, and  he  had
    repeatedly failed to reform.

52. In his oral submissions, Mr Harding stressed again that the  respondent
    needed to establish that his  deportation  was  justified  on  "serious
    grounds of public policy", and that this was a harder test  than  under
    Regulation 21(5)(c) that "the personal conduct of the person  concerned
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".   Although  the
    language used within the Regulations was to some  extent  tautologious,
    it was clear that there were three levels of protection, and  that  the
    threshold for the second level must be significantly  higher  than  the
    first.

53. Accordingly, the first question was what the "fundamental interests  of
    society" which needed protection were.  That threshold had  to  be  met
    before moving on to the second threshold, which required  there  to  be
    serious reasons for deporting, over and  above  what  would  have  been
    otherwise required.

54. So the first question was whether the appellant's  behaviour  was  such
    that the requirement within Regulation  21(5)  was  met.   If  so,  the
    Tribunal would nonetheless have  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
    threshold set out within Regulation 21(3) was satisfied.

55. With that legal framework in mind, the appellant's  primary  submission
    was that the threshold set out within Regulation 21(5)(c) was not  met.
    Although it was acknowledged that this appellant had a terrible  record
    of persistent offending, and that it would also be right to say that he
    had been given a  great  deal  of  opportunity  to  show  that  he  had
    reformed, and that he had previously been given a chance by the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2011, nonetheless we were dealing in  this  case  with
    someone with a drugs problem which was a scourge on society.

56. The appellant had persuaded a probation officer that he was drugs-free,
    having been  released  in  May  2017  and  (it  was  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf) on the evidence before the Tribunal  the  appellant
    "has demonstrated that he is a reformed character".  He had done  drugs
    courses in prison and had been drugs-free in prison.

57. In any event, the appellant still  did  not  represent  a  sufficiently
    serious threat that he should  be  deported;  further,  when  one  then
    considers that he is entitled to  permanent  residence,  and  that  the
    threshold within Regulation 21(3) has to be satisfied, that test  could
    not be met in this case.  These were the  essential  elements  in  this
    case.

58. Mr Harding accepted that in the event that the Tribunal did not  accept
    his submissions with regard to paragraph 21(5)(c) and 21(3) it was very
    unlikely that he could persuade the Tribunal  that  his  removal  would
    nonetheless be disproportionate, having regard to Regulation 21(6).



Discussion

59. It is of course the case that  because  the  respondent's  decision  to
    deport this appellant has to be considered  with  regard  to  the  2006
    Regulations, and in particular Regulation 21, this Tribunal cannot have
    regard to the revulsion felt by members of the public generally towards
    persistent  criminals  or  to  the  need  generally  to  deter  foreign
    criminals from offending.  The  Tribunal  must  have  regard  first  to
    whether or not the personal  conduct  of  the  appellant  represents  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society" (Regulation 21(5)(c)), and  then,  if
    it  does,  whether  there  were  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy"
    justifying his deportation.

60. Although, as noted above, at paragraph 9  of  his  written  submissions
    contained in his skeleton argument, Mr Harding has suggested  that  the
    appellant's  "offending,  although  persistent,  is  low-level   drugs-
    related" and that he "has never faced a conviction for  the  supply  or
    anything serious", not only is it factually incorrect to state that  he
    has never been  convicted  of  supplying  (his  convictions  include  a
    fifteen month sentence of imprisonment in 1999 for possessing  Class  B
    drugs,  cannabis  resin,  with  intent  to  supply)  but  nor  can  his
    convictions properly be said not to be "serious".   The  appellant  has
    numerous convictions for theft,  resulting  in  prison  sentences,  and
    notwithstanding numerous Warning Letters and being given  a  chance  by
    the First-tier Tribunal panel 2011, he has continued  to  offend.   The
    claim now made on his behalf that he  is  a  "reformed"  person  has  a
    hollow ring to it when one considers his record.  This Tribunal has  no
    hesitation in finding that he is not.

61. Although the appellant now claims that he enjoys a better  relationship
    with his wife which will be an incentive to him to continue to put  his
    past behind him, it is notable that not only was his wife  not  present
    to give evidence on his behalf, but she did not even provide a  witness
    statement.  The appellant himself gave two conflicting explanations for
    this.  In the first place he said he did not wish to give  her  anymore
    trouble, because he had given her trouble before, and that this was why
    he had not asked her for her statement, but then, only  a  few  moments
    later, he claimed that she  had  not  given  a  statement  because  his
    solicitor had not advised him to get one.   Then,  giving  evidence  on
    behalf of the appellant, Mr Lawal gave yet another explanation for  why
    the appellant's wife was not present, even though he believed that  she
    knew about the case, which was that she was a travel agent  with  other
    commitments, and was therefore unable to be  present  at  the  hearing.
    This of course is also not consistent  with  the  appellant's  evidence
    that his wife was an air stewardess for Japan Airlines.  Even though Mr
    Lawal claimed to have been the best man at the appellant's wedding,  he
    seemingly had very little knowledge of the appellant's wife or  of  the
    appellant's life outside the working environment, for the periods  when
    they had been working together.

62. With regard to Mr Lawal's evidence itself, very little  weight  can  be
    given to anything he says, because apparently, he had no  knowledge  of
    the appellant's previous drug history.  Given this lack  of  knowledge,
    it is surprising, to say the least, that he felt able to  say  that  he
    was now a "changed person".

63. In my judgement, it is a fundamental interest of society  that  members
    of the public are able to  go  about  their  daily  lives  without  the
    constant threat to their property which  this  appellant  continues  to
    represent.   The  threat  he  represents  is  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat that there is a clear  public  interest  in
    deporting him.  So far as Regulation 21(3) is concerned the deportation
    of this appellant is justified on "serious  [my  emphasis]  grounds  of
    public policy".  This appellant has been given chance after  chance  to
    stop offending; he has shown by his conduct that the risk he  continues
    to represent is a real and serious risk, from which society in  general
    needs to be protected.

64. With regard to Regulation 21(6), I bear in mind that the appellant  has
    no family in this country.  Even if he has some  kind  of  relationship
    with his wife, she  no  longer  lives  here  and  visits  the  UK  only
    sporadically.  His mother and siblings all  live  in  Algeria.   He  is
    neither particularly young nor particularly old, and there  is  nothing
    about his health or economic situation which would  make  it  important
    that the appellant remains in the UK rather than returning  to  Algeria
    where his family lives.  Although he  has  resided  in  the  UK  for  a
    lengthy period, his social and cultural integration is not sufficiently
    deep as to prevent him going in and out  of  prison  for  his  repeated
    offending.

65. In summary, the deportation of this  appellant  is  entirely  justified
    having  regard  to  Regulations  21(3)  and  21(5)(c)   of   the   2006
    Regulations, and  is  also  entirely  proportionate  having  regard  to
    Regulation 21(6).  Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    must  be  set  aside  and  replaced  with  a  decision  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal is set aside and replaced with the following decision:

The  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed,  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 26 April 2018

