

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00955/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 17 September 2013                          |On 18 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ALAZAR BERHE
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co.,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The SSHD appeals against a determination by a panel comprising First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Morrow and Ms Street  JP,  allowing  Mr  Berhe's
       appeal against refusal of asylum.


    2. The Presenting Officer's  submissions  followed  the  lines  of  the
       grounds of  appeal,  which  rehearse  again  in  detail  the  SSHD's
       position that Mr Berhe is not credible, and argue that the panel did
       not adequately deal with those points.  The grounds secondly  attack
       the panel's conclusions related to Mr Berhe's possibly illegal  exit
       from Eritrea.

    3. Mr Winter pointed out that the SSHD's case,  and  the  history  from
       which the SSHD sought to draw negative inferences, are  referred  to
       clearly throughout the  determination,  and  explicitly  taken  into
       account.  At paragraphs 15 and 19 the panel accepted that  Mr  Berhe
       carried out  his  deceptions  through  desperation,  and  found  his
       evidence credible and straightforward.  His reliability was enhanced
       by evidence which the panel accepted from his  partner  and  from  a
       Pastor of the Pentecostal Church, of which Mr  Berhe  is  a  member.
       The positive credibility findings were properly open to  the  panel.
       Its reasons, if brief, were sufficient.  The panel carried  out  its
       proper function.  It was common ground that on a finding that he  is
       a  Pentecostalist  Mr  Berhe  was  entitled  to  succeed.   If   the
       credibility findings were sound, the SSHD's second ground was beside
       the point.

    4. I advised that the SSHD's appeal to the UT would be dismissed.

    5. The SSHD's grounds come close to an argument that no rational  panel
       could have believed Mr Berhe.    The SSHD's  case  in  the  FtT  was
       sensibly made, but there were two sides,  and  it  was  the  panel's
       function to decide between them.  As Mr  Winter  argued,  the  panel
       reached conclusions properly open  to  it,  for  reasons  adequately
       explained.  The grounds are no more  than  an  insistence  upon  the
       SSHD's side of the case on  credibility.   They  disclose  no  legal
       basis on which the UT would be entitled to go behind the conclusions
       reached by  the  tribunal  of  fact.   The  conclusions  related  to
       possible illegal exit and perception of Mr Berhe as a  draft  evader
       might be open to debate, but that need not be taken any further.


    6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

    7. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


                               [pic]
                                17 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


