
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00462/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Tuesday 12 November 2019                   |On Tuesday 19 November 2019   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE NICOL
                    [SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE]
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DIOGO MENDES-GOMES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by Freemans solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the SSHD against a decision of FTTJ Onoufriou
      dated 27th June 2019. The appeal is brought with the permission of UTJ
      Mandalia granted on 27th August 2019.



   2. The Respondent is a citizen of Portugal. He came to the UK July 2006.
      The SSHD has no record of his arrival. However, the SSHD can say that
      on 3rd August 2007 the Respondent was issued with a registration
      certificate as an EEA national dependent on his mother, Antonieta
      Mendes-Gomes.



   3. The Respondent accrued seven convictions between January 2014 and
      February 2017 for a total of 12 offences. Seven of these were for drug
      offences. They were as follows:



        a. 21st January 2014 possession of cannabis - sentenced by West
           London Juvenile Court to 4 months referral order.




        b. 20th February 2014 possession of heroin and possession of crack
           cocaine with intent to supply. Sentenced by West London Juvenile
           Court to a youth rehabilitation order with 91 days activity
           requirement and a 6 month curfew with electronic tagging. This
           order was later revoked and replaced with a 10 month detention
           and training order.



        c. 29th April 2014 possession of cannabis. Sentenced by West London
           Juvenile Court to a 6 month detention and training order.



        d. 7th October 2014 possession of heroin with intent to supply.
           Sentenced by Isleworth Crown Court to 9 months youth
           rehabilitation order with 9 months suspended sentence, 3 months
           curfew requirement, 30 days activity requirement and 9 month
           parenting order with 8 days programme requirement. In July 2015
           this order was revoked and replaced with a 12 month detention
           and training order.



        e. 13th February 2017 possessing cocaine and heroin with intent to
           supply. Sentenced by Luton Crown Court to 42 months detention in
           a Young Offenders Institution.



   4. Following the last sentence, on 8th June 2018 the SSHD made a decision
      to deport the Respondent to Portugal. The SSHD did so under the
      Immigration (European Economic Area Regulations 2016 ('the EEA
      Regulations') regulation 26(6)(b) and regulation 27 on grounds of
      public policy/public security. The SSHD acknowledged that, if he had
      acquired the right of permanent residence in the UK by living in the
      UK for a continuous period of 5 years, the Respondent, as the family
      member of an EEA national, could only have been deported on 'serious
      grounds' of public policy or public security.



   5. If a person with EEA Free movement rights has resided in the UK for a
      continuous period of 10 years prior to the deportation decision he or
      she may only be deported if there are 'imperative' grounds of public
      security (regulation 27(4)). The SSHD therefore considered whether the
      Respondent had been resident in the UK for a continuous period of 5 or
      10 years. Time in prison will normally break the continuity of
      residence (regulation 3(3)(a)). The regulation uses the term
      'imprisonment'. Because of his age, the Respondent has never been
      sentenced to imprisonment, but rather to detention and training orders
      or to detention in a Young Offenders' Institution. Nonetheless, we
      accept that the regulation should not be limited to 'imprisonment' in
      the strict sense but should be interpreted to include such forms of
      detention of young offenders - see SSHD v Viscu [2019] EWCA Civ 1052
      at [48]. The SSHD concluded that the Respondent had not been able to
      show that he had resided continuously in the UK for even 5 years. The
      SSHD concluded that the Respondent posed a genuine, present and
      sufficiently serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of UK
      society and it was in the interests of public security, public policy
      or public health for him to be deported.



   6. The respondent exercised his right of appeal to the FTT. The Appellant
      gave oral evidence before Judge Onoufriou. The Judge noted that the
      SSHD did not challenge the Respondent's evidence that he had always
      resided with his parents in the UK whenever he had not been in
      detention. The Judge accepted that the Respondent had been a 'family
      member of an EEA national' (i.e. his mother). He therefore did not
      have to demonstrate that he himself had been a student throughout the
      relevant period (see EEA Regulations regulation 7(2)). At paragraph 44
      of his decision Judge Onoufriou said,



           'As the appellant's mother was entitled to PR [Permanent
           Residence] from at least 2011, i.e. 5 years after her arrival,
           then similarly the appellant would be entitled to PR at the same
           time ... It therefore follows that the appellant is entitled to
           enhanced protection and therefore a decision to deport cannot be
           made against him except on "serious grounds of public policy and
           public security".'



   7. The Judge then went to consider whether the Respondent had accrued 10
      years of continuous residence. The Judge accepted the evidence of the
      Respondent's mother that the whole family had come to the UK in 2006.
      The Judge said, 'This means that the 10 years continuous residence
      would have been achieved by the [respondent] in July 2016.' The Judge
      was aware of regulation 3(3) (a) and its effect on continuity of
      residence, but he also had regard to regulation 3(4) which says,



           'Paragraph 3(a) applies, in principle, to an EEA national who
           has resided in the UK for at least 10 years, but it does not
           apply where the Secretary of State considers that -

                 a) Prior to serving a sentence of imprisonment, the EEA
                    national had forged integrating links with the UK;

                 b) The effect of the sentence of imprisonment was not such
                    as to break those integrating links; and

                 c) Taking into account an overall assessment of the EEA
                    national's situation, it would not be appropriate to
                    apply paragraph 3(a) to the assessment of the EEA
                    national's continuity of residence.'



   8. In this case Judge Onoufriou said,



           'In view of the fact that the [respondent] had resided in the UK
           for some 8 years before his first incarceration and had gone to
           school here since his arrival, I am satisfied that he "had
           forged integrating links with the UK" and that the effect of his
           imprisonment was not such as to break those integrating links.
           Furthermore, I take into account an overall assessment of his
           situation and do not consider it appropriate to apply paragraph
           3(a) to the assessment of the continuity of residence.



   9. The Judge said that it followed that the Respondent could only be
      deported if there were 'imperative' grounds of public security.
      Applying the standard in VP Italy [2010] EWCA Civ 806 and MG and VC
      Ireland [2006] UKAIT 0053 at [26] the Judge did not consider that that
      test was made out.



  10. However, at [48] of his decision the Judge added this,



           'Even if I am wrong about the 10 years continuous residence and
           the [respondent] has to rely on the permanent residence, the
           appellant's offences do not comprise "serious grounds of public
           policy" as opposed to mere "public policy". In this respect I
           take into account the OASys report of 12th March 2019 in which
           it is reported that the [respondent] accepted full
           responsibility for his actions, was ashamed and bitterly
           regretted his involvement in drug possession, considered his
           period in custody as a "significant wake-up call", very
           importantly had acknowledged his mistake, has understood his
           association with his peers has not helped him take any positive
           steps, has shown enthusiasm to change his course of life, has
           been designated as low risk of reoffending and has supportive
           family. I am aware of the negative aspects of the report,
           especially that if  [the respondent] is unemployed there is a
           risk he might reoffend in order to obtain income and if he
           becomes involved again with his peers who apparently encouraged
           him in the first place,   but I consider that the positive
           factors outweigh these negative factors, especially when
           applying the enhanced level of protection. I have also taken
           into account the sentencing Judge's remarks, especially that he
           had not learnt from his previous sentences for drug offences and
           that this was an aggravating factor, but I weigh against this
           the positive progress he appears to have made whilst
           incarcerated and the efforts he has made since his release on
           licence.'



  11. Finally, the Judge added this,



           'In reaching my decision, I have also taken into account
           Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations. He obviously has close
           familial links with his family who are of the same nationality
           and with whom he speaks Portuguese, but I am satisfied he also
           has a wider cultural and societal integration. I have also taken
           into account the length of his custodial sentence which is not
           to be trivialised, and the fact that he has been a persistent
           offender, but in view of his apparent reform whilst in prison
           and upon release, I think this outweighs his negative criminal
           record. This reflects the provisions of paragraph 5 of Schedule
           1.'



  12. Mr Lindsay on behalf of the SSHD first submitted that the Judge's
      decision that Respondent had acquired permanent residence was flawed.
      The Respondent had to establish that he had resided continuously in
      the UK for 5 years.



        a. First, the Judge was wrong to proceed on the basis that it had
           not been challenged that the Respondent had always resided with
           his parents when he had not been incarcerated. As the Judge had
           recorded at paragraph 22 the SSHD's representative had drawn
           attention to the lacuna in the documentary evidence for the
           period June 2007 to April 2010. While the Respondent's parents
           may have remained in the UK during this period, it did not
           follow that the Respondent himself had stayed here.




           The Judge's phrasing was infelicitous, but it is plain from
           other parts of his judgment that he was well aware that the SSHD
           placed reliance on this lacuna in the documentary evidence (see
           for instance paragraph 45). However, the Judge had heard oral
           evidence from the Respondent's mother and he accepted her
           evidence that the whole family had moved to the UK in 2006 and
           that the Respondent had always resided with his parents.




        b. Next, Mr Lindsay argues that the Judge had failed to have regard
           to the views expressed in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40
           that a Judge should be cautious about accepting oral evidence
           where reasonably available potentially corroborating evidence
           had not been supplied. Mr Lindsay argued that was the case here.
           One of the schools which the Respondent claimed to have attended
           had been unable to supply records, but had said that these had
           been passed to another college where he had studied.
           Furthermore, Mr Lindsay argued the Judge had given no reasons
           for accepting the mother's evidence.




           We do not find these submissions persuasive. In TK (Burundi) the
           immigration judge had not believed the witness. The Court of
           Appeal 's decision at [21]-[22] held that he was entitled to
           come to that conclusion.  That is far from saying that, in the
           absence of documentary evidence which might be reasonably
           available, an immigration judge is obliged to disbelieve a
           witness. Nor do we regard the absence of reasons to be an error
           of law. It was sufficient for the Judge to say, as he did here,
           that he accepted the witness's account. In addition, it does not
           appear that TK (Burundi) was cited to the Judge.




        c. Thirdly, Mr Lindsay submitted that the Judge had misunderstood
           the burden of proof. He had said at paragraph 39,




                 'In deportation appeals, the burden is on the respondent to
                 show that the appellant satisfies the criteria for
                 deportation to the civil standard of balance of
                 probabilities.'

           Mr Lindsay submitted that this was not correct in terms of
           showing the level of protection which the Respondent had as an
           EEA national. In other words, it was for the Respondent to prove
           that he had permanent residence and it was for the Respondent to
           prove that he had accrued 10 years continuous residence.
           However, we do not read paragraph 39 as dealing with this issue.
           In retrospect it may have been better if the Judge had been more
           explicit, but we do not see any sign that in determining the
           level of protection and whether the Respondent had accrued the
           necessary periods of continuous residence, the Judge was under
           the mistaken impression that the burden of proof was on the
           SSHD. A further difficulty with this complaint is that it did
           not feature in the SSHD's grounds of appeal. In the course of
           the hearing Mr Lindsay applied to amend the grounds. Ms Shaw,
           for the Respondent, resisted the application since it had been
           made so late. In our view there would have been merit in that
           objection, but, since the point goes nowhere, it does not assist
           the SSHD in any event.


  13. It follows that we are not persuaded that Judge Onoufriou erred in law
      in his finding that the Respondent had become permanently resident in
      the UK.



  14. Mr Lindsay was on firmer ground when he argued that the Judge had
      erred in law in concluding that the Respondent had the benefit of
      regulation 27(4) and that the deportation decision had to be justified
      by 'imperative reasons'. Regulation 27(4)(a) says,



           'A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -

                 a) Has resided in the UK for a continuous period of at
                    least 10 years prior to the relevant decision ...'



  15. As Mr Lindsay submitted, it is then necessary to count backwards from
      the date of decision to see if, at that stage the individual had
      resided in the UK continuously for 10 years. What Judge Onoufriou did
      was to count forwards from what he decided was the date of the
      Respondent's arrival in the UK. We agree that it was an error of law.
      (We add in parenthesis that Mr Lindsay did not allege that the same
      error infected the decision that the Respondent had acquired the right
      of permanent residence. Mr Lindsay accepted that for that purpose the
      Judge was correct to count forwards from the date of arrival in the
      UK). Significantly, at the date of decision (which, we remind
      ourselves, was 8th June 2018) the Respondent was in the course of or
      had recently completed the custodial part of his term of 42 months
      detention in a Young Offenders' Institution. We agree with Mr Lindsay
      that Judge Onoufriou did err in law in this regard.



  16. That said, this error on Judge Onoufriou's part was not material. The
      reason is that, as we have shown, in paragraph 48 of his decision he
      found that there were not 'serious grounds of public policy' for the
      deportation decision. Thus, the SSHD was not entitled to deport the
      Respondent even if he had not accrued 10 years continuous residence.



  17. Mr Lindsay sought to argue that the Judge's conclusion in paragraph 48
      was also infected with errors of law. However, in our view, his
      submissions in this regard were no more than a disagreement with Judge
      Onoufriou's factual findings. They did not constitute errors of law.
      We need expand on only one of Mr Lindsay's submissions in this regard.
      He submitted that there was not really a discrete and separate
      consideration of the 'serious grounds' justification for the
      deportation order since Judge Onoufriou had acknowledged the negative
      factors in the OASys report but had found these were outweighed by the
      positive factors 'especially when applying the enhanced level of
      protection'. Mr Lindsay argued that the term 'enhanced level of
      protection' referred to the need to show 'imperative grounds' where 10
      years continuous residence prior to the date of decision had been
      established.



The difficulty with that submission is that the phrase 'enhanced
protection' is ambiguous. It was used by Judge Onoufriou in two ways. As Mr
Lindsay observed, in paragraph 47 of the decision it is applied to the
protection enjoyed under regulation 27(4) by an EEA national with 10 years
continuous residence. But in paragraph 44 Judge Onoufriou used 'enhanced
protection' to describe the position of an EEA national who had acquired
the right of permanent residence. Since paragraph 48 is addressing the
position on the assumption that Judge Onoufriou was wrong about 10 years
continuous residence, we think that his use of the expression 'enhanced
protection' in this paragraph was more likely to have been an allusion to
the protection which an EEA national enjoyed once he had the right of
permanent residence.  Ms Shaw submitted and we accept that by "enhanced
protection" the Judge intended to refer to both higher levels of protection
and that, read in context, therefore, the Judge at [48] must be taken to be
referring to permanent residence when he says what he did about the OASys
report.



  18. Our conclusion remains that the only error of law which we have
      identified was not material.



  19. It follows that the SSHD's appeal is dismissed. The decision of Judge
      Onoufriou to allow the Respondent's appeal stands


Notice of Decision

We are satisfied that there is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Onoufrio  promulgated  on  27th  June
2019.  That decision is therefore  upheld  with  the  consequence  that  the
Respondent's (Mr Mendes-Gomes') appeal stands allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   A NICOL                             Dated    14 November 2019

Mr Justice Nicol sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.








