
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00039/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport Crown Court                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 August 2013                              |On 21 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E M DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                               SUDARSHAN DEWAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, instructed by N C Brothers & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 5  September  1989.
    The appellant is the son of a Ghurkha veteran.  His father came to  the
    UK in 2004 and was granted indefinite leave to remain on 21 March 2005.
     The appellant came to the UK on 3 August 2006 aged 16.  He accompanied
    his mother and brother.  They were granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in order to settle with the appellant's father.  In October  2011,  the
    appellant's parents were granted British Citizenship.   No  application
    was made on behalf of the appellant, perhaps because on 15 May 2011  he
    was  arrested  and  charged  with  a  number  of  offences:   attempted
    kidnapping, putting a person in fear of violence, two counts of  having
    a bladed article in  a  public  place,  and  criminal  damage.   On  10
    November 2011, the appellant was convicted after a trial at the  Oxford
    Crown Court of these offences.  On 2 December 2011, he was sentenced to
    a four year term of imprisonment for the attempted  kidnapping  offence
    and concurrent terms of imprisonment for  the  other  offences  of  one
    year, nine months and two months respectively.

 2. On 15 December 2011, the  appellant  was  served  with  notice  of  his
    liability to be deported  as  a  "foreign  criminal"  pursuant  to  the
    automatic  deportation  provisions  of  the  UK   Borders   Act   2007.
    Representations were made on the appellant's behalf but on 24  December
    2012, the Secretary of State made a decision that  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applied and a deportation order was made  against  the
    appellant.

 3. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the  Tribunal")
    against the Secretary of State's decision taken on  24  December  2012.
    The appellant relied upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Tribunal (Judge  Y  J
    Jones and Mrs R M Bray  JP)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The
    Tribunal concluded that the appellant had not established that  he  had
    "family life" with his parents in the UK and  his  recent  relationship
    with his girlfriend had ended.  However, the Tribunal accepted that the
    appellant had  "private  life"  in  the  UK  and  that  that  would  be
    interfered with if he were deported to Nepal.   However,  the  Tribunal
    found that the appellant's deportation would be proportionate.

 4. On 27 March 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J  M  Holmes)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before us.

The Appellant's Grounds

 5. Mr Howells, who represented the appellant, relied upon the  grounds  of
    appeal and submitted to us that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in
    reaching its decision in three respects.

 6. First, he submitted that the Tribunal erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    respondent to rely upon a NOMS1 report which was only provided  to  the
    appellant's representatives on the morning of the hearing.  Mr  Howells
    submitted that either that report should  not  have  been  admitted  in
    evidence as it had been served  outwith  the  standard  directions  and
    there was no "good reasons" to admit it under rule 51(5) of the  Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230) or, if it
    were to be admitted in evidence, the Tribunal  erred  in  refusing  the
    appellant's application for an  adjournment  in  order  to  permit  the
    appellant's representatives to obtain the OASyS Report upon  which  the
    NOMS1 report claimed to  be  based.   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    appellant had been prejudiced because he did not accept what  was  said
    in the NOMS1 report that he had threatened that he would commit suicide
    to the prison governor.  Mr Howells submitted that the  refusal  of  an
    adjournment was procedurally unfair to the appellant.

 7. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that  the  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
    assessment of the risk that  the  appellant  would  reoffend.   It  had
    failed to take into account his previous good character, namely that he
    had no previous convictions.  Further, the Tribunal had placed too much
    weight upon the consequences if the appellant reoffended,  rather  than
    the low risk that he posed of reoffending at all.

 8. Thirdly, Mr Howells submitted that the Tribunal had misdirected  itself
    on the relevance of the "historic injustice" that had resulted from the
    UK government's policy towards Ghurkha veterans and their families.  In
    this  appeal,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  "historic  injustice"
    affected the appellant in that, had it not occurred, his  family  could
    have come to the UK and obtained indefinite leave  to  remain  earlier.
    His parents could then have become British  citizens  earlier  and  the
    appellant himself would have  been  eligible  to  be  registered  as  a
    British citizen prior to his offending which would have  prevented  the
    Secretary of State from deporting him.

 9. Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  expressly  referred  to  a
    statement in the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ghising  (Family  life  -
    adult - Ghurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at [93] that  the
    "historic wrong" perpetrated against  Ghurkhas  carried  "substantially
    less weight" than that perpetrated upon BOCs which had  been  overruled
    by the Court of Appeal in Gurung and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

Discussion

1.  The Adjournment Issue

10. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place  on  27  February
    2013.  The hearing had originally been listed for 6 February  2013  but
    was adjourned the previous day and relisted for 27 February 2013.   The
    directions for that earlier hearing stated that  "no  later  than  five
    days before the date of  the  Full  Hearing"  both  the  appellant  and
    respondent should send to the Tribunal and the other party "a bundle of
    all documents to be relied upon at the hearing".  At the hearing on  27
    February 2013, the Presenting Officer provided to the Tribunal and  the
    appellant for the first time a NOMS1 report  on  the  appellant.   That
    report is undated but it is stated that the report was  required  by  4
    February 2013.  In that report it is stated at  section 2c that:

         "Particular concerns re:



         *    suicide risk -  emotional  abuse  -  threats  made  to  prison
             governor - futility regarding his life".


    At sections 3c and 6b the report states, inter alia, that a  source  of
    information was an OASyS Report completed on 24 January 2013.

11. Before the Tribunal,  Mr  Howells  sought  an  adjournment  as  he  was
    instructed that the appellant did not accept that he had threatened  to
    commit suicide to the governor and no OASyS Report had  been  compiled.
    Mr Howells requested an adjournment in  order  that  the  OASyS  Report
    could be obtained and the appellant be given an opportunity to  respond
    to both reports.  In the  alternative,  Mr  Howells  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal that on the basis of rule 51(4) of the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
    Procedure Rules, that if the hearing was not to be adjourned  then  the
    NOMS1 report should not be admitted.


12. At para 21 of its determination, the Tribunal refused  the  appellant's
    application for an adjournment in the following terms:


         "21. We refused the adjournment because it was clear from the  NOMS
             1 report that an OASyS assessment had been completed  on  24th
             January 2013.  The appellant would have been given a  copy  of
             that report and the NOMS 1  report  states  that  one  of  the
             sources of information was  the  current  OASyS  completed  by
             Julian Harvey on 24th January 2013.  The appellant  can  speak
             English and should have brought this matter to  the  attention
             of his instructing solicitors.  The appellant's solicitors had
             been instructed for 'some time' and we see from the file  that
             the First-tier Tribunal  was  sending  correspondence  to  his
             solicitors from 11th January 2013 so it is  likely  that  they
             had been instructed by the appellant before that date.  It was
             clear that they had at least 6 weeks  to  gather  evidence  on
             behalf of the appellant.  We refused the  adjournment  on  the
             basis that the OASyS Report  had  been  available  since  24th
             January and that the appellant's  instructing  solicitors  had
             had sufficient time to prepare their case."


13. There is no doubt that the respondent had failed  to  comply  with  the
    directions of the Tribunal as to the filing and serving  of  the  NOMS1
    report if it was to  be  relied  on.   Rule  51(4)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Procedure Rules states as follows:

         "Where the Tribunal is given directions setting time limits for the
         filing and serving of written evidence, it must  not  consider  any
         written evidence which is not filed or served  in  accordance  with
         those directions unless satisfied that there are good reasons to do
         so."


14. Consequently, the Tribunal could only consider (the rule  states  "must
    not consider") the NOMS1 report if it  was  satisfied  that  there  was
    "good reasons to do so".  We have no doubt that in a  deportation  case
    documents such as NOMS1  reports  and  others  such  as  OASyS  Reports
    dealing with issues of risk  and  rehabilitation  of  an  offender  are
    important and significant documents for the Tribunal in considering the
    legality of an individual deportation.  In order to carry out its fact-
    finding function, we consider that in the usual course of events  there
    would be "good  reasons"  to  admit  such  documents  even  though  the
    direction had not been complied with even to the extent of the document
    only being provided by the respondent on the day of the hearing.  That,
    however, must be subject to the requirements of fairness.


15. Here, the appellant contested what was said in the  NOMS1  report.   He
    did not accept that he had  threatened  to  commit  suicide  whilst  in
    prison.  He was not aware, those were Mr Howells' instructions  at  the
    Tribunal hearing, that an OASyS Report had been  completed.   Yet,  the
    NOMS1 document stated that it was based,  inter  alia,  upon  an  OASyS
    Report that had been completed on 24 January 2013.


16. Mr Hibbs submitted that the appellant had not been  prejudiced  by  the
    refusal of the adjournment.  Subsequent to that hearing, the respondent
    provided the appellant (and both parties provided us)  with  the  OASyS
    Report which had, indeed, been completed on 24 January 2013.  Mr  Hibbs
    submitted  that  the  appellant's  legal   representatives   who   were
    instructed in January 2013 could have obtained the OASyS  document  for
    themselves.  He relied upon the OASyS Report because it did not contain
    any reference to the appellant threatening  suicide  to  the  governor.
    Consequently,  he  submitted  that  it  could  not  have  affected  the
    Tribunal's finding in that regard.  Mr Hibbs also  submitted  that  the
    panel had not accepted that the appellant had threatened suicide to the
    governor in any event.


17. As we have indicated, we were shown the OASyS Report and we  considered
    it de bene esse.  It is not clear to us that it can be relied  upon  to
    show the absence of any prejudice to the appellant.  Even if it  could,
    in our judgment the  refusal  of  the  adjournment  together  with  the
    admission in evidence of the NOMS1 report did create prejudice  to  the
    appellant.


18. Whilst the appellant could (and indeed did) give evidence that  he  had
    not threatened to kill himself to the governor, he was not  aware  that
    this was an issue until the date of the  hearing.   On  its  face,  the
    NOMS1 report appears to base the "fact" that the  appellant  threatened
    to commit suicide to the governor upon other documents reviewed by  the
    writer of the NOMS1 report.  Although Mr Howells, before the  Tribunal,
    believed the source was the OASyS Report, we now, of course, know  that
    it was not.  But, the NOMS1 report also notes that the writer used as a
    source of management the "case management system" which he reviewed  on
    7 February 2013 (see section 6b of the NOMS1 report).  Even if that was
    not the basis of Mr Howells' submission before the Tribunal,  it  would
    have become clear to those representing the appellant when they saw the
    OASyS Report that the source (if any) of the "fact" of  the  threat  of
    suicide was a different document which they needed access to  in  order
    to deal with the allegation.  We, of  course,  do  not  know  what,  if
    anything, the "case management system" would disclose  in  relation  to
    this matter.  We are, in fact, in precisely the same state of ignorance
    as was the Tribunal at the hearing.


19. The Tribunal, having heard the appellant's evidence,  rejected  it  and
    made finding in para 46(iii) that the appellant "has  made  threats  to
    the prison governor regarding the futility of his life".  That language
    mirrors the wording of the NOMS1 report.  Then, at para 52 in assessing
    the risk, if any, of the appellant reoffending states:  "We  find  that
    all his threats of suicide were to gain sympathy". (Our emphasis).


20. It seems to us, therefore, that the Tribunal made an adverse finding of
    fact concerning the appellant threatening suicide without the appellant
    having access to the documents which, on the basis of the NOMS1 report,
    it could be reasonably concluded were the source of  this  information.
    As we have said, we do  not  know  what,  if  anything,  those  further
    documents would disclose.  But, in  our  judgment,  the  appellant  was
    entitled as a matter of fairness to see those  documents  in  order  to
    deal with the allegation that was being made against him.


21.  We  do  not  accept  Mr  Hibbs'  submission   that   the   appellant's
    representatives could and should have  obtained  the  OASyS  Report  in
    advance of the Tribunal's hearing.  Before the Tribunal, the Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Home Office no longer received OASyS Reports
    and that the appellant could obtain a copy for himself.   We  were  not
    provided with  any  further  information  concerning  access  to  OASyS
    Reports.  What is clear, however, is that the Secretary  of  State  can
    obtain OASyS Reports.  That happened in this appeal prior to the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  We were told that the Secretary of State sent to the
    appellant's representatives on 1  August  2013  a  copy  of  the  OASyS
    Report.

22. We do not know, because of the lack of information before  us,  whether
    the  appellant's  representatives  could  obtain  such  a  report   for
    themselves.  We will assume for the purposes of this appeal  that  they
    could.  Here,  however,  until  the  NOMS1  report  was  given  to  the
    appellant's representative on the morning of the Tribunal hearing,  the
    appellant's representatives were unaware of the specific importance (as
    it was thought then) of the OASyS Report and the information  contained
    within it.  There is a dispute as to whether  the  appellant  (and  his
    representatives) knew that an OASyS Report had been  produced.   Before
    the Tribunal, it was Mr Howells' instructions that no report  had  been
    compiled.  Mr Hibbs submitted that the appellant was aware that  report
    had been prepared as he had completed  a  self-assessment  form.   Even
    accepting that, the appellant would not necessarily know that a  report
    had actually been produced and, as we have already said, the importance
    of the OASyS Report only surfaced on the morning of the hearing because
    of the contents of the NOMS1 report.

23. It might be thought that the appellant's threatened suicide was a  side
    issue in the case.  However, the Tribunal clearly thought  it  relevant
    to its assessment of the issue of proportionality.  It seems to us that
    the Tribunal may well  have  taken  into  account  the  "fact"  of  the
    appellant's continuing manipulative behaviour in threatening suicide as
    part of its assessment of the future risk, if any, that  the  appellant
    presented to the public or to known individuals.


24. By way of a footnote we would add that we do  not  accept  Mr  Howells'
    submission that the NOMS1 report was, somehow, not to  be  admitted  in
    evidence simply because it did not reflect progress that the  appellant
    claimed to have made on courses in prison.  Those  were  matters  which
    the appellant could deal with by way of evidence, as indeed he did,  of
    courses completed and any other supporting evidence of his behaviour in
    prison.  In fact, at the time of the hearing he had not  completed  the
    Healthy Relationships course.  It would then  have  been  a  matter  of
    submission by the appellant as to the weight that was to be placed upon
    the NOMS1 report given that it had not taken into account any  evidence
    of those matters which was accepted by the Tribunal at the hearing.


25. That said, however, for the reasons we have given, in our judgment  the
    refusal of an adjournment in order to allow the appellant to obtain the
    documents upon which the NOMS1 report was based was procedurally unfair
    and the First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot  stand  for  that  reason
    alone.


2.  Assessment of Risk of Reoffending


26. We do not consider that there is any merit in Mr Howells' submission on
    this ground taken in isolation.  At para 52 of its  determination,  the
    Tribunal said this:

         "Although this appellant has been assessed as being of low risk  of
         reoffending it is of note that if he does reoffend there is a  high
         risk to a known adult and a medium risk of serious harm to children
         and the public."


27. At para 53 the Tribunal continued:

         "At the time of his trial he  did  not  accept  that  he  had  done
         anything wrong and we find that  if  he  does  reoffend  there  are
         potential serious consequences and high risk to the public."


28. The Tribunal then continued at para 53:

         "We also take into account that the violence  predictor  is  medium
         and the SARA, the spousal assessment risk is high."


29. Whilst the Tribunal did not expressly refer to the fact that  prior  to
    the attempted kidnapping and attack upon his girlfriend  the  appellant
    had no previous offences, we have no doubt that  that  they  were  well
    aware of what Mr Howells referred to as the appellant's "previous  good
    character".  The risk assessment in the NOMS1 report  was,  of  course,
    itself based upon  the  appellant's  offending  and  his  circumstances
    including that these were his first offences.  Whilst it  was  for  the
    Tribunal to assess the appellant's risk, if any, of reoffending, it had
    to do so in the light of the evidence contained in the NOMS1 report and
    the other relevant  material  before  it,  including  the  pre-sentence
    report.


30. We see nothing in the Tribunal assessment of the  appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending as being inconsistent with what is set out in section 3a of
    the NOMS1 report.  The OGRS  or  "Offender  Group  Reconviction  Scale"
    predicts that the risk  of  the  appellant  being  reconvicted  of  any
    recordable offence within two years of sentence as being "low".  It  is
    specifically stated that the OGRS: "uses an offender's past and current
    history of standard  list  offences  only".   The  General  Reoffending
    Predictor (OGP) and the OASyS Violence Predictor (OVP)  provide  scores
    for the likelihood of, respectively, general  reoffending  and  violent
    reoffending over one and two years after release on  licence  as  being
    "low" and "medium".  The Spousal Assault  Risk  Assessment  is  put  at
    "high".  We do not consider that the Tribunal's  failure  to  expressly
    refer to the appellant's previous lack of conviction as,  in  any  way,
    demonstrating  that  its  assessment  of  the  risk  of  the  appellant
    reoffending was flawed.


31. Likewise, we do not accept Mr Howells'  submission  that  the  Tribunal
    attached too much weight to the consequences if the appellant  offended
    and did not attach "any or any adequate" weight to the low  level  risk
    of reoffending.  As we have said, the risk of the appellant reoffending
    was for two measures "low" but in relation to violence was at "medium".
     In our judgment, the Tribunal properly  took  into  account  both  the
    risk, if any, of the appellant  reoffending  and  the  consequences  to
    others if he did in fact reoffend.  The weight to  be  given  to  those
    factors was a matter for the Tribunal to assess in the light of all the
    evidence.  There is no basis upon which it can be said that the  weight
    attached respectively to the risk of reoffending and, if  it  occurred,
    its consequences, was  perverse.   For  these  reasons,  we  reject  Mr
    Howells' submission on this issue.


3.  Historic Injustice

32. Mr Hibbs did not seek to defend the Tribunal's  citation  of  the  UT's
    decision in Ghising at para 47 of its determination.  As we  understood
    Mr Hibbs, he accepted that the statement made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that  the  "historic   wrong"   in   relation   to   Ghurkhas   carried
    "substantially less weight" in the Art 8 assessment of  proportionality
    than the historic wrong perpetrated against BOCs had  been  disapproved
    by the Court of Appeal in Gurung and Others.  We  agree,  it  is  clear
    from the judgment of  Lord  Dyson  MR  at  [42]  disapproved  the  UT's
    approach stating that:


         "It also follows that we do not agree with the UT that  the  weight
         to be given  is  generally  'substantially  less'  in  the  Ghurkha
         cases."


33. Instead, Mr Hibbs submitted that the Tribunal's error was not  material
    as the  appellant's  criminality  "trumped"  any  historic  wrong.   Mr
    Howells submitted that the Court  of  Appeal  had  indicated  that  the
    "historic injustice" gave  rise  to  a  "strong  claim"  under  Art  8.
    Although, Mr Howells accepted that the Court of Appeal  had  recognised
    that  "adverse  information  of  a  serious  nature"  was  relevant  in
    determining what weight to be attached to the "historic injustice".  He
    submitted that just as "long residence" could outweigh  the  legitimate
    aim of the prevention of disorder or  crime,  so  could  the  "historic
    injustice"  outweigh  that  same  legitimate  aim.   For   the   former
    proposition he referred us to the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Rocky
    Gurung [2012] EWCA Civ 62 at [19(iv)].


34. We are in no doubt that the Tribunal misdirected itself in para  47  of
    its determination citing a passage in the Tribunal's  determination  in
    Ghising which was expressly disapproved  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Gurung and Others at  [42].   Dealing  with  the  "historic  injustice"
    issue, the Tribunal in this appeal stated as follows at para 51:

         "51. Furthermore, the appellant would have been entitled  to  enter
             the UK but for historical injustice as  a  dependent  child  a
             little earlier.  It is acknowledged by the respondent that  it
             is in the public interest to remedy an historic  injustice  in
             the UK government's previous  treatment  of  Gurkha  veterans.
             However  the  respondent  has  distinguished  between   Gurkha
             veterans, their wives and minor children on the one  hand  who
             will generally be given leave to remain.   Adult  children  on
             the other will only be given leave to  remain  in  exceptional
             circumstances.  Given that the Gurkhas  are  Nepali  nationals
             this is not inherently unfair or in breach  of  human  rights.
             This appellant was able to enter the UK as  a  minor  and  has
             been given indefinite leave at the  appropriate  time.   Since
             the respondent has provided a scheme to  remedy  the  historic
             injustice in  appropriate  cases  there  is  a  strong  public
             interest in ensuring that the entry  of  Gurkha  veterans  and
             their  families  is  decided  fairly   and   consistently   in
             accordance with the scheme."


35. In our judgment, this paragraph fails to grapple with  the  implication
    of the so-called "historic injustice"  argument  as  relevant  to  this
    appeal.  Mr Howells' argument is that, but for the historic  injustice,
    this family  would  have  settled  in  the  UK  earlier  and  both  the
    appellant's parents and therefore the appellant lost the opportunity to
    obtain British citizenship at an earlier date such that  the  appellant
    would not have been "liable to deportation" as a British  Citizen  when
    he committed  the  offences  which  underlie  the  current  deportation
    decision.


36. It is not clear to us how, if at all, the Tribunal took this  "historic
    injustice" into account.  There is no doubt that  it  was  relevant  in
    assessing  the  proportionality   of   the   appellant's   deportation.
    Certainly, in a case not concerned with deportation, Lord Dyson  MR  in
    Gurung stated (at [41]):

         "That is why the historic injustice is such an important factor  to
         be taken into  account  in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why  the
         applicant dependent child of a Ghurkha who is settled in the UK has
         such a strong claim to have  his  Article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
         notwithstanding the potency of the countervailing  public  interest
         in the maintaining of a firm immigration policy."


37. This appeal, of course,  is  not  concerned  with  the  "countervailing
    public interest in the maintaining of firm immigration policy".  We are
    concerned, instead, with the  countervailing  public  interest  in  the
    prevention of disorder or crime.  It is well-recognised in the case law
    that that legitimate aim may have greater potency than where  the  only
    public interest engaged is that of  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control (see, for example, JO (Uganda) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 and AM
    v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634).  Even giving due weight  to  that  public
    interest, we do not accept that necessarily  in  this  appeal  it  must
    outweigh the "historic injustice" relied  upon  by  the  appellant  and
    other factors relied upon by the appellant under Art 8.  We cannot  say
    that,  despite  the  Tribunal's  misdirection,  the  outcome   of   its
    assessment of proportionality  would  inevitably  be  adverse  to  this
    appellant.  It will be for the First-tier Tribunal on remittal of  this
    appeal to take into account the "historic  injustice"  factor,  in  the
    light of the Court of Appeal's decision in Gurung and  Others,  bearing
    in mind the recognition in the case law of the  greater  weight  to  be
    attached to the legitimate aim of the prevention of disorder  or  crime
    under Art 8.2.


Decision and Disposal

38. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.  We  set
    aside its decision.

39. In the light of our finding that the First-tier Tribunal's decision not
    to adjourn the appeal involved a procedural irregularity, applying para
    7.2(a) of the Senior President's Practice Statements, it is appropriate
    to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.
    Both Mr Hibbs and Mr Howells invited us to remit the  appeal  in  these
    circumstances.

40. We remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing
    (not before either Judge Y J Jones or Mrs R M Bray JP).

41. The appeal should be listed for a case management hearing  as  soon  as
    practical in order to deal with, inter alia, any directions that should
    be made concerning disclosure of documents.






                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
