
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00747/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LUKMAN DAWODU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Franco, Counsel, instructed by Mandy Peters
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make an order restricting  publication  of
    details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of State  to  make
    him the subject of a deportation order with reference to Section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal
    and the Secretary of State  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision was wrong in law.

 3. I begin by considering carefully the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 4. It notes that the claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born in 1959
    and so is now 56 years old.

 5. The claimant's immediate family members are in the United Kingdom  with
    permission although they are not settled there.  His wife has lived  in
    the United Kingdom since 2004.  They have five children.  The eldest, a
    daughter, was born in 1992 and a son was born in 1997.  They were  both
    adults by the time the First-tier Tribunal decided the case and are  of
    little relevance to the decision.  There are three younger children:  a
    daughter born in June 2001, a daughter born in December 2005 and a  son
    born in February 2009.  They are now aged 14, 9 and 6.

 6. The claimant visited his family with permission using a multiple  entry
    visit visa.

 7. Although the claimant and his wife lived together until about  December
    2009, their relationship deteriorated  and  the  claimant  returned  to
    Nigeria where he remained until May 2013.  He then entered  the  United
    Kingdom  at  Manchester  Airport  using  a  forged   passport   falsely
    identifying him as a citizen of France.  He was detected and prosecuted
    and pleaded guilty to offences he had committed  and  he  was  sent  to
    prison for twelve months.  That is the matter that  led  to  his  being
    subject to deportation.

 8. The claimant had applied for visit visas in March  2010  and  September
    2010.  Both applications were unsuccessful.

 9. He initially applied for asylum when he realised he was in difficulties
    but the case before the First-tier Tribunal was conducted solely on the
    basis that his deportation would be a disproportionate interference  in
    his private and family life.

10. He sought to excuse his efforts to  get  into  the  United  Kingdom  by
    saying he wanted to be back with his family.

11. The Secretary of State's case was simple.  The claimant was  a  foreign
    criminal as  defined  in  statute  and  he  should  be  deported.   The
    Secretary of State had considered each of  the  minor  children.   They
    were each in the United Kingdom with leave which was due to  expire  in
    September 2014 but which had been extended  until  March  2017.  It  is
    implicit in the Decision that leave  was  extended  this  way  and  the
    details were confirmed expressly at the hearing.

12. It was found that the children could keep some  sort  of  contact  with
    their father in the event of his removal. They were cared for  well  by
    their mother in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept that the claimant was in a genuine and subsisting marriage  with
    his wife.

13. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence and  submissions  and  made  its
    findings.

14. The Judge accepted that the claimant had been absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom from 2009 because of marital difficulties but had  returned  in
    May 2013.  The claimant and his wife had five children.  The Judge  was
    satisfied that there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
    with all of the children although the three  minor  children  were  the
    ones that were relevant for the purposes of paragraph 399  of  HC  395.
    The Judge was also satisfied  that  the  claimant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife although the judge noted that "it
    seems to me that this is a less important aspect of the appeal  overall
    because the [claimant's] status was most clearly precarious up to  2009
    and, of course, it has since been precarious".

15. The Judge accepted that when the claimant returned to  Nigeria  he  had
    tried unsuccessfully to establish a business. He  was  "facing  a  very
    uncertain economic future in Nigeria".

16. There was little communication between  the  claimant  and  his  family
    between 2009 and 2013.  The Judge found that the  claimant had been

         "... doing his best to act responsibly and well as a father towards
         all of his children.  As a consequence he has improved  the  family
         relationship as a whole.  He does very  practical  and  responsible
         tasks such as taking the  younger  children  to  and  from  primary
         school; he assists with cooking and doing general household chores.
         All of this is very much to the [claimant's] credit and  serves  to
         show the extent to which he is building perfectly loving  and  good
         relationships with his children".

17. The Judge was unimpressed with the suggestion that the  claimant  could
    maintain communication with his children from  Nigeria.   No  doubt  he
    could but it was the Judge's view that the claimant had  re-established
    himself within the nuclear family and was fulfilling properly his  role
    as father and that was something to be encouraged on grounds of  public
    policy.

18. The Judge said at paragraph 49 of its decision:

         "These children would be affected in a way  that  would  be  unduly
         harsh for them to have to leave this country."

19. The Judge explained that this was because  the  children,  particularly
    the younger two, have  only  ever  really  known  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom. They all benefited from their relationship with their  father.
    Although recognising that their primary carer had been their mother for
    much of their lives the Judge found at paragraph 50 that:

         "Since the [claimant's] return to the United Kingdom he has  played
         what I see as an extremely important valuable role in  relation  to
         these children and a role that should not be underestimated, or, in
         fact, undermined.  Not only would it be hard for these children  to
         go to Nigeria but it would be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to  go  to
         Nigeria.  It will be unduly harsh for them to stay in this  country
         without that person that they now know as their  father,  a  person
         that they love and look up to and who can be  a  responsible  guide
         for them in their lives.  The overall conclusion I  reach  is  that
         paragraph  399(a)(b)  does  apply  to  the  circumstances  of  this
         [claimant] and his family".

20. The Judge then directed himself to the requirements of Section  117  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge noted that
    the claimant speaks English well, that he was willing to live work  for
    his  living  if  that  were  permissible  and  he  had  been   occupied
    productively in the United Kingdom. For example he had  contributed  to
    the home in a way that enabled his  wife  to  develop  her  work  as  a
    seamstress.  The Judge then reminded himself that Section 117C referred
    to the public interest in deportation increasing with  the  seriousness
    of the offence.  The Judge found that the offence was at the lower  end
    of the bracket that qualified a person for deportation  and  therefore,
    in his judgment, there was less interest in removal.  Nevertheless,  he
    was careful to direct himself that  there  was  a  public  interest  in
    deportation but he concluded that deportation would be  wrong  in  this
    case.

21. In many ways I have considerable sympathy with the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He has clearly considered family unity to be  highly  desirable
    unity and  he  decided  that  on  the  facts  of  the  case  the  usual
    consequences of  deportation  ought  not  follow.  Nevertheless  it  is
    appropriate to note the claimant's family members are  not  settled  in
    the United Kingdom and even if they were they  could  remove  to  their
    country of nationality.

22. I have to ask myself if the First-tier Tribunal's decision is right  in
    law.  I conclude that it is not.  I  have  listened  carefully  to  the
    submissions of Counsel and noted the favourable findings that have been
    made and no doubt correctly made.

23. I am  not  able  to  understand  or  agree  with  the  conclusion  that
    deportation in this case would be unduly harsh.

24. The Upper Tribunal is clearly uncertain about the  proper  approach  to
    take when discerning the meaning of "unduly harsh".

25. I was referred to MAB (Para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT  00435
    (IAC) which was a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  with  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips.  Here, the Tribunal expressed  the  view
    that unduly harsh is to be assessed "solely upon an evaluation  of  the
    consequences that impact on the individual concerned".   It  then  said
    that  something  will  be  "unduly  harsh"   if   it   is   more   than
    "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,   undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely
    difficult and challenging".  Harshness was to be  understood  as  being
    "severe"  or  "bleak"  and  they  were  "unduly"  harsh  if  they  were
    "inordinately" or "excessively" harsh taking  account  of  all  of  the
    circumstances of the individual.  There is a further  decision  in  the
    Upper Tribunal by Judge Southern at KMO (Section 117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543  (IAC).    This  was  written  in  the  clear
    knowledge of the decision in MAB and expressed a contrary view.  It was
    Judge Southern's view that because  Section  117  expressly  recognises
    that the public interest in deportation increases with the  seriousness
    of the offence the phrase  "unduly  harsh"  should  be  construed  with
    regard to the seriousness of the offence.

26. If I had to choose between  the  two  approaches  I  would  prefer  the
    approach  suggested  by  Judge  Southern  for  the  reasons  indicated.
    However, in my judgement it is not necessary to choose between them  in
    this case.  This is because the offence could hardly  be  less  serious
    and still attract automatic deportation. The sentence was  the  minimum
    necessary. It is not an offence of violence. The claimant admitted  his
    guilt. Parliament says that the offence attracts deportation because it
    was punished with  twelve  month's  imprisonment  but  it  is  free  of
    aggravating features.  This should not  be  read  as  me  condoning  or
    approving the claimant's criminal behaviour. A person is not  sentenced
    to twelve months' imprisonment for committing an offence that is  other
    than serious but it is right to say that there are  many  more  serious
    offences that have to be punished by the courts and, in  my  judgement,
    many of them will attract a sentence  of  less  than  the  four  years'
    imprisonment and therefore will not be subject to  the  need  for  very
    compelling circumstances "over and above" the circumstances outlined in
    section 117C(4) and (5).

27. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has not identified any factors  which  on
    either interpretation make the degree of hardship undue.  There will be
    bad consequences.  That is what deportation does to people.  Therefore,
    although this was a case where the father's return to the  family  fold
    has improved family relationships, the case could not  be  put  on  the
    basis that  his  arrival  has  transformed  a  failing  family  into  a
    successful family. This is not a  case,  for  example,  of  exceptional
    dependency because  a  child  has  a  particularly  challenging  health
    problem or of a mother incapable of managing on her  own.  There  is  a
    certain  unattractive  irony  in  a  person's  prospects  of   avoiding
    deportation being inversely proportionate to his  partner's  competence
    but that is because deportation appeals rarely succeed because  of  the
    impact of removal on the offender but because of the impact of  removal
    of an offender's family.

28. I have considered the skeleton arguments and replies  set  out  by  the
    claimant.  I cannot accept that the First-tier Tribunal  has  explained
    its finding that removal would be unduly harsh. Further,  although  the
    claimant's deportation will be unpleasant  and  undesirable  the  facts
    found are not, in my judgement, capable  of  being  unduly  harsh.  The
    First-tier Tribunal therefore erred in law.

29. Anticipating this as a possible outcome I ask the parties to assist  me
    about how I should proceed if I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law.  Mr Franco invited me to order a further hearing.  I  see
    no need for that.  I have gone through the witness  statements.  It  is
    quite clear that it is in the best interests of the children that their
    father is allowed to remain with them in the United Kingdom  but  their
    best   interests,   although   a   primary   consideration,   are   not
    determinative. The family has managed in the father's  absence  and  no
    doubt could do so again.

30. This is not a case where the Judge had material capable of supporting a
    finding that it would be unduly harsh.  In my  judgement  the  evidence
    does not support the conclusions. It only supports the conclusion  that
    there will be harshness and disappointment and sadness.

31. I also noted that Mr Franco indicated that in the  event  of  the  case
    having to be decided again he would like to adduce further evidence but
    the evidence has not been prepared. It is open to the claimants to make
    a fresh application if they want to,  whether  that  is  based  on  the
    psychological harm to the family on removal or  psychological  harm  to
    the claimant in the event of his return.  It is not  right  to  give  a
    further opportunity to the claimant to produce evidence that  they  did
    not produce when they had the opportunity to present their appeal.

32. There is nothing here to suggest to me that there would be any harm  to
    the claimant on return that would come near to engaging the  protection
    of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

33. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I allow the Secretary of  State's
    appeal I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    substitute a decision dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |Jonathan Perkins                     |
|Dated 30 October 2015                |Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |

