

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal number:
DA/00310/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 September 2019                  | On 1 October 2019                  |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MARCIN MODRZERJEWSKI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as  above,  but  are  referred  to  in  the  rest  of  this
    determination as they were in the FtT.

 2. A panel comprising Designated Judge Murray and Judge  Rea  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against  deportation  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016.

 3. Apart from restating the case put  to  the  FtT  and  saying  that  its
    decision is "totally inadequately reasoned", the  gist  of  the  SSHD's
    grounds is that the FtT should not have found that  the  appellant  had
    resided in the UK for 10 years, so  as  to  acquire  the  corresponding
    degree of protection in terms  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2016, due to the lack of documentary evidence.

 4. Mr Govan pressed that line of argument, and submitted that the decision
    should be set aside.

 5. I was not persuaded.  The SSHD made a justifiable point in the FtT that
    the documentary evidence was scanty, but it was up to the panel how far
    that went.  The panel heard oral evidence and was  entitled  to  accept
    it.  The grounds are fundamentally no more than disagreement.

 6. In any event, success  on  error  of  law  would  take  the  respondent
    nowhere.  The appellant now has documentary evidence of  employment  in
    the UK unbroken from 2006 to 2017.  Mr Govan said that  was  irrelevant
    to error of law, which is correct, but he accepted that it  would  fall
    to be admitted in any remaking of the decision.   If  that  stage   had
    been reached, there would have been  no  reason  to  find  against  the
    appellant.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      30 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




