
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00032/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DNO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Smyth, Solicitor, Kesar & Co Solicitors
(Tonbridge)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 14  January  1974,  as
    the appellant herein.

2.   On 17 February 2015 the respondent decided to make a deportation  order
    and the appellant appealed under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

3.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron
    on 27 July 2015.  The  judge  noted  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a family member of an EEA national and that it  was  also
    accepted that he had acquired a permanent right of residence by  virtue
    of a five year period of continuous residence.   The judge  noted  that
    in those circumstances the appellant's removal  must  be  justified  on
    serious grounds of public policy or public security.

4.   The appellant was convicted at Croydon Crown Court on 30 April 2009  of
    being knowingly concerned  in  fraudulent  evasion  of  prohibition  or
    restriction on importation of Class A controlled drugs.  A confiscation
    order was made and the appellant  was  also  convicted  for  possessing
    Class B controlled drugs  with  intent  to  supply  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment to be served concurrently.

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and his partner.

6.   For reasons that will become apparent it is not necessary to  summarise
    the judge's determination in detail as there is  only  one  issue  that
    arises.   The  following  extract  from  the  judge's  decision  is  of
    relevance in relation to that issue:

         "90. There  is  no  doubt  from  the  reports  available  that  the
             appellant has undertaken  a  considerable  number  of  courses
             whilst  he  has  been  in   prison   both   in   relation   to
             rehabilitation and also  training.  He  has  worked  while  in
             prison and had enhanced status and no adjudications.

         91.  Notwithstanding the seriousness of the appellant's offence  he
             has been assessed as being at low risk of both reoffending and
             of  harm  to  the  public.   That  risk  assessment  has  been
             confirmed by the probation services.  I do however  take  into
             account the serious nature of the  offence  which  is  clearly
             shown  from  the  sentence  received.   I   also   take   note
             particularly of the detrimental effect drugs have  on  society
             generally and in particular where Class A drugs  are  involved
             the high likelihood that drug  users  will  commit  additional
             offences in order to fund their habit. This is an issue  which
             was accepted by the probation within the OASys Report.

         92.  I also take note of the fact  that  the  appellant  as  always
             indicated that the offence itself  took  place  because  of  a
             difficulty he found himself in after taking a loan to start  a
             business.  He has given evidence in relation to  threats  made
             to both himself and  his  family  and  although  there  is  no
             corroborative evidence of this from the  authorities,  he  now
             states that the monies have been repaid and that  the  threats
             have stopped.

         93.  The appellant has one previous conviction  in  relation  to  a
             motoring offence and the probation  report  clearly  indicates
             that he he did not have  an  offending  history.  Taking  into
             account  all  of  those   factors   placed   before   me   and
             notwithstanding that the probation report does  indicate  that
             the appellant has some work to be undertaken  in  relation  to
             his overall thinking in relation to offending, I am  satisfied
             that the assessment as to his being a low risk of  reoffending
             and at low risk of harm to the public is a sustainable one.

         94.  I have had regard to Essa, R (On the Application Of)  v  Upper
             Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor  [2012]  EWCA
             Civ 1718.  The appellant has undertaken a  number  of  courses
             while in prison and it is clear from the report that given his
             offending and low-risk he is not suitable for  any  additional
             courses.  The current  probation  assessment  is  that  he  is
             complying with his licence conditions  and  is  utilising  his
             time constructively towards employment.

         95.  I take into account in particular  paragraphs  54  and  55  of
             Dumliauskas [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145.   It  is  clear  that  the
             prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  not  irrelevant   to   the
             proportionality exercise and that the longer  the  person  has
             been in a state the more weight these [sic] should be given to
             those prospects.

         96.  I have not received any additional  evidence  with  regard  to
             what if any assistance may be available to the appellant if he
             were returned to Nigeria but given that he has  completed  all
             the relevant courses he can in this country and given that  he
             has employment skills both as a barber and also  from  courses
             he has  undertaken  whilst  in  custody  I  am  not  satisfied
             notwithstanding  that  there  is  no   direct   rehabilitation
             provisions  in  Nigeria  that  the  appellant  would   be   at
             appreciably higher risk of reoffending  if  he  were  deported
             compared to that risk if he were not deported."

7.   The appellant and his partner have an autistic daughter.  He  has  been
    in a relationship with his partner since 2005 and  their  daughter  was
    born on 14 July 2006.

8.   The judge found that the appellant was at low risk of  reoffending  and
    at low risk of harm to the public. In paragraph 124 of the decision the
    judge stated as follows:

         "Although the offence itself is a particularly serious one and  the
         effect of drugs on the public  is  considerable  given  that  drugs
         addicts particularly those addicted to Class A drugs are likely  to
         commit offences to fund their habit, I am   not  satisfied  on  the
         evidence available that the appellant does  currently  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  such  that  his
         removal would be justified under Regulation 21."

8.   The judge did not need in the circumstances  to  consider  the  further
    grounds in relation to Article 8 but observed that the  best  interests
    of the daughter were to remain with  both  her  parents  and  that  the
    daughter had bonded with the appellant and it was in her best interests
    to remain with both her parents in the United Kingdom.

9.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal.  The second ground  of
    appeal concerned the issue of rehabilitation which the judge dealt with
    in the extract from the determination  which  I  have  set  out  above.
    Reference was made to SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of  State  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 256 and the appellant could not  benefit  from  the  case  of  Essa
    because he was not an EEA national himself but just the  family  member
    of an EEA national.  The judge had erred in  finding  at  paragraph  95
    that the  "prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  not  irrelevant  to  the
    proportionality exercise".

10.  The application for permission to appeal was renewed in respect of  the
    first ground of appeal where it had been  argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed  to  take  into  account  material  matters  and  had  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant was at low  risk  of  reoffending.   This
    application was considered by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  and  in  a
    decision dated 28 September 2015 she refused  to  grant  permission  in
    relation to the first ground.

11.  Mr Smyth filed a response to the grounds on 16 September 2015.  In  the
    response Mr Smyth submitted in relation to ground 1 that the judge  had
    properly directed himself and that the complaint by  the  Secretary  of
    State was nothing more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    judge.

12.  In relation to the ground on  which  permission  was  granted,  it  was
    pointed out that the First-tier Judge had not in fact placed any weight
    on the appellant's prospect of rehabilitation in Nigeria and  reference
    was made to paragraph 96 of the decision which I have  set  out  above.
    Any reliance placed by the judge on the point was immaterial.

13.  Reference was made to Secretary of State v Dumliauskas.  The  appellant
    did not represent a  genuine  and  present  threat  and  could  not  be
    deported under the EEA Regulations.   At the hearing Mr Smyth  referred
    me to MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC).

14.  Mr Kandola, while not instructed to withdraw the  appeal,  acknowledged
    the difficulties in advancing the proposition in the ground relating to
    rehabilitation.  However, he sought to  raise  a  new  point  that  the
    appellant had not  achieved  permanent  residence  on  the  chronology.
    There was no evidence that the appellant's wife - the EU citizen -  had
    exercised treaty  rights  and  was  a  qualified  person.   Mr  Kandola
    acknowledged that the matter had been conceded by the respondent in the
    refusal letter and that the  concession  had  been  maintained  at  the
    hearing.  Further, the point had not been mentioned in the first set of
    grounds or in the second and no notice had been given of the  intention
    to raise it before me.  Mr Kandola accepted that  rehabilitation  could
    be raised as part of the proportionality exercise.  Mr Smyth relied  on
    his written response.

15.  At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved  my  decision.   I  can  of
    course only interfere with the judge's decision if  it  was  flawed  in
    law.   Permission was only granted on the  rehabilitation  issue.   The
    short answer to that point is that the judge, as is  quite  clear  from
    paragraph 96 of the determination which I have set out above,  did  not
    find that the question of rehabilitation made any  difference  in  this
    case - the applicant  would  not  be  at  appreciably  higher  risk  of
    reoffending if he were deported than if he remained  in  this  country.
    Even if it were an error (and  Mr  Kandola,  while  not  instructed  to
    withdraw the argument, did not advance it with any great enthusiasm) it
    is quite  clear  that  it  played  no  material  part  in  the  judge's
    reasoning.

16.  In relation to the point  that  Mr  Kandola  sought  to  raise  at  the
    hearing, as I have made clear, this did  not  feature  in  the  refusal
    letter, the hearing or in either set of grounds and no advance  warning
    was given of an application to withdraw  a  concession  that  had  been
    clearly made in the decision  and  at  the  hearing.   It  was  clearly
    accepted, for example, in paragraph 15 of the refusal letter  that  the
    appellant was a family member of an EEA national and in paragraph 19 it
    was accepted that the appellant  had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence.

17.  The respondent's position having been so clearly stated,  it  would  be
    grossly unfair to permit at such a very late stage a fresh point to  be
    taken  in  relation  to  the  matter.   I  unhesitatingly  refused  the
    application.

18.  Permission to appeal in relation to  the  other  matters  was  properly
    considered and refused by the Tribunal.  I agree with the comments made
    by Mr Smyth in his helpful response in relation  to  ground  1  of  the
    original grounds.  In relation to the point  on  which  permission  was
    granted I find that any error was immaterial in  the  circumstances  of
    this case.

Notice of Decision

19.  Accordingly, for the reasons I have given,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is dismissed and I direct that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order no doubt  because  of  a  child
being involved and that anonymity order continues.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
