
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00798/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates'     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     i n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECtion made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant who is a national of Somalia has been granted  permission
    to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I F Taylor and Mr G
    Getlevog (the panel) by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald.
     The panel dismissed the appeal against the decision that s.32  (5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applied to the appellant. He had relied in  his
    grounds of appeal on a risk from Al-Shabab, that removal  would  be  in
    breach of Articles 2 and 3 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  and  the
    private and family life that he had established in the UK.

 2. The appellant's claim was that he is from the Bajuni clan  which  is  a
    minority clan in Kismayo.  He had arrived in the United Kingdom in 1999
    when he unsuccessfully claimed  asylum  and  was  subsequently  granted
    exceptional leave to remain for four years  leading  to  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain in 2005.

 3. By the time the matter came before the panel, the family life had  come
    to an end.  The panel did not accept the  claimed  clan  membership  or
    that the appellant had established any risk to himself in Mogadishu  or
    elsewhere in Somalia.  His removal would not be contrary to  Article  3
    or in breach of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.   As  to
    the appellant's  private  life,  the  panel  concluded  there  were  no
    exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

 4. The challenge to the panel's determination relates to  its  refusal  to
    grant an adjournment for the production of  an  expert  report  on  the
    appellant's claimed ethnicity.  The  second  grounds  argues  that  the
    panel erred by taking  factors  taken  into  account  in  deciding  the
    ethnicity question that were not put to him.

 5. After reviewing the history of this  matter  including  the  directions
    that had been issued at the case management review, the  reasons  given
    for not adjourning the case prior to the  hearing  and  the  fact  that
    legal aid funding was in place for the instruction of an expert  report
    at the time of the hearing, Mr Harrison sensibly  accepted  that  there
    had been procedural unfairness.  In consequence he considered that  the
    case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. The background is that on 12 December 2013 the appellant was  convicted
    at Aylesbury Crown Court of being concerned in supplying  a  controlled
    class A drug to another for which he was sentenced on 30  January  2013
    to fourteen month's imprisonment.  On 1 March 2013 he was  served  with
    notice informing of his liability to deportation.  The appellant made a
    human rights and asylum claim by way of response.   The  decision  that
    s.32(5) of the 2007 Act applied was made on 22 April 2014.

 7. The chronology of events relevant to the issue  of  adjournment  is  as
    follows.  A case management review was due to take  place  on  11  June
    2014.  On 9 June the appellant's current solicitors wrote to the First-
    tier Tribunal explaining that although they were instructed, due to the
    terms of their contract with the Legal Aid Agency, they were unable  to
    grant legal help or undertake substantive work without establishing the
    means of the appellant's partner.  They had written to  her  but  would
    not be able to confirm the appellant's eligibility for  legal  help  in
    time to prepare for the case management  review  hearing.   They  added
    this:

         "Our preliminary assessment of N's case indicates that his  claimed
         ethnicity is a central issue to his appeal, one which is  currently
         disputed by the Home Office.  Whilst we have yet  to  substantively
         assess this case in accordance with our contract with the Legal Aid
         Agency, an expert report on this matter would assist  the  Tribunal
         in determining this issue.

         In the event that we are have [sic] able to confirm N's eligibility
         for legal aid, we would take steps to source and instruct an expert
         in this matter.  Of course, in the event that we are  not  able  to
         confirm his eligibility, we would not be able to  assist  under  LA
         Legal Aid.

         In view of this, we request an adjournment of  N's  hearing  for  a
         period of six weeks (that is until 21/07/14) to enable us to;

         ...

          1. Confirm eligibility for legal help.

          2. Fully assist N's case.

          3. Instruct a country expert.

          4. Obtain a report in relation to N's nationality.

          5. Consider the content of the report and take instructions  from
             N.

          6. Prepare a  Respondent's  bundle  in  relation  to  the  appeal
             hearing."

 8. The directions that were issued indicated that the  case  would  remain
    listed for hearing on 9 July 2014 but with the added provision "in  the
    event that the  representatives  obtain  public  funding  they  are  at
    liberty to seek further directions."

 9. On 30 June 2014 Duncan Lewis wrote to  the  Upper  Tribunal  confirming
    their client's eligibility for legal aid and  they  had  been  able  to
    fully consider the case and take further instructions.  Several experts
    had been contacted to provide  quotations  for  the  preparation  of  a
    report and they had written to the  Legal  Aid  Agency  to  request  an
    extension of the upper costs limit to cover the costs  of  the  report.
    In their experience the agency  were  taking  three  to  five  days  to
    respond.  The chosen expert would  need  to  attend  the  appellant  in
    detention for which 24 hours' notice would be required  and  a  further
    three to five days to prepare the report.  The process would take  nine
    to thirteen working days.   An  adjournment  until  28  July  2014  was
    requested.  The letter included an  email  from  the  intended  expert,
    Samuel Bekalo confirming amongst other matters the time that  he  would
    need to compile a report.

10. The application was refused by a designated  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in these terms:

         "This appellant has  accumulated  58  convictions  on  30  separate
         occasions since he entered the United Kingdom  illegally  in  1999.
         His asylum claim was refused in 2000.  He has had years with  which
         to obtain evidence as to his claimed ethnicity.   I  note  that  he
         could not name the Bajuni  sub-class  or  the  islands  where  they
         lived.  In the representative's letter of application they referred
         to his "Bajuni" ethnicity, which is a cause for concern.  I do  not
         accept that refusing this late adjournment  request  would  prevent
         the just disposal of this appeal."

11.  The  application  for  adjournment  was  renewed  before  the   panel.
    According  to  the  record  of  proceedings,  Mr  Martin,  counsel  who
    represented the appellant, confirmed that  legal  aid  funding  was  in
    place.  He did not know when the solicitors  had  been  instructed  nor
    when the appellant had been granted legal aid.  My inference  from  the
    record is that the panel noted the correct answers to these two  latter
    points as two weeks and 24 June 2014.  The application was  opposed  by
    the respondent.

12. The panel's reason for refusing the application was  in  the  following
    terms. It had been submitted that an expert would assist the  court  in
    relation to any difficulties the appellant would suffer in  Somalia  by
    virtue of his physical appearance.  Such an  expert  could  comment  in
    addition on his knowledge of the area and his knowledge of Kibajuni and
    Swahili.  The panel observed

         "Mr Martin explained that legal aid had been  granted  on  24  June
         2014 and as at the date of hearing funding for an  expert's  report
         was not in place.  It followed that no  expert  has  in  fact  been
         instructed.  In the circumstances, we were not satisfied that legal
         aid funding would be  available  for  the  purposes  of  an  expert
         report.  Furthermore, we  concur  with  the  reasons  given  on  an
         earlier occasion to refuse the application for  an  adjournment  on
         the grounds that the appellant has had a substantial amount of time
         to obtain evidence as to his claimed ethnicity  and  that  refusing
         his late adjournment request does not prevent the just disposal  of
         his appeal."

13. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  observed
    that it was arguable the expert report could  have  affected  the  core
    finding that the appellant is not from the Kibajuni minority group.

14. In the course of his submissions, Mr Harrison referred to the  Rule  24
    response opposing the appeal.  Given the further information that could
    and should have become available to the Tribunal he believed  the  case
    would have been adjourned.  He acknowledged the core issue was that  of
    ethnicity and despite the inconsistencies in  the  evidence,  the  fact
    remained that a report would have assisted the  appellant's  case.   In
    his view the appellant had been prejudiced and the  appropriate  remedy
    was for the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. For her part Ms Capel explained she had no information from counsel who
    represented the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal but  she  observed
    that he was certainly wrong about whether controlled representation was
    in place.

16. It appears to me that even  if  the  panel  cannot  be  criticised  for
    failing to act on information that was not  before  them  or  had  been
    incorrectly given, I was nevertheless concerned by its adoption of  the
    earlier reasons given for refusing the  adjournment  application.   The
    seriousness of the criminal offending in the  United  Kingdom  did  not
    bear any relevance to the protection issue at stake which it was argued
    required the expert report.

17. Ms Capel explained that were she required to her argument would be  the
    appellant had been deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  and  relied  on  the
    decision by the Upper Tribunal in MM (unfairness; E & R)  Sudan  [2014]
    UKUT 00105 (IAC).  In the event it was unnecessary for her to do so  in
    the light of Mr Harrison's concession.

18. By way of conclusion therefore I find error of law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in refusing to grant the adjournment sought.  I set aside  its
    decision and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to remake  its
    decision before a differently-constituted Tribunal.

19. As this is a protection case, I make an  anonymity  order  pursuant  to
    rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules   2008
    prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to  lead
    members of the public to identify the appellant.





Signed        Date 13 March 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

