
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00903/2014
                                                               DA/01011/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            itthisak chanamklang
                            atthasat chanamklang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Thailand  and  they  are  brothers.   Mr
    Itthisak Chanamklang's date of birth is 4 December  1990  and  that  of
    Atthasat Chanamklang is  14  June  1992.   Both  appellants  were  made
    subject of a deportation order under Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 on 21 May 2014 following criminal convictions against them. On
    6 June 2013 they were convicted of possession  with  intent  to  supply
    cannabis.  On 12 July  2013  they  were  convicted  of  ABH  and  using
    threatening, abusive insulting words or behaviour with intent to  cause
    fear or provocation.  They were sentenced to  20  weeks  for  the  drug
    offence and 60 weeks for the ABH and Public  Order  Act  offence.  Both
    sentences were to  run  concurrently,  making  a  total  of  80  weeks'
    imprisonment.  Both appellants have a history  of  offending.  Atthasat
    has eight convictions relating to eleven  offences.  Itthisak  has  two
    convictions relating to four offences

2.   The  appellants  appealed  against  the  deportation  order  and  their
    appeals were dismissed by Judge Braybrook (following a  hearing  on  20
    January 2015) in two separate decisions promulgated on 27 January 2015.
     Permission to appeal was granted to the appellants  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Blum in a decision of 28 May 2015.  Thus the matter
    came before me.

3.   The appellants were granted ILR when they arrived here in 2000 to  join
    their mother who had arrived here in 1994 as  a  visitor  and  who  had
    since them been granted ILR.

The decision of the FtT in relation to Itthisak Chanamklang

4.   The judge took into account that the appellant  left  Thailand  at  the
    age of 7 and the bulk of his  education  took  place  in  the  UK.  She
    accepted that the appellant would struggle to read or  write  Thai  but
    concluded that he speaks the language and indeed speaks to  his  mother
    in Thai.  The judge took into account the appellant's  assertions  that
    he has no family in Thailand and he accepted that there was  likely  to
    be little, if any, contact between the  appellant  and  his  father  in
    Thailand, given the harsh experiences the appellant (and  his  brother)
    experienced when they were with their father there.

5.   The judge took into  account  that  the  appellants'  mother  had  been
    travelling to and from the UK as a visitor from 1994  and  that  before
    she obtained indefinite leave to remain in 1998, as  a  result  of  her
    marriage to a  British  citizen,  both  appellants  had  been  left  in
    Thailand. The judge concluded that the only credible inference is  that
    they had been left by their mother in the overall care of a "circle  of
    relatives or friends as well as the  appellants'  father".   The  judge
    took into account evidence that the family had returned to Thailand  on
    holiday every one to two years.  The judge concluded that the appellant
    would be returning to a country in which he had been  brought  up  when
    young and to where he had returned on a number of occasions.

6.   The judge found that the appellant had not established  that  he  would
    be without ties including  cultural,  linguistic  and  social  ties  in
    Thailand.  The judge considered the appellants'  relationship  with  Ms
    [P] and Ms [M] but concluded that he had not been in the UK for fifteen
    years could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399.

7.   In relation to this appellant's son (born here on 12 November 2012  and
    who was aged two at the hearing) the Judge considered the OASys  Report
    of 20 February 2014 in which the appellant had indicated that he  hoped
    to return to his parents and in the long-term to live with his partner,
    Ms [P] and  their  young  son.   He  stated  that  he  had  been  in  a
    relationship with her for six years and she was a "stabilising factor".
     In relation to the child the judge took  into  account  correspondence
    from the appellant's solicitors which indicated that the mother of  the
    child was a national of the Philippines and  that  the  appellant  was,
    most of the time, living with his parents.

8.   At the hearing before the First- tier Tribunal Ms [M] stated  that  she
    had been in a relationship with the appellant for two and a half  years
    and that they were expecting their first child together  in  May  2015.
    The case was presented before the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that
    the appellant and Ms [P] had separated following  the  birth  of  their
    son.  The  judge  concluded  that  the   inconsistency   (between   the
    appellant's case as presented at the hearing and what he  had  said  to
    the author of the report) "cast some doubt  on  their  account  of  the
    appellant's relationships."

9.   There was further contradiction, found by the  judge,  in  relation  to
    the  evidence  about  where  the  appellant   was   living   prior   to
    incarceration.  In any event, the judge went on to  conclude  that  the
    child's mother Ms [P] was the  carer  of  her  son  and  therefore  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.  His  case  was
    presented on the basis that there were exceptional circumstances  which
    justified consideration outside of the Rules,  the  exceptional  factor
    identified by the appellant's representative was the very close  family
    unit in the UK and the appellant's  relationship  with  his  son.   The
    judge concluded that the appellant had never  lived  consistently  with
    his son and had been detained for a considerable period of time in  his
    son's life.  The judge  concluded  that  the  appellant's  decision  to
    develop a relationship with Ms [M] and had a further child would  limit
    any further financial support he was able to give to his son.

10.  The judge took into account the strong  family  support  and  emotional
    bonds between the appellant and other family members  but  found  there
    was little to indicate that outside of the family home his  sisters  or
    parents were involved in his wider social circle.  The judge  concluded
    that the relationship with Ms [P] was limited  to  contact  with  their
    son. The judge concluded that although Ms [M]  asserted  that  she  was
    pregnant, the relationship had been entered  into  when  she  was  well
    aware of the appellant's precarious immigration status and  found  that
    they had never cohabitated.  The judge concluded that Ms [M] was living
    with her own family, there was no financial interdependency and she was
    currently in receipt of jobseekers allowance.  The judge did not attach
    significant weight to the relationship which had been disclosed for the
    first time shortly  before  the  hearing.   The  judge  considered  the
    seriousness of the offending concluding that the appellant was an adult
    when he committed the offences.

11.  The judge took into account the OASys Report which noted  "an  emerging
    pattern of antisocial and criminal behaviour is building all  within  a
    relatively short space of time" and noted a tendency to drink in excess
    and resort to violence  and  entrenched  pre-criminal  attitudes.   The
    judge noted that there was no  mention  in  the  OASys  Report  of  the
    appellant's evidence as to what steps he had taken to  ensure  that  he
    does not relapse into excessive alcohol and the daily cannabis  use  in
    which he was involved.  The Judge concluded that  there  was  no  clear
    evidence that the appellant, (once no longer  on  licence),  would  not
    meet up with the same friends as before and that he was living  in  the
    same area.  The  judge  concluded  that  there  was  much  against  the
    appellant in the balancing exercise notwithstanding that  he  had  been
    lawfully resident here since 2000.  He concluded  that  there  were  no
    very compelling reasons which would outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

12.  The judge took into account that the appellant had been here since  the
    age of 7 but concluded that he was not satisfied that  there  would  be
    "very significant obstacles to his integration in  Thailand".   He  was
    not satisfied that the relationship between the appellant  and  Ms  [M]
    was genuine or subsisting and the appellant's son was not a  qualifying
    child for the purposes of paragraph 117C of the 2002 Act.

The Decision of the FtT in relation to Atthasat Chanamklang

13.  In a separate decision the judge made findings which was  very  similar
    to that of his brother.  This appellant had left Thailand  aged  9  but
    had spent the bulk of his education here in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge concluded that he would be returning to a country which  was  not
    alien to him and that through "his mother his cultural  and  linguistic
    ties to Thailand were maintained".  The judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant would be without ties including cultural, linguistic  and
    social ties.

14.  The judge considered the appellant's relationship with Ms  Hanif  under
    paragraph 399 (b), but concluded that the appellant had not been in the
    UK with leave for fifteen years and therefore it did not apply to  him.
    The judge was not  satisfied  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Thailand.   The  judge  considered
    exceptional  circumstances  as   put   forward   by   the   appellant's
    representative (see paragraph 22) which included consideration  of  the
    appellant's relationship with Ms Hanif. The judge noted that there  had
    been hitherto no mention of this relationship for the purposes  of  the
    proceedings.  The judge noted that there was a reference in  the  OASys
    Report to a current girlfriend which the judge assumed  was  Ms  Hanif.
    The judge noted that in oral evidence the appellant had said  that  she
    had been his girlfriend since October 2012 whilst her oral evidence was
    that they had been in a relationship for three years.   In  any  event,
    the judge went on to conclude  that  they  had  never  cohabitated  and
    whilst accepting that the relationship was genuine, "it was of  limited
    duration and  their  future  was  tied  to  factors  such  as  becoming
    financially independent and the need to find employment  and  housing".
    The judge went on to find that their plans for actual cohabitation were
    taken at a time when both parties were well aware  of  the  appellant's
    precarious immigration status.  The judge accepted that Ms Hanif was  a
    British citizen who would find particular  difficulties  in  moving  to
    Thailand given her family and work commitments in the UK but overall he
    did not consider  that  he  could  give  the  relationship  significant
    weight.

15.  The judge took into account the judge's sentencing comments, but  noted
    that the offences were committed when the appellant was an adult.   The
    judge noted the OASys Report for this appellant disclosed that he had a
    limited employment record and that he will turn to illegal  sources  of
    income when he has limited sources of income and that there was a  risk
    that he would return to mixing with negative associates and socialising
    in high  risk  areas.   The  judge  concluded  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

Error of Law

16.  The judge applied the wrong Immigration Rules in  respect  of  both  of
    the appellants. Neither of  whom  submitted  any  further  evidence  in
    accordance with the directions of the UT and I  gave  the  parties  the
    opportunity,  in  the  light  of  the  clear  error  of  law,  to  make
    submissions in relation to the application of the  correct  version  of
    the Immigration Rules. There are, in my view,  lawful  and  sustainable
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal (which  were  not  the
    subject of challenge in any event). I considered whether  the  decision
    could be maintained in the light of the submissions I heard or  whether
    this was not possible in the light of the error.  Having heard  lengthy
    submissions I decided to set aside  the  decision  because  it  is  not
    possible to conclude with certainty that the judge would  have  reached
    the same conclusion had she applied the correct version of the Rules. I
    heard submissions with a view to remaking the decision myself.  In  the
    light of the lack of further evidence and sustainable findings of  fact
    made by the First-tier Tribunal, I could see no merit in remitting  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal  or  adjourning  the  matter.  Indeed
    there was no request made by either party for me to do  so.  The  basis
    for the remaking of the decision are the findings of fact made by Judge
    Braybrook.  However, it is clear from the documentation that was before
    the First-tier Tribunal that Itthisak's son is a  British  citizen  and
    there is now a second child in the picture whose circumstances must  be
    considered.  There is no evidence relating to his  interests,  but  his
    existence and nationality is not in dispute.

17.  The appellants' deportations are conducive to the public  good  because
    they have been convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at
    least twelve months (see paragraph 398 (b) of the Immigration Rules).

18.  I will  deal  with  Itthisak  first  of  all.  He  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with two British citizen children. The issue is
    whether it is unduly harsh for the children to  live  in  Thailand  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain  here  without  the
    appellant (399 (ii) (a) and (b) of the Rules). I find that it would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the appellant's  son  to  live  in  Thailand.  I
    conclude that  the  appellant  has  not  established,  considering  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the findings  made  by  the
    judge, that it would be unduly harsh for his son to remain  in  the  UK
    without him.

19.  There is tension between the opinion of the Upper Tribunal  in  regards
    to unduly harsh. In KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh)  [2015]  UKUT  543
    the UT held that  the  words  "unduly  harsh"  do  import  a  balancing
    exercise that requires  consideration  of  the  statutory  presumptions
    introduced by the Immigration Act  2014.  In  MAB  (para  399;  "unduly
    harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 435 the  UT  decided  that  the  words  "unduly
    harsh" do not import or require any kind of balancing exercise and that
    the statutory human rights presumptions.  In this case the  appellant's
    son is young and lives with his mother.  He  does  not  live  with  the
    appellant and  the  appellant  and  his  mother  are  no  longer  in  a
    relationship. The appellant has spent  a  considerable  period  of  the
    child's life in custody. There is a history of offending. The appellant
    has been convicted of serious offences and deportation is in the public
    interest.  It is uncontroversial that the best interests of  the  child
    are to remain here  in  the  UK  with  his  father  here  in  order  to
    facilitate regular contact, but this does not establish unduly harsh in
    either the MAB or KMO sense.

20.  Although not accepted by the First -tier Tribunal,  Ms  [M]  has  since
    that hearing given birth to the appellant's child and I find  that  the
    relationship is genuine  and  subsisting.  The  child  and  mother  are
    British citizens. By any account this relationship was formed at a time
    when the appellant's status was precarious albeit lawful. It was formed
    when the appellant was subject to a deportation order and therefore the
    appellant cannot benefit from paragraph 399(b).

21.  There has been no further evidence submitted  relating  to  the  child.
    There is no evidence  before  me  that  the  difficulties  involved  in
    relocating to Thailand would be such as to amount to  unduly  harsh  in
    the context of the Rules.  In the light of the age  of  the  child  and
    dependency on both parents, whilst it is likely to be unduly harsh  for
    her to remain in the UK without her father, as a  result  of  her  very
    young age, the evidence does not establish  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the child and mother to relocate to Thailand where they
    could live together with the appellant.  I  appreciate  that  both  are
    British citizens and that Ms [M] has family here, but the child is very
    young and there is no evidence before me that would lead me to conclude
    that relocation would be  unduly  harsh  following  an  MAB  or  a  KMO
    assessment.

22.   Neither  party  addressed  me  in  oral  submissions  in  relation  to
    paragraph 339A. The appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK most
    of his life and the starting point has to be in  my  view  that  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  Judge Braybrook did  not
    properly  consider  this.   However,   in   relation   to   399A,   the
    determinative  issue  is  whether  there  would  be  very   significant
    obstacles to his integration into Thailand which the  Judge  ultimately
    properly considered and concluded that there were none.  I  agree  with
    Judge Braybrook.

23.  The appellant does not satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore he is only able to succeed in his appeal if  he  is
    able to establish that there are very compelling circumstances over and
    above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A.  I asked Mr  Layne  to
    identify compelling circumstances.  He relied on matters that have been
    considered within the assessment under the Immigration Rules.   Article
    8 must be considered through the lens of paragraphs 117(B) and  (C)  of
    the 2002 Act. Significant weight that should be attached to the  public
    interest in cases of deportation.  The deportation of the appellant  is
    in the public interest and the exceptions in section 117 C (4) and  (5)
    do not apply to the appellant in this case. This appellant's appeal  is
    dismissed under the Rules.

24.  In respect of Mr Itthisak Chanamklang he does  not  have  any  children
    here but relies on his relationship with Ms Hanif which has been  found
    to be genuine and subsisting.  In terms of whether or  not  deportation
    would be unduly harsh in the context  of  the  Rules,  the  judge  made
    lawful and sustainable findings about the nature  and  quality  of  the
    relationship. In light of these, any unduly  harsh  assessment  on  any
    basis, would in  my  view  inevitably  result  in  a  decision  in  the
    respondent's favour. It could not by any account be  considered  unduly
    harsh (within the context of the Rules following on from  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal) for the appellant o be deported leaving  Ms
    Hanif here to remain without him.  It is also the case that it  is  not
    entirely clear from the evidence whether or not this  relationship  was
    started  at  a  time  when  the  appellant's  immigration  status   was
    precarious because it followed the making  of  the  deportation  order.
    There was inconsistency in the evidence on this issue. His case was not
    advanced before  me  under  399A,  but  I  conclude  that  he  has  not
    established that there are significant obstacles to integration  and  I
    rely on the findings made by Judge Braybrook. In  terms  of  compelling
    circumstances this appellant like his brother was unable  to  establish
    that these existed in the context of the Rules.  His  Article  8  claim
    rests primarily with his relationship  with  Ms  Hanif  and  his  wider
    family.   He  has  committed  a  serious  offence  and   has   previous
    convictions. He does not fall within exception in 117C (4) and (5). His
    appeal falls to be dismissed under the Rules in the absence of Mr Layne
    identifying compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
    the Rules which have  been  considered.  In  respect  of  both  of  the
    appellants, I have had regard to the length of time that they have been
    here and that they came to the UK as children, but the trigger offences
    were committed at a time when they were adults. I have  had  regard  to
    the judgement in Akpinar,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v  The  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2014] EWCA Civ 937.

25.  The appellants' appeals are dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 12 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

