

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00075/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 2nd May 2014                               |On 27th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                             ALEXEY VYLEGZHANIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr R Jeserum, counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed his appeal against a decision  dated  7th  January  2013  to
      refuse to revoke a deportation order made on 18th  September  2012  in
      accordance with s32(5) UK Borders Act 2007.


   2. I granted permission to appeal on the following grounds:

                  It  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   panel
                  incorrectly undertook independent research  of  their  own
                  volition and failed to place  such  considerations  before
                  the   parties   to   enable    submissions    (see    [55]
                  determination]). Although there are  disputes  as  to  the
                  weight to  be  placed  upon  the  evidence  given  by  the
                  appellant it appears unlikely that these would, in the end
                  make much difference  to  the  outcome  if  the  issue  of
                  persecution  as  a  gay  man  returning  to  Russia   were
                  correctly and adequately addressed. There is  no  apparent
                  dispute but that the appellant is gay and would, on return
                  to Russia seek to live his life openly as a  gay  man.  It
                  seems of  little  relevance  that  the  appellant  is  not
                  credible in terms of his personal evidence as to  his  own
                  history given the basic question at issue. It is  arguable
                  that prosecution and fines for public acts may  amount  to
                  persecution; it is  arguable  that  there  is  a  lack  of
                  reasoning for such findings ([56]).



   3. It was accepted by the respondent and the First-tier Tribunal that the
      appellant is a gay man but that his claimed experiences in Russia  and
      whether he had been persecuted in Russia was challenged.


   4. In paragraph 55 of the First-tier Tribunal  determination  the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge states

                  "We consider that, viewed objectively,  the  situation  in
                  Russia is not a happy one for men and women  who  wish  to
                  live an openly gay lifestyle, but  we  would  characterise
                  this as (quoting the US State Department Report) "societal
                  stigma and discrimination" rather than persecution.  There
                  is clearly some risk of attack from skinheads  and  others
                  but we do not consider that the risk from  the  state  can
                  amount to persecution.  We  are  not  convinced  that  the
                  evidence suggests (whatever Mr  Chenciner's  view  to  the
                  contrary) that the risk is such that it amounts to a  well
                  founded fear of persecution, either by the  state  or  non
                  state actors. However even if there is a risk of  physical
                  attack by non state actors, we consider that the  evidence
                  suggests that there would be adequate protection.  Clearly
                  there  is  a  problem  with  police  corruption  but   the
                  background materials suggest that  there  is  governmental
                  will to address this, and there have been prosecutions  of
                  corrupt police. Furthermore there have  been  prosecutions
                  of homophobic attacks. Although Mr Chenciner  argues  that
                  it is hard to find evidence against attackers, we  do  not
                  consider that this indicates a general lack of protection.
                  We note that Mr Chenciner believes that the police do  not
                  provide sufficient protection, but his  report  relies  on
                  generalised corruption rather than (at 2.5.1 for  example)
                  explaining  satisfactorily  why  there  is   a   lack   of
                  sufficient protection. The addendum  report  (at  item  3)
                  argues that the law in  the  Russian  Federation  Criminal
                  Code "only deals with victims after the event if they have
                  been seriously injured or killed, which is  too  late".  I
                  have read the code, and consider this analysis  is  simply
                  wrong. It plainly does cover attacks which  do  not  cause
                  injury. We consider that the nature of any crime  is  that
                  it cannot be prosecuted until it has been committed. There
                  is nothing in the code, that I could find, about the  need
                  for independent witnesses: this appears to be no more than
                  Mr  Chenciner's  unexplained  opinion,  and  the  original
                  report at 2.5.1 would not justify a conclusion  that  such
                  crimes would not be prosecuted. We attach little weight to
                  this assertion and accept that whatever  the  shortcomings
                  of law enforcement  in  Russia  there  is  sufficiency  of
                  protection."


   5. Mr Jeserum asserted that it was not open to a judge (or panel) to look
      at the source material relied upon by an expert without notifying  the
      parties that he/they were intending to do this. I do not agree. If  an
      expert relies upon particular sources for his opinion it is right  and
      reasonable for a judge/panel  to  be  able  to  access  those  reports
      himself and this would usually be through the source  footnotes  given
      by the expert in his/her report - as here.  There  was  nothing  wrong
      with the judge following the source and reading the  original  reports
      from that source, as here. A difficulty is that his view of  the  code
      appears to be at variance to that opined by  the  expert.  It  is  not
      clear whether the judge is an expert in  Russian  criminal  law  -  or
      indeed whether Mr Chenciner is. Interpretation of a statute, may  call
      for more knowledge than mere reading of it. A further issue raised  is
      that the judge refers to having read the Criminal Code; it is  nowhere
      apparent that the non legal member also read  the  Code  and  yet  the
      determination is a joint determination. This would be an error of  law
      but the issue is whether and to what extent it is such as  to  require
      the setting aside of the determination to be remade.

   6. Other matters were raised by Mr Jeserum in relation to the findings as
      to the appellant's past claims, in particular that the panel failed to
      approach the analysis of past events in  the  context  of  the  expert
      report, a failure to identify whether they accept that the appellant's
      claims of past serious harm occurred or  not  and  that  although  the
      relevant paragraphs of HJ (Iran) were set out  in  the  determination,
      the panel failed to apply the principles properly.

   7. The determination has to be read as a whole.  It  is  clear  in  their
      setting out of the evidence  before  them  and  the  analysis  of  the
      appellant's account that there were  numerous  matters  which  led  to
      their conclusion that they did not accept that the claims made by  the
      appellant were credible. There is reference throughout  that  analysis
      to Mr Chenciner's report. It is inconceivable that they did  not  bear
      fully in mind the overall views of Mr Chenciner  when  reaching  their
      conclusions on claimed past events.

   8. The assessment of the claim under the  Refugee  Convention  considered
      those findings and specifically took account of Mr Chenciner's report.
      Although it is a mistake for only one member  of  the  panel  to  view
      sourced material I am satisfied that  this  does  not  impact  on  the
      adequacy of the overall findings. Removal of the comments by the judge
      as to the Criminal Code does not detract from the  criticisms  of  the
      report and its generality which stand irrespective of those  comments.
      It is clear that this view of the code did not impact on  the  panel's
      approach to the report as a whole or its relevance to the evidence.

   9. In so far as HJ (Iran) is concerned, the  panel  applied  the  correct
      principles. They accepted that the appellant was a gay  man  and  made
      their findings,  based  upon  the  evidence  before  them.  It  is  no
      contradiction to refer to the appellant's evidence that  he  had  been
      able to live a  reasonably  openly  gay  lifestyle  and  yet  to  have
      dismissed the claim made by  the  appellant  of  assaults,  given  the
      evidence.

    10. Accordingly I am satisfied that there is no error of law such as to
        merit the setting aside of the decision.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel stands namely the  appeal
is dismissed.



    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and  no
    request for anonymity was made to me..









                                    Date 23rd May 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
