
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00380/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 September 2014                             |On 12 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          Damion Anthony Rose green
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Williams, Andrew Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Damion Anthony Rose Green, was born on  6  October  1980
    and is a citizen of Jamaica.  The appellant entered the United  Kingdom
    on a six month visit visa but did not return to Jamaica on  the  expiry
    of that visa.  In  May  2003,  he  was  convicted  of  being  knowingly
    involved in the supply/production of class A drugs.  He  was  sentenced
    to three years'  imprisonment  and  recommended  for  deportation.   He
    appealed against the subsequent decision to deport him and  his  appeal
    was dismissed in December 2004. Subsequently, the  appellant  absconded
    but, on 25 April 2013, he made an application to revoke the deportation
    order.  A decision not to revoke the order was made by  the  respondent
    on 20 February 2014.  The appellant appealed against that  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grimshaw),  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 June 2014 dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There were three  grounds  of  appeal.   First,  the  determination  is
    challenged on the basis that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child in accordance with Section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. Secondly, the grounds assert that
    the judge carried out a flawed assessment  of  proportionality,  having
    little or no regard to the fact the appellant had not reoffended  since
    the index offence.  Thirdly, the grounds assert that the  judge  failed
    properly to carry out an assessment of paragraph  399  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) by failing to identify exceptional factors in the  appellant's
    case.

 3. Granting permission, Judge Campbell wrote:

    This ground is arguable.  As is clear from recent case law including AJ
    (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 and Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74  an  assessment
    of best interests of a child will form part of the  overall  assessment
    of proportionality in the Article 8  context.   The  determination  has
    been carefully prepared but contains no mention of the Section 55  duty
    and the judge's focus, in what was an  appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse a deportation order ..., appears to have been on  the  appellant
    and his partner.  At  paragraph  26,  the  judge  may  well  have  been
    entitled to find as a fact there were no barriers  to  the  appellant's
    partner carrying out her role as a primary carer of their son  but  the
    determination  carries  no  particular  consideration  of  the  child's
    circumstances or where his best interests might lie.

    Judge Grimshaw  has  prepared  a  well-structured  determination  which
    considers all the relevant  issues.   She  recorded  at  [9]  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraphs 398 and 399  of
    the Immigration Rules because his son (who is a British citizen, as  is
    his partner) "could be cared for by his mother in this  country."   The
    judge  went  on  to  consider  [29]  whether  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances in the appellant's case which would enable him to succeed
    under the Rules notwithstanding his failure to meet the requirements of
    paragraphs 399, 398 and 399.  She acknowledged [36] that the  appellant
    was a good father and a loyal partner to the child's mother.   She  had
    no doubt that the appellant's  expulsion  would  cause  disruption  and
    suffering to the  partner  and  their  child  [33].  She  recorded  the
    evidence in cross-examination of the witnesses (the appellant  and  his
    partner) as to the "devastation" that would be caused by  the  loss  of
    the appellant from the lives of Miss Wilson and their child.   Her  use
    of that expression at [31] was no more than a recording of the language
    used by the witnesses; it does not represent a  finding  by  the  judge
    herself as to the extent of disruption to the family  which  the  judge
    herself found likely to occur as result of the appellant's deportation.
     At [26], the judge wrote:

    In other words it is plain that in the event of the appellant's removal
    to Jamaica Miss Wilson is in a position to  ensure  the  child's  basic
    needs for nutrition, adequate clothing  and  hygiene  are  met  and  to
    supervise all other aspects of his welfare.  I  find  as  a  fact  that
    there are no barriers to her carrying out that role as primary carer.

 4. In the context of the particular facts of  this  appeal,  I  considered
    that is an adequate assessment of the best interests of the child.   It
    is true that the judge has not mentioned Section  55  specifically  but
    that is not of consequence lack of care on her part;  indeed,  she  has
    properly analysed the evidence and made appropriate findings [26].

 5. As regards any exceptional circumstances or an assessment  outside  the
    Immigration Rules of Article 8 ECHR, I find  that  the  judge  has  not
    erred in law.  To be exceptional, the circumstances  of  the  appellant
    would have to fall outside the ambit of the Rules.  They did not.   The
    judge  found  that  there  was  nothing   exceptional   regarding   the
    relationship of the appellant, Miss Wilson  and  their  child  and  the
    Rules made specific provision for the deportation of an individual such
    as the appellant where another family  member  remains  in  the  United
    Kingdom and is able to care for any child.   Judge  Grimshaw  made  the
    very clear finding that Miss Wilson would be able and willing  to  care
    for the child should the appellant be deported.   It  is  not  for  the
    Tribunal to seek to rewrite the Immigration Rules where  their  meaning
    and import is  entirely  clear  and  where  the  circumstances  of  any
    particular appellant  are  not  so  unusual  as  to  fall  outside  the
    circumstances contemplated by the Rules.  In other  words,  exceptional
    circumstances have to consist of  something  more  than  a  failure  to
    comply with the provisions of the Rules.

 6. The judge was right to carry out a proportionality assessment in  order
    to  determine   whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.   Her
    analysis in that regard is thorough and supported by clear  and  cogent
    reasoning.  In particular, there is no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that, in order to provide for the welfare (or best  interests)  of  the
    child, it was necessary for the  appellant  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in addition to Miss Wilson.  It was upon that  issue  that  the
    appeal turned and I can  identify  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    approach or analysis.

 7. I am also satisfied that the judge considered all the relevant evidence
    in reaching her decision.  She was not bound, for example, to allow the
    appeal simply because the child's teacher expressed the  view  that  it
    would be "extremely detrimental both emotionally and socially"  to  the
    child if the  appellant  were  deported.   The  judge  considered  that
    evidence in the context of all  the  evidence  and  her  findings  were
    clearly available to her.  Likewise,  the  judge  was  aware  that  the
    appellant had not reoffended, but  she  properly  attached  significant
    weight to  the  public  interest  concerned  with  the  removal  of  an
    individual  who  had  committed  serious   drugs   offences   and   had
    subsequently absconded.

 8. Finally, I find that the judge did not err in law by  failing  to  seek
    the opinions of the child himself who is only 7 years old.   There  was
    adequate evidence before the judge regarding the child's views and  his
    circumstances to enable her to reach a decision.

 9. In the circumstances, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
