
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00306/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 March 2020                              |On 27 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE JOHNSON
                  sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                LAUMA VANKOVA
                        (NO Anonymity decision made)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both judges have contributed to this decision.

 2. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bristow that the removal of Ms Vankova from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach her rights under the EU Treaties because it  would
    not be in her children's best interests. As  a  result,  Judge  Bristow
    allowed Ms Vankova's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    that she should be deported.

The facts

 3. Ms Vankova is a national of Latvia. She is 31. She has  twin  boys  who
    are 15 and who speak English and some Latvian. The family moved to  the
    UK in 2008 when the twins were almost  4.  Between  2010  and  2013  Ms
    Vankova conspired to breach  United  Kingdom  immigration  law  and  to
    acquire, use or possess criminal property. She was convicted  of  those
    offences  and  was  sentenced  to  a  total  sentence   of   6   years'
    imprisonment. In his sentencing remarks in May 2016, the Judge  (having
    described how Ms Vankova's co-defendants were purporting to  help  find
    work for poorly paid workers) said:

         "You set up a plan together to recruit some of your most vulnerable
         female workers as brides for hire and to introduce them to a  wider
         conspiracy that was in contact with people  desperate  to  come  to
         this country. One woman who owed  you  money  was  threatened  with
         violence if she didn't  go  through  with  a  wedding...  There  is
         something  careful  and  calculated  in  the  way   you   exploited
         vulnerable people who worked for you...

         ... You started with bank accounts set up with a view  to  defraud.
         You facilitated multiple account openings,  perhaps  with  the  co-
         operation of some nominees... [These accounts] were used to receive
         criminal money..."

 4. Ms Vankova's mother, Mrs Vankova, is 51. She has lived in the UK  since
    2012. When Ms Vankova was sent to prison, her  children  went  to  live
    with Mrs Vankova, with whom they have a close  relationship.  They  are
    now once again living with  Ms  Vankova  who  has  been  released  from
    custody on licence.

 5. On 9 May 2019 the Secretary of State  wrote  to  Ms  Vankova  and  gave
    reasons for a decision that her deportation was justified on grounds of
    public policy in accordance with regulation 23(6)(b) of the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 and that it was proportionate
    to deport her in accordance with the principles  of  regulations  27(5)
    and (6).

 6. Ms Vankova appealed against  that  decision  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision breached her rights  under  the  EU  Treaties  in  respect  of
    residence in the UK. She initially contended that the decision was also
    incompatible with Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
    but in the event she did not pursue that aspect of her appeal.

Legal framework

 7. Mr Vankova is a citizen of an EEA  country.  She  has  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years. She has therefore
    acquired a right of permanent residence in the UK - see  regulation  15
    of the 2016 Regulations. Regulation 23(6)(b) permits the  Secretary  of
    State to restrict a right of permanent residence and to  remove  a  EEA
    national from the UK on "serious grounds of public  policy  and  public
    security".  Any  such  decision  must  be  taken  in  accordance   with
    regulation 27. That states:

         "27  Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security
             and public health


         (1)  In  this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.


         ...


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security.


         ...


         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             ...


             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.


         ...


         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).


 8.  Paragraph  7  of  schedule  1  to  the  Regulations  states  that  the
    fundamental interests of society (cf regulation 27(5)(c)) include:

         "(a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of  the  immigration
             laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness  of  the
             immigration control system....


         ...


         (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member  of  an
             EEA national  with  a  conviction...  and  maintaining  public
             confidence in the ability of the relevant authorities to  take
             such action;


         ...


         (i)  protecting the rights and  freedoms  of  others,  particularly
             from exploitation and trafficking;






         (j)  protecting the public;






         (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing
             so entails refusing a child admission to the  United  Kingdom,
             or otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);


         ..."


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number of findings relevant to the
    application of the Regulations:

      a) Ms Vankova's conduct engaged the fundamental interests of  society,
         including preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of  immigration
         laws, and  maintaining  the  integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the
         immigration  control  system;  removing  an  EEA  national  with  a
         conviction; maintaining public confidence in  the  ability  of  the
         relevant authorities to take such action; tackling offences  likely
         to cause harm to society where an immediate or direct victim may be
         difficult to identify but where there is wider societal harm  (such
         as crime with a cross-border dimension; protecting the  rights  and
         freedoms of others, particularly from exploitation and trafficking;
         and protecting the public).


      b) Ms Vankova's  assertion  that  she  pleaded  guilty  at  the  first
         available opportunity was entirely rejected. She had  not  accepted
         full responsibility for her behaviour.


      c) Ms Vankova presented a medium risk to the public  of  serious  harm
         "via emotional and psychological harm" and a medium risk  to  known
         adults  of  serious  harm.  She  has,  however,  been  assessed  as
         presenting a low risk of re-offending.


      d) Ms Vankova had not successfully reformed or rehabilitated.


10. In the light of these findings Judge  Bristow  did  not  consider  that
    removal would have a disproportionate effect on Ms Vankova. He  pointed
    out that there was no question of Ms Vankova's children being  forcibly
    removed from the United Kingdom - that would be a matter of choice.  He
    then said:

         "I accept that it would be something of a compelled choice  however
         in circumstances where the Appellant  wishes  that  [her  children]
         live with her and when the Respondent  accepts  that  it  would  be
         unduly harsh on them to remain in the  UK  without  her.  Mr  Simon
         Dermody states that "forced relocation" would be "nothing short  of
         a developmental catastrophe for both boys"...  I  have  found  that
         force of circumstances would mean [the children] would go with  the
         Appellant to Latvia  if  she  were  removed.  I  accept,  in  those
         circumstances, Mr Simon Dermody's opinion that relocation would  be
         a developmental catastrophe for [them].


         I find that it would not be in [the children's] best  interests  to
         relocate to Latvia with the Appellant. It  is  not  in  their  best
         interests to leave the UK  at  this  time.  It  is  in  their  best
         interests to live with the Appellant and to live in  the  UK.  This
         can only be achieved if the Appellant lives with [them] in the UK.


         The removal of the Appellant would be contrary to [the  children's]
         best  interests.  Consequently,   the   decision   would   have   a
         disproportionate effect on them. For that reason, the decision does
         not comply with the principle of proportionality as is required  by
         the 2016 Regulations.


         The decision breaches the Appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties
         in respect of entry to or residence in the UK."


The Secretary of State's appeal

11. The Secretary of State appeals on the ground that there are  inadequate
    reasons for the finding that the deportation of Ms  Vankova  to  Latvia
    would not be proportionate  and  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
    material matters, particularly the public interest in deportation.  The
    First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal, stating:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has failed to  consider  the  public
         interest  in  deportation  when  assessing   proportionality.   The
         relevant finding is at [54] of  the  Judge's  decision  and  it  is
         apparent from  this  paragraph  that  the  finding  is  made  as  a
         consequence of the Judge's view that removal of the appellant would
         not be in the best interests of her children. It is  arguable  that
         there is nothing in this paragraph or those preceding  it  to  show
         that the Judge  has  conducted  the  balancing  exercise  necessary
         before determining proportionality. Alternatively, it  is  arguable
         that the Judge has given inadequate reasons to  enable  the  losing
         party to understand why he has resolved this balancing exercise  in
         the appellant's favour."


12. We heard oral argument from Mr Tan on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    and Mr Bandegani on behalf of Ms Vankova. We are grateful to  both  for
    their oral and written submissions.

13. Neither party had addressed the principle of proportionality under  the
    EEA regulations in their submissions. We granted permission for further
    written submissions on the topic. Mr Bandegani provided helpful further
    written submissions which we have taken into account. Despite  granting
    an extension of time to 27.3.20 for the Secretary  of  State  to  lodge
    further submissions, no such further submissions had been  received  by
    the date of the making of this decision.



The principle of proportionality under the EEA Regulations

14. Regulation 27(3) prevents the removal of an EEA national with  a  right
    of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on serious grounds of
    public policy and public security. If that test is  not  met  then  the
    person may not be removed. There is, at that stage, no  proportionality
    assessment. It is only if there are serious grounds  of  public  policy
    and public security that it is then necessary to address the additional
    requirements imposed by regulation 27(5): "it must  also  be  taken  in
    accordance with the following principles", and see MC (Essa  principles
    recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) at [29b].  The  first  of  those
    additional requirements is that  the  decision  must  comply  with  the
    "principle of proportionality" - see regulation 27(5)(a).

15. The "principle of  proportionality"  to  which  reference  is  made  in
    regulation 27(5)(a) is taken from  Article  27(2)  of  the  Freedom  of
    Movement Directive. It derives from a general principle of EU law  that
    "the content and  form  of  Union  action  shall  not  exceed  what  is
    necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties" - see article 5(4)
    of the Treaty on European Union. That principle is  separate  from  the
    test of proportionality under the European Convention on Human  Rights,
    as distilled in Bank Mellat v Her Majesty's Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC
    39; [2014] AC  700  per  Lord  Reed  JSC  at  [74].  The  principle  of
    proportionality under EU law requires consideration of two questions  -
    see R v Lumsdon v Legal Services Board [2015] UKSC 41;  [2016]  AC  697
    per Lord Reed and Lord Toulson JJSC at [33]:

         "...  first,  whether  the  measure  in  question  is  suitable  or
         appropriate to achieve the objective pursued; and secondly, whether
         the measure is necessary to achieve that objective, or  whether  it
         could be attained by a less onerous method."


16. The approach to be taken in assessing whether  removing  a  fundamental
    freedom  under   the   Treaties   accords   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality was explained thus by Lord Toulson at [55]-[56]:

         "55. ...the court must determine whether the measure is suitable to
         achieve the legitimate aim in question,  and  must  then  determine
         whether it is no more onerous than is required to achieve that aim,
         if there is a choice of equally effective  measures.  The  position
         was summarised by Advocate-General Sharpston  at  para  89  of  her
         opinion in Commission of the  European  Communities  v  Kingdom  of
         Spain (Case C-400/08) [2011] ECR I-1915, a case concerned with  the
         right of establishment:


             'Whilst it is true that a member state seeking  to  justify  a
             restriction on a fundamental  Treaty  freedom  must  establish
             both its appropriateness and its proportionality, that  cannot
             mean, as regards appropriateness, that the member  state  must
             establish that the restriction is the most appropriate of  all
             possible measures to ensure achievement of  the  aim  pursued,
             but simply that it is not inappropriate for that  purpose.  As
             regards proportionality, however, it is necessary to establish
             that no other measures could have been equally  effective  but
             less restrictive of the freedom in question.'


         56.  The justification for the restriction tends to be examined  in
         detail,  although  much  may  depend  upon  the   nature   of   the
         justification, and the extent to  which  it  requires  evidence  to
         support it. For example, justifications based on moral or political
         considerations may not be capable of being established by evidence.
         The same may be true of justifications based  on  intuitive  common
         sense..."


17. Thus, the principle of proportionality under the Treaties does  not  in
    all circumstances incorporate the proportionality balance that  is  the
    fourth of the Bank Mellat criteria  -  namely  whether  "balancing  the
    severity of the measure's effects on the rights of the persons to  whom
    it applies against the importance of the objective, to the extent  that
    the measure will contribute to its achievement,  the  former  outweighs
    the latter."

18. However, in this  particular  context  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union has treated the principle of  proportionality  under  EU
    law in a similar way as the test for proportionality under Article 8 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights - see Orfanopoulos and others v
    Land Baden-W�rtenberg C482/01 [2005] 1 CMLR 18 at [95]-[99]:

         "95. ... the examination on a case-by-case basis  by  the  national
         authorities of whether there is  personal  conduct  constituting  a
         present threat  to  the  requirements  of  public  policy  and,  if
         necessary, of where lies the fair balance  between  the  legitimate
         interests in issue must be made  in  compliance  with  the  general
         principles of Community law.


         96.  It is for  the  competent  national  authority  to  take  into
         account, in its assessment of where lies the fair  balance  between
         the legitimate interests in issue, the particular legal position of
         persons subject to Community law and of the fundamental  nature  of
         the principle of the free movement of persons...


         97.  Moreover, it is necessary to take into account the fundamental
         rights whose  observance  the  Court  ensures.  Reasons  of  public
         interest may be invoked to justify  a  national  measure  which  is
         likely to obstruct the exercise of  the  freedom  of  movement  for
         workers only if the measure  in  question  takes  account  of  such
         rights...


         98.  It must be noted, in that  context,  that  the  importance  of
         ensuring the protection of the family life of  Community  nationals
         in order to eliminate obstacles to the exercise of the  fundamental
         freedoms  guaranteed  by  the  Treaty  has  been  recognised  under
         Community law. It is clear that the removal of a  person  from  the
         country where close members of his family are living may amount  to
         an infringement  of  the  right  to  respect  for  family  life  as
         guaranteed by Article 8 of the ECHR, which is among the fundamental
         rights, which, according  to  the  Court's  settled  case-law,  are
         protected in Community law...


         99.   Finally,  the  necessity  of  observing  the   principle   of
         proportionality  must  be  emphasised.  To   assess   whether   the
         interference envisaged  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
         pursued, in this instance the protection of public policy,  account
         must be taken, particularly, of the nature and seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the  person  concerned,  the  length  of  his
         residence in the host Member State, the period  which  has  elapsed
         since the commission of the offence, the  family  circumstances  of
         the person concerned and the seriousness of the difficulties  which
         the spouse and any of their children risk facing in the country  of
         origin of the person concerned (see, as regards Article  8  of  the
         ECHR, Boultif v Switzerland (54273/00) [2001] ECHR  493,  paragraph
         48)."


19.  Aside  from  complying  with  the  principle  of  proportionality,   a
    regulation 27 decision may only be made  after  having  regard  to  the
    other factors set out in regulation 27(5) and (6).  These  include,  on
    the one hand, the question of whether the person represents a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental  interests  of   society,   and,   on   the   other   hand,
    considerations such as the family of the person. Although expressed  in
    the Regulation as separate requirements, the Upper  Tribunal  has  held
    that  they  fall  for  assessment  when  addressing  the  principle  of
    proportionality - MC at [29b] and [29f]. What is required,  both  under
    the Directive and the 2016  Regulations  is  a  "wide-ranging  holistic
    assessment" - see MC at [29j].

20. It  is,  moreover,  necessary  for  a  decision  maker,  as  a  primary
    consideration, to take account of the best interests of any child - see
    ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC
    4; [2011] 2 AC 166   per  Lady  Hale  JSC  at  [24].  It  is  now  well
    established what this means in practise. It  does  not  mean  that  the
    bests interests of a child should be the sole or  necessarily  decisive
    consideration. Rather, it means that "they must  be  considered  first"
    albeit they could then "be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other
    considerations" - see ZH per Lady Hale at [33].

Discussion and decision

21. The First-tier Tribunal sought to address the question of  whether  the
    removal  of  Ms  Vankova  was  compatible   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality. It did not, however, answer that question by reference
    to the two questions identified in Lumsdon, namely whether her  removal
    was suitable or appropriate  to  achieve  the  objective  pursued,  and
    whether it was necessary to  achieve  that  objective  or  whether  the
    objective could be achieved by a less onerous method. If it had done so
    then it would have been bound, on the  findings  it  made,  to  resolve
    those questions in the Secretary of State's favour.

22. The objective that was here being pursued by the Secretary of State was
    the prevention of unlawful immigration and  abuse  of  the  immigration
    laws, and the maintenance of the integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the
    immigration control system. The First-tier Tribunal's finding  that  Ms
    Vankova's  "personal  conduct  represented  a  genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society" and that she was  not  reformed  or  rehabilitated  inevitably
    meant that her removal  was  suitable  or  appropriate  to  pursue  the
    objective pursued and that it was necessary to remove  her  to  achieve
    that objective - it could not be achieved by a less onerous method.

23. So, in that narrow sense, the Secretary of  State's  decision  did  not
    offend the principle of proportionality.

24. As explained above, however, that is not an end to the analysis that is
    required.  It  is  necessary  to  undertake  a  "wide-ranging  holistic
    assessment" of the factors identified in regulation  27,  and  to  have
    regard, as a  primary  consideration,  to  the  best  interests  of  Ms
    Vankova's children. This includes assessing whether a fair balance  has
    been struck in seeking to protect public policy, having regard  to  all
    relevant factors including on the one hand the nature  and  seriousness
    of the criminal offences, and on the other, the difficulties  that  the
    children would risk in their country of origin.

25. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that her children's  bests  interests
    were to remain with Ms Vankova in the United Kingdom.  It  allowed  the
    appeal on this basis.

26. Even if the finding that Ms Vankova's children's best interests were to
    remain with her in the United  Kingdom  were  sound,  this  was  not  a
    sufficient basis to allow the appeal. Although their interests  were  a
    primary consideration, they were not the sole consideration. The First-
    tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis that once it had been  found  that
    the children's best interests lay in remaining with their mother in the
    United Kingdom, the decision  to  remove  Ms  Vankova  was  necessarily
    incompatible with the EEA Regulations. That amounted  to  an  error  of
    law.

27. For that reason alone, we find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    error of law which requires the decision in the appeal to be set  aside
    and remade.

28. In remaking the decision, we do not question  the  conclusion  that  it
    would be in the children's best interests, assessed  in  isolation  and
    without regard to the "real world" situation of Ms Vankova,  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom with their mother. The  Secretary  of  State  had
    also conceded that it would be unduly harsh for the children to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without their  mother.  Although  they  had  been
    dislocated from their mother whilst she was in  custody  they  are  now
    back in her immediate care. So far as moving to  Latvia  is  concerned,
    they have spent their formative years in the UK. They were, at the time
    of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  at  a  critical  stage  of  their
    education.

29. However, given that the bests interests of the  children  are  not  the
    sole consideration, it is not sufficient to make a binary assessment as
    to where the children's best interests lie. It is necessary to consider
    whether it is reasonable to expect the children to live in Latvia  (see
    ZH at [29], and EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 per Lewison LJ at [57]) and to  consider
    the impact on the children of different options so  that  they  can  be
    weighed in the balance. Here, those options included moving  to  Latvia
    with their mother, or remaining with their grandmother in  the  UK,  or
    some alternative approach (for example completing their GCSEs in the UK
    before moving to Latvia, or spending term-time with  their  grandmother
    and holidays with their mother). Moreover, it is necessary  to  conduct
    that analysis "on the basis that the facts are as they are in the  real
    world" - see EV at [58], and KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273 per Lord Carnwath JSC
    at [19]. We have taken  all  of  these  factors  into  account  in  the
    remaking of Ms Vankova's appeal.

Disposal

30. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or that the appeal is redetermined by the Upper Tribunal.

31. We, therefore, considered whether to redetermine the appeal  without  a
    further hearing.  Mr  Bandagani  argued  that  we  should  not  do  so,
    submitting that  substantial  further  fact-finding  was  required.  In
    particular, it was said that Ms Vankova has become aware of a programme
    recently broadcast on Latvian television about  her  offending  in  the
    United Kingdom which, it was submitted,  may  have  a  bearing  on  the
    determination of the appeal. Moreover, both parties made concessions at
    the previous hearing that they  may  have  wished  to  reconsider:  the
    Secretary of State as to the children's best interests, and Ms  Vankova
    as to whether she in fact had 10  years  continuous  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom (such that any decision to  remove  her  could  only  be
    taken on "imperative grounds of public security").

32. We do not consider that either of these points justifies  the  remittal
    of the appeal or a further hearing before our remaking of the decision,
    particularly when these were not issues raised in the grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. If Ms  Vankova  considers  that  the  television
    programme puts her at risk then her remedy is to  make  representations
    to the Secretary of State and invite her to  treat  these  as  a  fresh
    claim pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules.  As  to  the
    parties' respective concessions, neither party has sought to withdraw a
    concession previously made nor given any reason as to why  they  should
    be permitted to do so.

33. Accordingly, we have considered for ourselves whether the Secretary  of
    State's decision should be upheld. We do so on the basis of the primary
    findings of fact made by Judge Bristow identified in paragraph 9 above,
    taken  together  with  Judge  Bristow's  finding  that  it  is  in  the
    children's best interests to live with their mother and to live in  the
    UK.

34. The offence committed by Ms Vankova struck at the  heart  of  effective
    immigration control and the protection of the vulnerable.  There  is  a
    very strong public interest in her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    There is, as Judge Bristow observed, no question of her children  being
    forcibly removed. It will be a family choice as to whether they  remain
    with their grandmother in the United Kingdom, or move with their mother
    to Latvia, or spend time between the United Kingdom and Latvia. None of
    those options would secure their ultimate best interests  of  remaining
    in the United Kingdom with their mother. It is simply not  possible  to
    secure both the public interest in removing Ms Vankova from the  United
    Kingdom and her children's best interests of living  with  her  in  the
    United Kingdom. It is, however, not unreasonable to expect the children
    to live with her in Latvia if that is what the  family  choose  to  do.
    They speak some Latvian, that is where they born and spent their  early
    years, and they have now effectively completed their GCSE courses.  The
    element of choice, control and ability to return to the United  Kingdom
    mitigates the developmental catastrophe that would be occasioned  by  a
    wholly forced removed. Insofar as there is  any  developmental  impact,
    that is of Ms Vankova's  making  and  is  not  such  as  to  render  it
    unreasonable for them to return to Latvia if that is what they chose to
    do.

35. Accordingly, whilst  recognising  that  this  departs  from  a  primary
    consideration, namely the best interests of the  children,  a  holistic
    assessment of the competing considerations  outlined  above,  including
    those factors preserved from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    falls clearly in favour of upholding the Secretary of State's decision:
    that primary consideration is "outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations",  particularly  the  strong  public  interest  in
    removing Ms Vankova from the United Kingdom.

Outcome

36. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in concluding that the decision of
    the Secretary of State to deport Ms Vankova breached the  principle  of
    proportionality. Its error was to treat  the  bests  interests  of  her
    children as the sole  consideration,  without  undertaking  a  holistic
    assessment that encompassed other relevant factors.

37. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed, the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is quashed, and the Secretary of  State's  decision
    is restored.

Notice of Decision

38. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  we  remake  the  decision  in  the
    respondent's appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

39. We have considered whether Ms Vankova requires  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue. The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. We are told that a  programme  about  Ms
    Vankova has been broadcast in Latvia, without affording her anonymity.

40. Given the circumstances, we make no anonymity order.


Signed        J. Johnson                         Date 30 March 2020

Mr Justice Johnson, sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
