
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00869/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 5 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and


                           MR BRUNO FERREIRA MELO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Woodhouse and Miss A J F Cross de Chavannes) in which  it  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  made  on  23
    April 2013 to make a deportation order against him.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal born on 24 April 1978.  He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 but returned in  2005.   He  last
    entered the United Kingdom at some point in 2008 and on 4 October  2011
    was arrested in connection with the attempted importation of a class  A
    drug, LSD for which he was convicted on 26 June 2012 and  sentenced  to
    twenty months' imprisonment. Subsequent to that conviction, on 23 April
    2013, the respondent took a  decision  to  deport  the  claimant.   The
    reasons for this are set out in the refusal letter of that date.

The respondent's case

 3. In summary,  the  respondent  considered  that  the  claimant  had  not
    acquired the right of permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    thus may be  deported  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security.  The respondent  noted  at  [17]  that  the  NOMS  assessment
    indicated that the claimant posed a low risk  of  harm  to  the  public
    however she took the view that it  was  not  reasonable  to  leave  the
    public vulnerable to the effects of his reoffending  that  is  possible
    importation again of class A drugs.  She noted also that  although  the
    offender manager found that he posed low risk of  re-offending,  little
    assessment had been taken of the factors which  led  to  the  offending
    behaviour or whether those same factors continue to  exist  (see  [22])
    and that the claimant  had  attempted  to  import  drugs  for  his  own
    financial gain ([23]).

 4. The respondent noted also that although the claimant had  had  problems
    with alcohol in the past, there was no evidence that  he  had  attended
    any alcohol awareness programme or undertaken CBT  despite  that  being
    said to have occurred [25].  In the absence of  evidence  that  he  had
    overcome drug use or issues with alcohol, he was likely  to  revert  to
    using drugs or alcohol upon release [27] which would increase the  risk
    in reoffending. On  that  basis,  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    claimant has a  propensity  to  re-offend  and  represents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the public  to  justify  his
    deportation [28].

 5. The respondent considered that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    claimant to be able to re-adapt  to  life  in  Portugal  following  his
    deportation and noted that he was currently without employment, without
    accommodation as a result of his conviction [30]  and  that  thus,  the
    decision to deport him was proportionate in terms of  Regulation  25(5)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA
    Regulations").

 6. The respondent considered also, that having had regard to Article 8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights the claimant's deportation  was
    proportionate as although he had a daughter here,  there  had  been  no
    contact since 2009  and  his  girlfriend,  Miss  Marhoferova  had  been
    deported to Slovakia on 9 January 2013.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The claimant was not represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    heard evidence from him and took into account a bundle of  material  he
    produced.  The Tribunal found that:-

      i) the claimant had not established permanent residence in the  United
         Kingdom [103] or established a presence for a period  of  over  ten
         years [104] and thus the  respondent  was  required  only  to  show
         grounds of public policy, public security or public health [105];

     ii) although the claimant has a child in the United Kingdom  with  whom
         he wishes to enjoy family life and with whom he  has  attempted  to
         remain in contact since the breakdown of the  relationship  with  a
         former partner, his family life here therefore continues [111];

    iii) the claimant's offender manager concluded the risk of  re-offending
         was low; the risk of harm to  the  public  was  low  [117]  despite
         having been homeless upon release, the claimant  had  continued  to
         report daily and weekly, it had been noted that, in the opinion  of
         the offender manager, he has an exemplary record in complying  with
         the various licence conditions;

     iv) the claimant has only one conviction  [120]  and  the  trial  judge
         noted he had previously been of good character;

      v) the claimant was remorseful; he had  addressed  his  substance  and
         alcohol use ( (see [122] to [124]); and on all the evidence  before
         them, he is someone who does not have the  propensity  to  reoffend
         and therefore does not represent a genuine present and sufficiently
         serious threat to the public so to justify deportation ([126]);

     vi) weight was to be attached to letters showing he had friends in  the
         United Kingdom [130]; those with whom he had worked with  had  made
         positive comments about him [131]; he had assimilated very well  in
         the United Kingdom [131,  132],  having  an  excellent  command  of
         English [133] and his links to Portugal have  diminished;  and,  in
         light of his previous employment, friendships and language  skills,
         he had integrated strongly into the United Kingdom [133]; there are
         reasonable prospects of rehabilitation which is a  substantial  and
         relevant factor  in  the  proportionality  balance  as  to  whether
         deportation is justified [136] but that he does  not  constitute  a
         present threat and is well advanced in his  rehabilitation  in  the
         UK;

    vii) the respondent had not established that the claimant  represents  a
         genuine present and sufficiently serious threat  [140]  and  taking
         into account the considerations of Regulation 21(6) the decision to
         deport is disproportionate.

 8. The grounds for permission state that:-

      i) As the claimant had failed to demonstrate  five  years'  continuous
         residence the Tribunal had erred in taking into account findings on
         rehabilitation  into  the  assessment   of   proportionality,   the
         claimant's criminal behaviour indicates that he  is  not  genuinely
         integrated into the society of the  UK  and  in  dealing  with  the
         extent of the claimant's rehabilitation, the Tribunal had failed to
         note that his licence had expired on 24 February 2014;

     ii) that the findings in  respect  of  the  claimant's  good  character
         focused solely on the lack of previous criminality, failing to have
         regard to his history of  alcohol  and  drug  abuse;  and  this  is
         material to the present risk that he poses in failing  to  consider
         the risks  that  prospective  employment  may  pose,  the  Tribunal
         failing to engage with the previous abuse.

 9. On 5 June 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission, stating:-



         "Whilst generally a detailed and well-reasoned determination  there
         is arguable merit in the respondent's ground (g) since  the  Panel,
         in placing weight upon the influence of the offender manager during
         the   claimant's   licence   period   when   assessing   risk   and
         proportionality (paragraphs 117, 134 and 136), arguably  failed  to
         note that the licence period was due shortly to expire."

10. There is no response the claimant pursuant to rule 24.

The hearing before us on 28 July 2014

11. When the matter came before us, the claimant did not  appear.   We  are
    satisfied that due notice of the time, place and venue of  the  hearing
    had been sent to the address given by him and accordingly,  absent  any
    explanation for his failure to attend, that it was appropriate  for  us
    to proceed to determine the appeal in his absence. We heard submissions
    from Mr Avery.

12. Mr Avery submitted that,  in  assessing  the  claimant's  risk  of  re-
    offending as low, the Tribunal did not refer to any actual  score.   He
    submitted also that the Tribunal had failed to make any mention of  the
    fact that the claimant had no permanent accommodation and no employment
    this being of particular importance as homelessness indicated he is  in
    poor  financial  straits  which  had  in  the   past   contributed   to
    reoffending.  He submitted also that  the  Tribunal  had  not  properly
    grappled with what is meant by a low risk.

13. In addition, Mr Avery submitted that the Tribunal had erred at [136] in
    finding that the claimant had resided lawfully in  the  United  Kingdom
    for upwards of nine years.  He accepted however  that  that  is  not  a
    matter which had been pleaded in the grounds of appeal.

Discussion

14. It is for the Secretary of State to justify the deportation of  an  EEA
    national; that is established law.  The EEA Regulations  at  21(5)  and
    21(6) set out the factors that must be considered.

15. We note from Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013]  UKUT  00316
    at [32] to [35]:


    32.  We observe that for any deportation of an EEA national  or  family
       member of such national to  be  justified  on  public  good  grounds
       (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been achieved)  the
       claimant must represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact
       of a criminal conviction is not enough. It is not permissible in  an
       EEA case to deport a claimant on the  basis  of  criminal  offending
       simply to deter others.  This tends to mean,  in  case  of  criminal
       conduct short of the most serious threats to the  public  safety  of
       the state, that a candidate for EEA  deportation  must  represent  a
       present threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  re-offend  or  an
       unacceptably high risk of re-offending.  In such a case, if there is
       acceptable evidence  of  rehabilitation,  the  prospects  of  future
       rehabilitation do not enter the balance,  save  possibly  as  future
       protective  factors  to  ensure  that  the  rehabilitation   remains
       durable.

    33.   It is only where rehabilitation is incomplete or  uncertain  that
       future prospects may play a role in the overall assessment.  Here we
       must take our guidance from the Court of Justice in  Tskouridis  and
       the Court of Appeal in the present case remitting the matter to this
       Tribunal.  It is in the interests of the citizen, the host state and
       the Union itself for an offender to cease to offend.  This  is  most
       likely  to  be  the  case  with  young  offenders   who   commit   a
       disproportionate number of offences, but  many  of  whom  will  stop
       offending as they mature and comparatively few  of  whom  go  on  to
       become hardened criminals and persistent  recidivist  offenders.  We
       can exclude consideration of offenders beneath the age of 18 as  EEA
       law will prevent their deportation save in the unusual event that it
       is in their own  interest  (Article  28  (3)  (b)  of  the  Citizens
       Directive).

    34.   If the very factors  that  contribute  to  his  integration  that
       assist  in  rehabilitation  of  such  offenders  (family  ties   and
       responsibilities, accommodation,  education,  training,  employment,
       active membership of a community and the like) will  assist  in  the
       completion of a process  of  rehabilitation,  then  that  can  be  a
       substantial factor in the balance. If the claimant cannot constitute
       a  present  threat  when  rehabilitated,  and  is  well-advanced  in
       rehabilitation in a host state where there is a  substantial  degree
       of integration, it may well very well be disproportionate to proceed
       to deportation.

    35.  At the other  end  of  the  scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
       prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present threat and is
       likely to remain so for the indefinite future, we cannot see how the
       prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a significant factor in
       the balance. Thus  recidivist  offenders,  career  criminals,  adult
       offenders who have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment  programmes,
       claimants with impulses to commit sexual or violent offences and the
       like may well fall into this category.

16. The first issue to be considered is whether the individual represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  public;  were
    that not established, it is difficult to see how a decision  to  deport
    an individual could be proportionate in EU law terms (see  GW  EEA  reg
    21: 'fundamental interests') Netherlands [2009]  UKAIT  00050)  nor  is
    that the respondent's case.  We therefore consider if the finding  that
    the claimant does not pose such a threat was one rationally open to it.

17. We note, as did the Tribunal, that the applicant's offender manager had
    considered him to be at low risk of re-offending.  His reasons  for  so
    finding are set out at length in his report and are reproduced  in  the
    determination [117].  There is no direct challenge in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Tribunal's finding that the applicant does not  represent
    a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to the public.

18. The submission that it did not engage with  what  "low"  meant  is  not
    based on the grounds of appeal as pleaded. In any event, the categories
    of risk are specified in the Offender Manager's report, and represent a
    score of 0-40 out of a total of 168. No exact figure was  given  as  no
    OASys report was, according to the report, prepared.

19. That said, there is a challenge in the grounds [(h)]  to  the  "Panel's
    findings on the claimant's good character".  The first  observation  is
    that the reference to good character is clearly a  quotation  from  the
    sentencing judge's comments [120].  Further, it  is  evident  that  the
    Tribunal considered in some detail the claimant's past drug and alcohol
    abuse at [121] to [124].  They considered and  took  into  account  the
    evidence of the professionals involved with the claimant  as  he  dealt
    with this abuse noting in particular the report that the  claimant  had
    made good progress within therapy.  They noted also that he had pursued
    sessions in alcohol awareness, a five session relapse prevention course
    [122] and that drug testing  had  proved  negative  [124].   They  were
    rationally entitled and gave adequate reasons for finding that  he  had
    improved and had responded well while in prison.

20. The submission in the grounds [(h)] that the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    consider the risks that may rise in future employment is without merit;
    there is no evidence that such a submission was made  to  the  Tribunal
    that being  employed  as  a  DJ  or  in  clubbing  would  increase  the
    claimant's risk  of  becoming  involved  again  with  drink  or  drugs.
    Submissions have to be based  on  the  evidence.  Accordingly,  we  are
    satisfied given the comprehensive way in which  the  Tribunal  assessed
    the issue of propensity to reoffend that their finding is  sustainable.



21. The Tribunal reached that conclusion before going on  to  consider  the
    issue of proportionality, and it was at that stage that  it  considered
    rehabilitation. We  note  as  a  preliminary  observation  that  it  is
    difficult to conceive what factors could have permitted  the  Tribunal,
    having found that the claimant did not have a propensity to  re-offend,
    and  not  represent  a  threat,  to  conclude  that  nonetheless,   his
    deportation was proportionate.

22. The grounds challenging the Tribunal's approach to  rehabilitation  are
    somewhat confused. As was noted in Essa, the  issue  of  rehabilitation
    only properly arises where someone continues to present a threat of re-
    offending or a propensity to do so.  If, as here,  the  Tribunal  found
    that there was no such threat, then it cannot be said that a person has
    failed to rehabilitate and so failed to comply with societal norms. The
    findings with regard to rehabilitation were in fact unnecessary but  do
    not indicate that the Tribunal fell into error. Their observations with
    regard to future rehabilitation are, in  reality,  a  consideration  of
    what was referred to in Essa as future  protective  factors  to  ensure
    that the rehabilitation (which has occurred) remains durable.

23. Further, contrary  to  what  is  asserted,  the  Tribunal  set  out  at
    considerable  length  sustainable  reasons  for  concluding  that   the
    claimant was integrated into the United Kingdom.  That was a conclusion
    open to them on the evidence and  for  which  they  gave  rational  and
    adequate reasons; the challenge to that finding is nothing more than  a
    disagreement that does not identify error of law.

24. The Secretary of State has not shown  that  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and  we
    therefore uphold it.

Summary of Conclusions

 1) The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

 2) We uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date:    5 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
