
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00081/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Chapman, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal to allow on asylum grounds the appeal of EA against
the Secretary of State's decision of 23 December 2013 to deport him from
the United Kingdom.  The claim was brought on the basis of international
protection and human rights grounds.

2.   I refer hereafter to EA as the appellant, as he was before the judge,
and to the Secretary of State as the respondent, as she was before the
judge.

3.   There was also a cross-appeal brought by EA in respect of the judge's
failure to come to conclusions on Article 3 and Article 8 of the Human
Rights Convention.

4.   It was common ground that the judge had erred in law.  On the one
hand, the decision not to explore any further the Article 3 issue in light
of his allowing of the appeal on asylum grounds was flawed by the failure
to consider detailed medical evidence and submissions in relation to that
point.  Ms Chapman accepted that the judge's reasoning in respect of
international protection grounds and the refugee claim was flawed in that
the judge in effect went no further than setting out the background
evidence and, in noting that the evidence showed that mentally ill people
were perceived to be a distinct group in Afghanistan and discriminated
against because of their illness did not go far enough to amount to a
proper assessment of risk on return on grounds of reasonable degree of
likelihood of persecution.

5.   Ms Chapman suggested that the matter might best be dealt with, given
the fact that it had been heard over three separate days, by the same First-
tier Judge who heard it originally, and was therefore familiar with the
issues.  Mr Tufan was opposed to this course of action on the basis that
there were clear errors and the judge had made clear findings, for example
at paragraph 27 of his decision in respect of risk on return.

6.   On consideration, I consider that the most economical course of action
in this case will be for the matter to be returned to the same judge to
come to proper findings on the asylum and humanitarian protection issues,
bearing in mind the need not just to set out the background evidence but to
assess whether it is such, bearing in mind also the appellant's particular
health concerns, as to put him in a situation where he faces a real risk of
persecution or a real need of humanitarian protection on the basis of that
evidence and bearing in mind the correct legal threshold.  There will be no
need to address section 72 since that is a matter that, it appears, was
conceded in the First-tier.

7.   The judge will also have to consider Article 3 and Article 8 in light
of the subjective and background evidence also in respect of the correct
legal tests with regard to those elements of the claim.  The matter is
therefore remitted for a rehearing on this basis before Judge Callow at
Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 10 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

