

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
no: DA/00450/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice              |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On    05.02.2018                           |  On 08.02.2018                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                  Between:

                              Aleksandr POLOZOV
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

The appellant in person
Mr D Clark for the respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge MJ Hembrough), sitting at Harmondsworth on 11 September
    2017, to  a deportation  appeal by a citizen of Lithuania, born  1  May
    1985.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of what had  happened  at
    the hearing, when the judge had gone ahead with it in  the  appellant's
    absence. The decision under appeal had been made on 31 July:  there  is
    no endorsement on the copy before me to show when it was served on  the
    appellant in detention, nor before the judge who extended time  by  the
    one day needed, assuming he received it the  same  day,  to  cover  the
    notice of appeal he gave on 15 August. On the 17th  notice  of  hearing
    was given for 11 September.

 3. The next thing that apparently happened, on 30  August,  was  that  the
    appellant faxed the First-tier Tribunal to ask for an  adjournment,  so
    he could get his employment records from the Revenue, who had  said  it
    would take them up to 40 days. This was refused the same  day,  on  the
    basis that "The decision was served on 31st July -  the  Appellant  has
    thus had 6 weeks to prepare, which  is  sufficient".  The  next  day  a
    similar request was refused, on the same basis.

 4. The appellant's account of what happened next was that at 0600  on  the
    morning of 1 September, which was a Saturday, staff  at  the  detention
    centre woke him up, and told him he was being transferred to London for
    the hearing, in ten days' time. Depressed  by  his  dealings  with  the
    Tribunal, he refused to go: the judge noted this at paragraph 21, which
    disposes of the point about lack of a  production  order  made  in  the
    grant of permission.

 5. The other point in the grant refers to  the  Tribunal's  duty  to  help
    unrepresented appellants. While on the information before  the  hearing
    judge  this  appellant  had  simply  refused  to  co-operate  with  the
    transport arrangements, so that he could  ask  for  that  help  at  the
    hearing, it is worth looking a little closer at what had gone on.

 6. Although the decision letter itself bears no endorsement as to service,
    the enclosures are listed  as  "Confirmation  of  conveyance,  ICD.4348
    disclaimer". Those same documents are recorded as  signed  for  by  the
    appellant in another (J1 in the appeal  bundle)  dated  16  August.  It
    follows that, far from this appellant sitting on his hands  between  31
    July and 30 August, when he first asked  for  an  adjournment,  he  had
    given notice of appeal the same day he got the decision letter, and had
    taken steps to prepare his case within the next fortnight,  subject  to
    the co-operation of the Revenue.

 7. I don't in the least blame the judge for going on to deal with the case
    on the information before him as he did: Harmondsworth is an  extremely
    busy centre, and he will have had a number of other appellants  present
    and ready to get on with their cases. The only thing that alerted me to
    the possible need to go  into  it  in  greater  detail  was  the  first
    adjournment decision giving the delay between 31 July and 30 August  as
    six weeks, which could not be right.

 8. Finding out what it had really been made it clear that  this  appellant
    hadn't had a fair hearing from the First-tier Tribunal as a whole:  his
    adjournment request had been twice refused on the basis of a wrong time-
    scale, and without taking full account of the reason he  had  made  it,
    and the likely delay involved. It might well be said that the appellant
    should even so have come to the hearing, and made it again; but in  the
    circumstances his discouragement was understandable, and the result  of
    what (again understandably for  no  doubt  busy  duty  judges)  was  an
    unjustified assumption as to what it had been.

 9. That is why I have decided that the appellant is entitled  to  a  fresh
    hearing before another  first-tier  judge:  he  says  he  now  has  the
    evidence of his employment history which might show he had  established
    the necessary five years' qualifying residence for a  permanent  right,
    which would have required the Home Office to show, not  just  that  his
    conduct presented a 'genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat'
    to justify his removal, bearing in mind the principles in reg.  27  (5)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, but  that
    overall there were the  'serious grounds of public policy ...' required
    by reg. 27 (3).



10. Since this appellant is now serving his first custodial  sentence,  one
    of 14 weeks' imprisonment, passed on 3 July 2017,  consecutive  to  two
    suspended sentences received earlier last year,  it  must  be  open  to
    argument either way as to whether such grounds exist in his case, which
    will be for the next hearing judge to decide. The appellant should send
    a copy of his Revenue records to the Home Office  Presenting  Officers'
    Unit, at the address given on the notice of hearing, as well as to  the
    Tribunal, as soon as possible. If arrangements  can  be  made  for  the
    fresh hearing to take place before the appellant is sent back up to his
    detention centre in Lincolnshire, then so much the better.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Hembrough
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
