

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/00434/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th June 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                 RUSLANS [K]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, of Counsel, instructed by Sterling
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Latvia born in 1990. He came to the  UK
       to join his parents and brothers in October 2011. He met his  partner
       in November 2011 and they started to cohabit in December  2011.  They
       have two children together born in 2013 and 2016. The  appellant  was
       convicted of 23 offences on seven occasions from December 2012,  most
       of which were  shoplifting  and  theft  but  include  driving  whilst
       uninsured, travelling on a railway without  paying  the  fare,  using
       threatening and abusive words and possession of heroin. The offending
       behaviour was dealt with by means of fines until June  2017  when  he
       received a 14-day sentence of imprisonment for 12 theft offences  and
       a further 10  days  for  failing  to  surrender  to  custody  at  the
       appointed time.

    2. As a result of his criminal record on 20th July 2017  the  respondent
       made a deportation  order  against  the  appellant  under  Regulation
       23(6)(b) of the 2016 EEA Regulations  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
       justified on public policy grounds. He was  convicted  of  a  further
       offence of stealing three bottles of hair and skin care  tablets  and
       given a conditional discharge in June 2018.  His appeal  against  the
       decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 22nd November 2018.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  on
       20th February 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in applying an  "unduly  harsh"  test  in
       relation  to  the   appellant's   children   when   considering   the
       proportionality of his removal. An Upper Tribunal  Panel  found  that
       the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set  out  in
       the error of law decision appended at Annex A to this decision.

    4. The matter came before me to remake the appeal. It was  clarified  at
       the start of the hearing that Ms Iqbal accepted  that  the  appellant
       was only entitled to the lower level  of  protection  under  the  EEA
       Regulations and was not entitled to  the  higher  level  due  to  his
       partner having permanent residence. Mr Melvin said  it  was  accepted
       that the appellant had family life with his partner and children.  Ms
       Iqbal wished the Tribunal to consider a letter from  the  appellant's
       drugs worker on his detox programme. I directed that this  should  be
       filed with the Upper Tribunal and served on the respondent by 5pm  on
       12th June 2019, and that the respondent would then have until 5pm  on
       14th June 2019 to provide  any  comments  on  that  letter.  I  would
       determine the appeal  after  receipt  of  any  evidence  provided  in
       accordance with these  directions.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I
       reserved my determination.

    5. I received and considered both an email letter from Mr  Alan  Bellamy
       recovery worker for South London and Maudsley  NHS  Foundation  Trust
       dated 11th June 2019 and representations from Mr  Melvin  dated  13th
       June 2019.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    6. I set out in  summary  the  evidence  from  the  appellant  from  his
       statements and oral  evidence  which  was  given  through  a  Russian
       interpreter.

    7. The appellant says that he came  to  the  UK  with  his  parents  and
       siblings in 2011, when he was 21 years old. He says he was doing self-
       employed work on building sites and painting and decorating work from
       2013 to 2015 when he had an accident at work, which in  turn  led  to
       severe  pain  and  his  being  prescribed   Tramadol   an   addictive
       painkiller. He was not able to return to his self-employed work after
       this time bar doing a few odd painting jobs for friends and doing DIY
       work at home and for family.

    8. The appellant met his partner in 2011, and they have two  children  a
       daughter born in 2013 and a son born in  2016.  His  children  attend
       primary school and his partner works  as  a  cleaner.  His  wife  and
       daughter have permanent residence in the UK. He is very  attached  to
       his children, and it has affected them adversely  when  he  has  been
       detained for immigration reasons.

    9. His evidence is that he committed the 2016/7 crimes because he was in
       pain following his accident and because he associated  with  negative
       influences and developed a heroin addiction. He says neither of these
       issues applies now. He says he currently takes methadone from his GP,
       and has a drugs worker whom he sees regularly  and  has  worked  with
       over the past two years following his  arrest  in  May  2017.  He  is
       planning to come gradually off the methadone in  due  course,  taking
       "stepping stone" courses to  support  him  in  this  progression  and
       moving to taking calming/ sleeping pills rather than methadone.  Even
       when he was detained briefly under the Immigration Acts he  has  kept
       in touch with his  drugs  worker,  who  also  has  contact  with  his
       partner.

   10. The appellant says he is very sorry about the theft of the tablets to
       encourage hair growth in June 2018 which was a foolish impulsive  act
       he deeply regrets. He paid the compensation payments imposed. He says
       that the crimes he was convicted for in January 2012 (shoplifting and
       failure to surrender to custody at the appointed  time),  March  2013
       (driving a car without insurance) and the railway ticket offences  in
       2016 and 2017 were not ones which he committed to fund a drug  habit.
       He attributes those offences to the  fact  he  had  no  work  at  the
       particular time when they were committed, and the fact  that  he  was
       influenced  by  bad  people.  The  convictions  in  2017  for  theft/
       shoplifting/ possession of heroin/ use  of  threatening  and  abusive
       words and disorderly behaviour offences were ones which he  committed
       to fund his heroin addiction or as a result of  that  addiction.  His
       evidence is that he has not committed any offences over the past year
       and has not been in trouble with the authorities in any way.  He  has
       changed his life and corrected his previous  mistakes.  He  wants  to
       stay in the UK and keep his family together.

   11. The appellant says that he could not return to Latvia as  he  has  no
       home there, as his parents sold their house in that country,  and  no
       family there as his parents and siblings live in the UK  as  well  as
       his partner and children.  He has no experience of working in  Latvia
       and believes that construction works in a  different  way  there.  It
       would be hard for his family to go back as he fears he would  not  be
       able to find work to  support  them.  He  has  his  partner  and  two
       children in the UK, and they are all settled here and in school,  and
       do not speak Latvian as they are a Russian speaking  family  and  his
       children also speak English. He is very involved with the  upbringing
       of his children, taking them to and from  school  and  to  the  park,
       doing drawing with his daughter and  providing  other  entertainments
       for them.

   12. The OASys report regarding  the  2017  offences  sets  out  that  the
       appellant stole to support his heroin habit. The OASys report  writer
       finds that the appellant lives  in  a  stable  arrangement  with  his
       partner and children near to his mother's home, and that that  he  is
       now only associating with family so that he does not encounter  those
       who encourage  his  drug  use.  It  is  also  recorded  that  he  had
       participated in drug awareness courses; that he was on methadone; and
       that he has been completely illegal drug free since  July  2018.  The
       OASys report concludes that the appellant poses a low risk of serious
       harm but a medium risk of reoffending.

   13. In the email letter from Allan Bellamy,  recovery  worker  for  South
       London and  Maudsley  NHS  Foundation  Trust  dated  11th  June  2019
       forwarded to me by the appellant's solicitors it is  clear  that  the
       appellant has been a client of theirs since August  2018  and  is  on
       methadone, an opiate substitute treatment. He is now on  a  methadone
       reduction programme and attends bi-weekly key worker sessions. He has
       cooperated fully, and routine urine drug screening has shown that  he
       has taken no illegal substances.  When  the  methadone  reduction  is
       complete, the timescale for which cannot be  determined  in  advance,
       the appellant will also have a relapse prevention programme.

   14. The additional evidence provided by the appellant's partner,  Ms  VS,
       which is set out in  her  statement  and  given  orally  through  the
       Russian interpreter is in short summary as follows.

   15. Ms VS confirmed that the appellant is on methadone and works with his
       drugs worker and has had no involvement  with  the  criminal  justice
       system since June 2018. It is her opinion that the  appellant  became
       addicted to heroin after having an  accident  at  work  and  becoming
       addicted to painkillers prescribed by the GP including  Tramadol.  He
       had not taken illegal drugs prior to the accident, and  she  believed
       his convictions in 2017 related to his heroin addiction. She  has  no
       relatives in Latvia: her father, grandmother and aunt are  all  dead,
       and her mother and sister live in the UK. She went to  a  funeral  in
       Latvia two years ago, but had not been there since. She does not wish
       to leave the UK where she has work and her home,  and  which  is  the
       home for her children. It would be hard for her children as it  would
       be hard for the appellant and her to obtain work in Latvia. She would
       however return with the appellant if he was forced to go to Latvia as
       the  appellant  is  her  life  partner  and  has  a  good  and  close
       relationship with the children doing things such as drawing with them
       and reading to them. She  described  how  her  son  had  become  very
       difficult when the appellant was detained under the Immigration  Acts
       refusing to go to nursery school and being hysterical, but that  when
       the appellant returned home he became normal again.

   16. Mrs IK, the appellant's mother attended the Upper Tribunal  and  gave
       oral  evidence  to  support  her  statement   through   the   Russian
       interpreter, in short summary her key evidence  is  as  follows.  She
       works as a cleaner in the  UK.  She  believes  that  the  appellant's
       offending behaviour came about due to the bad influence of others and
       his addiction to opioids which started when  he  sustained  his  back
       injury. She believes he regrets his actions and  has  moved  on.  She
       confirms that the appellant has a very  committed  relationship  with
       his children and looks after them and the home a lot, particularly as
       he is currently not allowed to  work.  She  would  feel  impelled  to
       return to Latvia if the appellant were deported there to support  him
       as she is sure that that would be very stressful for him.  She  would
       also be concerned about her grandchildren as they speak  English  and
       Russian, not Latvian, and education is in Latvian only. She had  come
       to the UK as she had struggled  to  find  work  in  Latvia,  and  had
       insufficient money to support her three children.

   17. Mr Melvin submitted that he  relied  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter and  his  written  submissions  as  well  as  additional  oral
       submission. In short summary he argues that  the  appellant  posed  a
       medium risk of reoffending, as set out by the OASys  report,  and  it
       was clear that he was motivated by financial  gain  in  his  criminal
       behaviour as not all of his offending was driven by drug addiction as
       it had started within 3 months of his arrival  in  the  UK  and  thus
       several years before he became addicted to heroin. There was  a  long
       history of offending and a real  risk  of  reoffending,  and  it  was
       argued that offending would reoccur as money was short in the  family
       and it would seem that the appellant was only likely to get  sporadic
       work. Some of the thefts in 2017 were more serious  than  just  shop-
       lifting, and the appellant had one conviction in June 2018  after  he
       started his drugs programme. The fact the appellant had not  been  in
       trouble in the last year was not a strong enough indicator  that  his
       offending behaviour had stopped. As such there was a genuine, present
       and sufficiently serious threat to a fundamental interest of  society
       and the appellant fell to be deported. Further  his  deportation  was
       proportionate as it was  not  disproportionate  for  the  appellant's
       partner and children to leave just because his partner  and  daughter
       had an EEA right of permanent residence and because his  partner  and
       mother (who says she would  return  with  him  too)  were  exercising
       Treaty rights in the UK. It was not accepted that  the  appellant  is
       integrated in the UK given his offending history. He would be able to
       obtain work in Latvia given his skills, the fact that he is  in  good
       health and the fact that Russian is widely spoken  in  that  country.
       Mr Melvin also asserted that there would probably been distant family
       members living in Latvia to whom the appellant could turn for help.

   18.  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the  most  recent  evidence  from   the
       appellant's recovery worker shows that he is engaging with the  detox
       programme but also that it is unclear  when  the  appellant  will  be
       recovered. The recovery worker does not say anything which means that
       the appellant is not a medium risk of reoffending or suggest that  he
       is rehabilitated from his drugs habit. It is also not shown  that  he
       could not continue this programme in Latvia.

   19. Ms Iqbal argues that it is not lawful under the  EEA  Regulations  to
       deport the appellant. None of his offences have attracted a  sentence
       of 12 months or more, and although being a persistent offender  could
       make his deportation lawful it is not the case that  he  is  such  an
       offender anymore. It is argued that he  does  not  currently  pose  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  a  fundamental
       interest of society as most of his offending was linked to his heroin
       addiction which has now ended with his being on a methadone programme
       with the support of a drugs  worker.  He  has  not  reoffended  since
       starting this programme bar one  very  minor  offence  for  which  he
       received a conditional discharge a year ago, and since June  2018  he
       has not reoffended at all. He has  protective  factors  such  as  his
       highly supportive nuclear and extended family, and the fact  that  he
       has been offered employment in the UK. Two potential  employers  gave
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, so there is no need for  him
       to be short of money in the  future.  His  deportation  is  also  not
       proportionate under Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations 2016 because
       he has lived in the UK for 7 years since the age of 21 years and  has
       all family  members  in  this  country;  he  has  a  partner  who  is
       exercising Treaty rights in the UK and two children born in the UK  -
       his partner and older child having permanent  residence  due  to  her
       exercise of Treaty rights and their period of residence; he  and  his
       family are integrated in the UK with his children  being  in  school;
       due to the strong ties the  children  have  with  the  appellant  the
       family would all be forced to relocate to Latvia if he were  deported
       which would cause the children difficulties  as  they  do  not  speak
       Latvian at all as they are a Russian and English speaking and Latvian
       is the language of education and also further his  deportation  would
       lead to difficulties with money in  the  family  due  to  a  lack  of
       employment in  that  country.  His  deportation  would  therefore  be
       contrary to the best interests of his children.

Conclusions - Remaking

   20. The appellant  is  an  EEA  citizen  who  may  only  be  deported  in
       accordance with Regulations  23  and  27  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2016. The applicant is only entitled to  the  most  basic
       level of protection as he does not have permanent residence. In order
       to deport him on public policy grounds, as the  respondent  proposes,
       it must be shown that his  personal  conduct  represents  a  genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious threat to  one  of  the  fundamental
       interests of society. His criminal convictions alone  cannot  justify
       such a decision. The  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  his
       personal conduct. The decision must also be  proportionate  and  take
       into account his age, length of residence in the UK, state of health,
       family and economic situation and his social and cultural integration
       in the UK and his links with country of origin.

   21. I find that all of the witnesses gave truthful evidence:  their  oral
       evidence was consistent with their written statements and  with  each
       other. They answered  all  questions  put  to  them  fully,  and  the
       appellant did not attempt to avoid responsibility  for  his  criminal
       behaviour and there was no  attempt  to  diminish  it  by  the  other
       witnesses.

   22. I find that the appellant's offending prior to  his  period  of  drug
       addiction (two counts of shopping lifting and one of using a  vehicle
       whilst uninsured) related  to  his  being,  young  irresponsible  and
       unemployed: the offending ceases in the period  from  March  2013  to
       2015 when he has provided  evidence  that  he  was  employed  in  the
       construction industry.

   23. His offending recommenced after his accident when he  was  no  longer
       able to work in construction. There are three offences  of  traveling
       on the railway without paying which he does not attribute  to  heroin
       addiction in 2016/17 but to a lack of  income.  He  then  acquired  7
       convictions for theft, 6 convictions for shoplifting, one  conviction
       for riding a bike on a pavement, one conviction for  using  threating
       and abusive  words  or  behaviour,  one  conviction  for  failure  to
       surrender at the appointed time and one conviction for possession  of
       heroin all of which he attributes to  his  heroin  addiction.  As  Mr
       Melvin submitted some of these thefts are of items worth larger  sums
       of money such as a scaffold tower worth �2700. It was  calculated  in
       the OASys report that the total value of the 2016 and 2017 thefts was
       more than �6000. I find that this escalation in offending in  2016/17
       was attributable to the appellant's heroin addiction which came about
       following his accident when  he  found  himself  in  a  situation  of
       suffering on-going back pain and unemployment. The conclusion in  the
       OASys report is that the  appellant  was  determined  to  change  his
       behaviour (see for instance paragraph 12) and  had  joined  the  drug
       service, decided to stop contact with  his  criminal  associates  and
       dedicate himself to his family. He was on methadone detoxification in
       custody, and in the professional opinion of  the  report  writer  his
       current attitude was not related  to  a  risk  of  further  offending
       behaviour. His family (partner, children and mother) were found to be
       supportive factors which I, like the OASys report  writer  find  will
       make it less likely for him  to  reoffend.   However,  his  predictor
       scores in that report are that whilst he is at low  risk  of  serious
       harm to anyone he has a medium risk of non-violent reoffending.

   24. The appellant has had one  relapse  into  offending  behaviour  which
       resulted in a conditional discharge for shop-lifting vitamins in June
       2018 since the OASys report  which  he  attributed  in  his  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal to an impulsive theft as he had wanted
       to try to address his hair loss which had been laughed at  by  family
       members and he could not afford to buy the tablets.

   25. I find that the appellant has  addressed  the  major  factor  in  his
       offending behaviour, namely his heroin addiction. I am satisfied that
       he  is  participating  in  a  long-term  programme  to  address  that
       addiction, through taking methadone and having the support of a drugs
       worker. His drugs recovery worker has made it clear in his  email  of
       11th June 2019 that the appellant has  cooperated  fully  with  their
       service since August 2018 and routine urine tests have all been  free
       of  illegal  substances.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has   strong
       motivating factors to stay clean: his partner,  children,  supportive
       mother and accommodation. I find it  unlikely  that  he  will  commit
       offences due to illegal drugs addiction in the  future,  particularly
       as he appears not to be suffering back pain which  was  part  of  his
       mental justification for taking drugs.

   26. Mr Melvin has correctly identified that  financial  "need"  has  also
       been a theme in the appellant's criminal history: the  three  earlier
       convictions in 2012 - 2013, the  three  railway  ticket  offences  in
       2016/17 and  the  most  recent  shop-lifting  offence  all  had  that
       motivation. The fact that  the  appellant  is  not  a  heroin  addict
       stealing to address his habit will not mean that he might not  commit
       such offences in the future. However, I accept that this  pattern  of
       offending was also linked to associating with persons who  felt  that
       such behaviour was acceptable, and the  evidence  of  the  appellant,
       which I accept, is that he no longer  associates  with  these  people
       confining his social contact to  family  members.  I  find  that  the
       appellant is now older and less likely to commit such crime as he has
       experienced the consequences of doing so in terms of separation  from
       his family through being  sent  to  prison  and  due  to  Immigration
       detention due to his current precarious status. It is  also  relevant
       that he will be able to earn some money from working for friends  who
       have offered this in writing, and were sufficiently committed to this
       to attend the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  confirm  these  offers,  and
       through self-employed painting, decorating and handyman type work.  I
       find that the appellant's wife is also able to work full time  albeit
       in low paid work.

   27. I find that despite the predictor scores in  the  OASys  report  that
       there is a low risk that the appellant will reoffend when all of  his
       current circumstances, as outlined above, are  considered.  His  non-
       drugs related offending is  also  at  the  lowest  end  possible,  as
       reflected in the conditional discharge he received for the offence he
       committed a year ago.  On the totality of this evidence I  find  that
       the appellant does not  pose  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
       serious threat to a fundamental interest of society.

   28. Given that finding I look only briefly at the issue  of  whether  the
       appellant's deportation would not be proportionate.  The  appellant's
       deportation to Latvia would be contrary to the best interests of  his
       children. I find that it would be in their best interests  to  remain
       in the UK with both parents as this is the country of their birth and
       the only place they have ever lived for the following  reasons.  They
       are both in school here, and  speak  English  and  not  Latvian,  the
       language of education in Latvia. In the UK they  live  next  door  to
       their paternal grandparents in  the  UK  and  have  friends  in  this
       country. Their mother has employment here, and whilst I find that  it
       would not be impossible for the appellant and his partner to  find  a
       home and jobs in Latvia I find that they would struggle to do this as
       the difficulties with obtaining employment motivated the  appellant's
       family's move to the UK in the first place and the family home  there
       has been sold. The children also have  all  of  their  close  family,
       grandparents, including their maternal grandmother, and  their  aunts
       and uncles (maternal and paternal),  in  the  UK.  I  find  that  the
       appellant's partner and children  are  fully  integrated  in  English
       society. I find that it is also  of  some  weight  that  if  he  were
       required to leave then this would force his partner to  give  up  her
       exercise of Treaty rights and permanent residence in the UK, and  her
       ability to reside near her own mother and sister in the UK, which she
       would do if he were deported as she feels that  it  is  in  the  best
       interest of the children to live as a family with the  appellant  and
       she herself is committed to her relationship with him.  I  find  that
       the appellant has a degree  of  integration  due  to  his  period  of
       residence and family ties, but accept that he is not fully integrated
       as this process has been disrupted by his  criminal  behaviour,  time
       spent in custody and detention, addiction to illegal drugs, and  this
       consequent deportation appeal process which has  meant  he  has  been
       unable to work. I find however that he has lost all significant  ties
       with Latvia, with no family home or meaningful family  or  friendship
       ties  to  that  country.   Considering  the  best  interests  of  his
       children, with whom I find the appellant has  strong  parental  ties,
       and the interests of his partner, his degree of integration in the UK
       and his lack of ties with Latvia I find that the deportation  of  the
       appellant would not be proportionate in all the circumstances of this
       case.



  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    3. I remake the appeal allowing it under the EEA Regulations.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   17th June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A: Error of Law Decisions:



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Latvia born in 1990. He came to the  UK
       to join his parents and brothers in October 2011. He met his  partner
       in November 2011 and they started to cohabit in December  2011.  They
       have two children together born in 2013 and 2016. The  appellant  was
       convicted of 23 offences on seven occasions from December 2012,  most
       of which were  shoplifting  but  they  also  include  driving  whilst
       uninsured, travelling on a railway without  paying  the  fare,  using
       threatening and abusive words and possession of heroin. In June  2017
       he received a 14-day sentence of imprisonment for 12  theft  offences
       and a further 10 days for failing to  surrender  to  custody  at  the
       appointed time. The appellant's offending is related  to  his  having
       been addicted to heroin.

    2. As a result of his criminal record on 20th July 2017  the  respondent
       made a deportation  order  against  the  appellant  under  Regulation
       23(6)(b) of the 2016 EEA Regulations  on  the  grounds  that  it  was
       justified on public policy grounds.   His appeal against the decision
       was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson in a  determination
       promulgated on the 22nd November 2018.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  on
       20th February 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in applying an  "unduly  harsh"  test  in
       relation  to  the   appellant's   children   when   considering   the
       proportionality of his removal.

    4. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of law

    5. The grounds of appeal contend that the proportionality test under the
       EEA Regulations is distinct from that under Article 8 ECHR undertaken
       when an appellant  argues  he  is  entitled  to  succeed  by  showing
       compliance  with  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  in   deportation
       proceedings under domestic immigration law. The  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred  by  employing  this  test  when  it   is   not   relevant   to
       proportionality under the 2016 EEA Regulations, and  it  is  at  odds
       with  the  burden  of  proof  being  on  the  respondent  in  an  EEA
       deportation appeal. There was also a failure to give  weight  to  the
       appellant's partner's right to exercise Treaty rights in the UK which
       would be interfered with were he to be deported. This would also have
       a bearing on the appellant's ability to rehabilitate  himself  if  he
       were deported if he were without his family in Latvia  due  to  their
       remaining in the UK.

    6.  Ms  Iqbal  submitted  in  addition   to   the   grounds   that   the
       proportionality consideration erred in relation to both the  children
       and the partner: there was a failure to consider the  fact  that  the
       children had been born in the UK and the oldest was being educated in
       this country, and the difficulties they might  have  adapting.  There
       was also a failure to look  at  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the
       appellant's partner particularly as it had been  submitted  that  she
       had permanent residence in EU law  as  a  person  who  had  exercised
       Treaty rights for 5 years, see paragraph 27 of  the  decision.  There
       was a failure to reason the proportionality decision in  relation  to
       the loss of rights she would suffer and other difficulties she  might
       face on return or if she remained in the UK alone with the children.

    7. Ms Iqbal very properly accepted that it had not been  argued  in  the
       application for permission to appeal that the decision was flawed  as
       there was no consideration as to whether the appellant had  permanent
       residence, and thus the high level of  protection  from  deportation,
       through his partner. However, she submitted this was an  issue  which
       clearly arose and ought to be decided if  the  decision  was  remade.



    8. In a Rule 24 response  the  respondent  argues  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal carefully notes that this was a deportation under  the  2016
       EEA Regulations. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that the appellant
       is a medium risk of reoffending and does not  qualify  for  permanent
       residence. These findings are not challenged. It is not accepted that
       the approach to the OASys report is incomplete. Whilst it is accepted
       that the Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act do  not  apply
       to an EEA deportation decision it is argued that this is not what was
       done by the First-tier Tribunal. It is  argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal did take into account the impact of  deportation  on  family
       members and his prospects of rehabilitation in Latvia. It  is  argued
       that the decision is properly made in the context of  this  appellant
       only having basic level protection under EEA law. As such there is no
       error of law which requires that the decision be set aside.

    9. Mr Melvin added that any  rights  in  EU  law  that  the  appellant's
       partner might possess were not material to the determination  of  the
       appeal and that the children were young and  adaptable,  and  so  all
       relevant material had been considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  in
       considering the proportionality of the appellant's removal.

Conclusions - Error of law

   10. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal was fully  aware  that  this
       was an EEA deportation  appeal,  and  sets  out  the  relevant  legal
       framework at paragraphs 2 to 4 of the decision.  In  the  grounds  of
       appeal the appellant does not challenge the conclusion that  he  does
       not hold permanent residence as a  result  of  his  own  exercise  of
       Treaty rights, and thus has  only  the  lowest  level  of  protection
       against deportation, set out at paragraph 69 of the decision. As such
       the relevant test for deportation was that the respondent had to show
       that the appellant's deportation is justified in the public  interest
       based solely on his personal conduct  because  he  poses  a  genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious threat to a fundamental interest  of
       society, and further that his deportation is proportionate given  his
       age, state of health, his family and economic situation  and  in  the
       context of his social and cultural integration to the  UK  and  links
       with his country of origin.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal concludes that the appellant poses  a  medium
       risk of reoffending, although evidence is set out that  he  has  made
       significant progress in rehabilitating himself  and  abstaining  from
       drugs since the deportation decision was  made,  albeit  it  is  also
       noted that he was convicted of stealing three bottles of  hair,  skin
       and nail care tablets in June 2018 and given a conditional  discharge
       by a Magistrates Court.

   12. We find that the First-tier Tribunal erred as it  failed  to  make  a
       finding  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  partner  holds  permanent
       residence under the EEA Regulations and also to take into account the
       interference with her right of permanent residence and/or  her  right
       to  exercise  Treaty  rights  in  the   UK   when   considering   the
       proportionality of the appellant's deportation. Proportionality ought
       to have fully considered  the  appellant's  family's  situation.  His
       partner has been in the UK since 2010 and has always  worked  and  is
       currently working as a self-employed cleaner. In her witness evidence
       she says that she has struggled whilst the appellant  was  imprisoned
       and detained to provide financially and emotionally for the  children
       in the UK, and  she  also  says  that  she  would  struggle  to  find
       employment in Latvia if she returned there. There was also a  failure
       by the First-tier Tribunal to consider the witness evidence that  the
       older child speaks English and is happy at school, with  some  school
       evidence provided in support of this, when concluding that  the  best
       interests of the children would be served by the  appellant  and  his
       partner returning to Latvia.

   13. There is no test applicable in this EEA law proportionality framework
       of  whether  the  impact  of  the  appellant's  deportation  on   the
       appellant's partner and children would be "unduly harsh", but this is
       the one apparently employed at paragraph 84 of the  decision  in  the
       consideration of the proportionality of the appellant's  deportation.
       We find this also amounts to an error of law as it is  indicative  of
       the application of an irrelevant, and possibly  more  onerous,  legal
       test.

   14. As a result of these findings we set aside the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal. We preserve however the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at paragraphs 61 to 69 that the appellant is not entitled to
       permanent residence as a result of his own exercise of Treaty  rights
       in the UK. All other findings are set aside, and will be remade.

   15. We adjourned the remaking hearing as both parties submitted that this
       was appropriate as Ms Iqbal wishes to argue that  the  appellant  has
       permanent residence as a  result  of  his  partner  having  permanent
       residence and thus a higher level of protection against  deportation,
       an argument which had not previously been raised,  and  also  because
       the risk assessment and proportionality  exercise  will  require  up-
       dating evidence on the appellant's criminal record and  the  position
       of his family in the UK and the possibility of further oral  evidence
       from the appellant and his partner.



    Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. We adjourn the remaking of the appeal.



Directions

    1. The appellant must by 4pm on 1st May 2019 file on the Upper  Tribunal
       and serve on the respondent a new paginated  bundle  containing  only
       relevant documents for the remaking hearing. This bundle will include
       any new documents for which  permission  is  sought  to  adduce  them
       before the Upper Tribunal and also a skeleton  argument  setting  out
       all arguments on which  reliance  will  be  placed  at  the  remaking
       hearing.

    2. The respondent must by 4pm on 15th May 2019 file and serve a skeleton
       argument in reply to that of the appellant  attaching  any  documents
       for which permission to adduce before the Upper Tribunal is sought.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   9th April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley









