
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2015                          |                              |
|                                              |On 2 October 2015             |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              PATRICK TURZYNSKI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett promulgated  on  28  July
    2015 in which the judge allowed the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.
    For the purposes of continuity I shall refer to Mr  Turzyinski  as  the
    appellant as he was in the First-tier Tribunal.  He  is  a  citizen  of
    Poland and therefore also a union citizen. He was born on 5  June  1982
    and he appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State to  make
    a deportation order against him in accordance with Regulations  19,  21
    and 24 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  as
    amended.  The decision is dated 29 April 2015.

 2. The 29 April 2015 decision is a complex piece of thinking covering some
    fourteen pages of text. The appellant had stated that he was  a  Polish
    national who had resided in the United Kingdom since June 2011.  As the
    decision was made in April 2015 this was a period  of  less  than  four
    years since his arrival.

 3. The basis upon which his claim to remain appears  to  be  that  he  was
    entitled to join his wife Marta who is also a Polish national,  but  it
    was she who was exercising treaty rights. The couple have two  children
    who are described in the decision letter as H who was then 6 years old,
    and born in Poland, and a daughter, G, who was 8 years old and  arrived
    in the United Kingdom aged 4.  Accordingly, at least as  far  as  G  is
    concerned, she had only been in the United  Kingdom  for  a  relatively
    short period.

 4. The reason for the making of the deportation  order  centred  upon  the
    appellant's conviction for affray and possessing an offensive weapon in
    a public place for which he was sentenced on 1  July  2014  at  Bristol
    Crown Court to a period of imprisonment of some four years.  He did not
    appeal against that conviction.  The circumstances of the offence  were
    that under the influence of alcohol on Christmas Eve he and his father-
    in-law armed themselves with a cricket bat and a metal pole and  forced
    their way into the home of the father-in-law's former partner and there
    a scene of  some  terror  ensued.   The  sentencing  judge  made  these
    comments:

         "On 24 December 2013 you had with you a cricket bat and metal pole.
         You forced your way into the house and there was a violent struggle
         involving all persons present and the use of those weapons to which
         you attacked the son  and  daughter.  She  and  her  son  sustained
         injuries.  Fortunately the actual injuries were not as  serious  as
         they might have been. However for the occupants of the  house  this
         must have been a very frightening incident in the privacy of  their
         own home.   This must be one of the more serious affrays  that  one
         can imagine where you barge into  someone's  home  and  attack  the
         occupants, aggravated by the use of weapons."

 5. The seriousness of the offending cannot be better expressed by the fact
    that there was a sentence of imprisonment of as long as four years.

 6. The Secretary of State went on to consider the proportionality  of  the
    applicant's removal.  It was, according to the Secretary  of  State,  a
    question of whether it was justified on grounds of public policy.   The
    expression  "grounds  of  public  policy  "  is  directly  taken   from
    Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations.  The  section  provides  a  three
    tier level of protection against removal of EU citizens and the  lowest
    form of protection is an  EEA  decision  taken  on  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health.  We are  not  concerned  with
    public security or public health but with the meaning of the expression
    grounds of public policy.

 7. The Regulation then goes on to consider those with a  heightened  or  a
    more protected status, namely those  who  have  a  permanent  right  of
    residence.  Under the 2006 Regulations a permanent right  of  residence
    is acquired by individuals who have been  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a period of five  years.   In  their  position  removal  is
    prevented  except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security.  However, it is clear that this appellant  had  no  permanent
    right of residence as a result of the period of his stay in the  United
    Kingdom. There is one  final  category,  the  most  extensive  form  of
    protection provided by the Regulations and that is to those people  who
    are Union citizens who  have  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of at least ten years.  They are entitled not  to  be
    removed except on imperative grounds of public policy.

 8. The decision of the Secretary of State to which I shall now return then
    went on to deal with proportionality in these terms.

         "31.  You are 32 years of age and believed to be  in  good  health.
             It should be noted that you are not  conversant  with  English
             and that an interpreter is required  when  discussing  complex
             issues with you in  English.   There  therefore  would  be  no
             language barriers to overcome if you are deported  to  Poland.
             You have spent 28 years of your life  outside  of  the  United
             Kingdom and it is considered that you would have  had  all  of
             your formal education outside the United Kingdom. You have had
             an extensive experience of life in Poland  the  country  where
             you are a national.  If is therefore considered that you would
             have no difficulty in adjusting to life there."

 9. The  Secretary  of  State  also  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation.  That arises principally from the decision of the Court
    of Appeal  in  Essa  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1718.   Although  it  has  been
    reconsidered in the case of MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015]
    UKUT 520, a decision by a panel chaired by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.
     On consideration of the  principles  of  rehabilitation  the  decision
    maker considered that there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    undertaken any rehabilitative work while in custody,  and  no  evidence
    that he had successfully completed such  programmes  or  addressed  the
    issues that led to his conviction and imprisonment.  It was  of  course
    accepted that he had a wife and two children residing in the  UK,  none
    of whom were of course British citizens and in the absence of  evidence
    to the contrary they were unlikely to provide the  appellant  with  the
    necessary support to aid his rehabilitation.

10. On the basis of this reasoning the Secretary of  State  concluded  that
    this was a serious criminal offence and that the threat of serious harm
    was a real one and  it  did  not  therefore  preclude  the  appellant's
    deportation pursuant to the Rules.  It was therefore considered a  just
    and proportionate response to the level of offending.

11. There was then a further consideration of Article 8 and that entailed a
    consideration of paragraphs 398 to 399 and 399A of the  Regulations  as
    well as the new section 117 of the 2002  Act  as  incorporated  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

12. The appellant was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for a  period
    of  four  years  and  it  was  considered,  using  the  format  of  the
    Regulations the Rules and the statute as I have set out above, that the
    decision to remove him was a lawful one.

13. The matter came before the Tribunal on 13 July 2015.  At that time  the
    judge was aware of the period of time that the appellant had  spent  in
    the United Kingdom.  He heard evidence that the appellant was  unlikely
    to offend again and he did accept, as  I  accept,  that  the  appellant
    expressed both to the judge and to me sincere  expressions  of  remorse
    and contrition as to what had occurred.  The  judge  then  went  on  to
    consider whether the personal conduct of the  appellant  represented  a
    genuine present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. That was indeed the test that he  was
    required to perform in accordance with reg.21 (5)

     Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy  ...  it
shall...be taken in    accordance with the following principles-
          (a)   the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
proportionality;
     (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
         the person concerned;
         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
genuine, present       and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
fundamental interests of society

14. The 'serious threat' referred to in paragraph (5) is distinct from  the
    serious grounds referred to in reg. 21(3):

     A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with a
permanent right of     residence under regulation 15 except on serious
grounds of public policy or public security.

     The reason for this is that if the  two  were  the  same,  there  could
    never be a removal pursuant to reg. 21 (1)  taken  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy unless there were also serious grounds of  public  policy
    or public security.  This would then make nonsense of  the  distinction
    so carefully constructed in the hierarchy of protection set out in reg.
    21.

15. The  Judge,  however  appears  to  have  elided  the  two  concepts  by
    conducting an assessment of risk by reference to the  higher  level  of
    risk associated with the second level of protection which is set out in
    Regulation 21(3) of the  EEA  Regulations.   The  Judge  was  there  to
    consider whether as a matter  of  public  policy  the  removal  of  the
    appellant was not proportionate.  He went  on  to  look  at  the  OASys
    Report and then concluded in paragraph 49

     "I consider that the decision of the respondent  is  not  justified  on
serious grounds of     public policy and security".

16. It seems to me that this language of the judge was unfortunate in  that
    it was an express reference to the wrong test, if that is the test  the
    judge was applying; the correct test, being the test set  out  in  reg.
    21(1) of the Regulations, namely public policy and not the test set out
    in reg. 21(3): serious grounds of public policy derived from the status
    of a person who benefits from a permanent right of residence.  In those
    circumstances I find that the error of law was a material one  and   it
    is necessary for me to remake the decision.

17. The circumstances of the appellant's offending were considered  by  the
    OASys assessment and the circumstances of the offence were set  out  in
    page 9 of the report and the impact on the victim  was  dealt  with  at
    paragraph 2.5.  It was said that the motivation behind the  attack  and
    the circumstances which had triggered the attack was that the appellant
    had been drinking heavily on the day of the offence, something that  he
    did not do very often, and that this disinhibited him when his  father-
    in-law came to see him in order to involve him  in  the  offence.   The
    appellant stated that he would not  have  been  involved  had  he  been
    sober.  It was the effect of this conduct that led him to realise  that
    the consequences were not those he should have intended.

18. The  OASys system  assessment  continued  that  the  appellant  felt  a
    sufficient degree of loyalty to  his father-in-law to comply  with  his
    request and that it was fortunate  that  the  injuries  were  not  more
    serious as they well could have been.

19. At the stage of the making of the report the appellant had informed the
    Home Office, although it is a  matter  that  he  denies,  that  he  was
    actively seeking his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  he
    himself had decided to apply for the early removal  scheme  and  return
    back to Poland with his  family.   Although  he  denies  that  this  is
    something he had said, there must have been  a  basis  upon  which  the
    OASys report maker was able to report the matter.  The appellant's time
    in  custody  had  involved  limited  engagement  with   the   education
    department because his spoken and  written  English  was  poor  and  he
    required an interpreter to discuss anything that was  complicated.   He
    hoped to continue to improve his  English  during  the  period  of  his
    imprisonment.  It has to be said, however, that as far as  the  hearing
    today was concerned, the hearing was conducted through  the  assistance
    of a Polish interpreter.

20. The OASys assessment spoke of the contributory  factors  towards  risk.
    It was  said  that  due  to  the  manner  to  which  Mr  Turzynski  was
    manipulated and felt obliged to support  his  father-in-law  to  become
    involved, this was a potentially material risk factor linked to a  risk
    of serious harm and linked to a risk of reoffending.

21. Similarly, in relation to his thinking and behaviour, the report writer
    assessed that the appellant's thinking and behaviour was  linked  to  a
    risk of serious harm and linked to a risk of reoffending.  The same was
    said as to the risk posed by his drinking.

22. Finally at page 38 of the report there was an assessment of medium risk
    of serious harm.  This is  defined  as  where  there  are  identifiable
    indicators of risk of serious harm:

     The offender has the potential to cause serious harm  but  is  unlikely
    to do so unless there is a change of circumstances. For example failure
    to take medication, loss of accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug
    or alcohol misuse.

     In relation to the assessment of risk, at paragraph R 10.6, the  report
    writer concluded that there was a medium risk in the community  to  the
    public, and that there was a medium risk in the community  to  a  known
    adult.

23. The current situation was dealt with at paragraphs R11 -  12.   It  was
    said he was assessed to be a medium risk to the public and to  a  known
    adult in the community but he was  considered  to  be  a  low  risk  of
    reconviction, OGRS, a low risk of general reoffending, a  low  risk  of
    violent reoffending and that the appellant was being currently  managed
    as a MAPPA nominee.

24. This was the material that was before the judge.  He dealt with  it  in
    this way.  He took into account the ages of the children and the length
    of time the applicant had spent in the United Kingdom.   He  took  into
    account the parental role that he had adopted in the  children's  lives
    although said it was yet to be fully tested whether in the  future  his
    relationship with his wife and children and his responsibility  towards
    those children would change the appellant's offending behaviour and his
    attitude.  He recorded the OASys report  assessment  that  this  was  a
    factor which would help the appellant reduce his  offending  behaviour.
    It was properly recorded by the judge that it was not in the children's
    best interests to have a parent in their lives who continues to  commit
    violent offences.

25. The judge then went on to say that he found that the appellant did  not
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to society
    but nevertheless went on to consider the proportionality and it was  at
    that stage that he dealt with the issue of rehabilitation,  considering
    that his wife and children are in the United Kingdom and  that  if  his
    father-in-law were to leave  to  go  to  Poland  then  the  appellant's
    reoffending chances were reduced. Finally he concluded that the support
    provided  by  his  wife   and   children   was   a   material   factor,
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant has spent the vast majority
    of his life in Poland.

26.  Accordingly  the  factors  that  the  judge  took  into  account  were
    relatively limited in their scope and did not, in  my  judgement,  take
    into account the  full  impact  of  the  OASys  system  report  and  in
    particular the grounds of public policy  which  are  contained  in  the
    legislation surrounding  deportation.   The  report  to  which  I  have
    referred as some length clearly indicates that there is a  medium  risk
    to the public.  The risk referred to was a risk  of  history  repeating
    itself: in other words, the risk of violence.  The risk of violence  is
    unquestionably a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  It is  said  to
    be a medium risk to the community at large but obviously also a  medium
    risk to known individuals. That does not simply  arise  from  the  fact
    that there was an altercation in which he was involved with his  father
    in law with whom he is no longer in contact. It arises because  of  the
    risk that occurs when the appellant has  been  drinking.   It  is  also
    arises where the appellant is persuaded by other people who  are  of  a
    more forceful nature to join him in inappropriate behaviour of one sort
    or  another.  Accordingly,  whilst  the  specific  circumstances  which
    resulted in the commission of this offence may well  no  longer  apply,
    there is an underlying problem in relation to the  risk  posed  by  the
    appellant when he is disinhibited after the use of alcohol and where he
    is  subject  to  the  more  forceful  persuasion   of   other   people.
    Consequently there is a two-pronged risk that is faced by the community
    at large.  That is sufficient in my judgement to come within the  ambit
    of the expression 'public policy' found in reg. 21(1).  It is therefore
    in my judgement a legitimate aim for  the  control  of  non-  nationals
    (including importantly European citizens) that the community  at  large
    should be protected against  acts  of  violence  when  an  individual's
    conduct is disinhibited by the  use  of  too  much  alcohol  and  being
    persuaded to act to the detriment of others by third parties.

27. Given these circumstances, it was vital  that  the  judge  demonstrated
    that he was applying the right test and that  to  impose  a  heightened
    threshold gave the impression, at least, of requiring the Secretary  of
    State to overcome a burden that did not exist.  It is clear that  there
    is a public interest - described in the regulations as a public  policy
    - to remove those who present a  risk  to  the  maintenance  of  social
    order.   For these reasons I am satisfied that this is a proper case to
    say that there was a material error of law and that the requirements of
    the 2006 Regulations have been met justifying the appellant's  removal.



28. This brings me on to a consideration of proportionality.  The essential
    foundation of the Secretary of State's view on proportionality  is  the
    risk that is posed to the community by the appellant as a result of his
    past history.  Accordingly on the balance  in  favour  of  his  removal
    there is a substantial weight that has to be  attached  to  the  medium
    risk that is identified in the OASys Report.  It is true that there are
    passages in the report which deal with the low risk of reoffending  but
    these are on the basis that circumstances do not repeat  themselves  in
    such a way that a further offence will take place.   There  was  little
    evidence to say that the  appellant  had  engaged  with  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation, although he had stated that he was motivated to address
    his offending.

29. If that is on one side of the balance then there is on the  other  side
    of the balance the fact that the appellant is married with two children
    who are nationals of Poland.  It is of course true that where there are
    children who  are  involved,  they  must  be  a  primary  consideration
    although not a principal or indeed an  overarching  consideration.   In
    the circumstances of this case the children are aged 8 and 6.  At least
    as far as the daughter is concerned, she has spent a  relatively  short
    period of time in the United Kingdom, arriving at the age of 4.   I  am
    not entirely sure when the appellant's son entered the  United  Kingdom
    but he is aged 6.  Accordingly neither child has  spent  a  substantial
    period of time in the United Kingdom and during the period of time that
    they have spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  they  have  inevitably  been
    involved in a Polish home, if only because the  appellant  himself  has
    according to the evidence only a very limited grasp of English.

30. For these reasons the family may have to make choices.  If  the  choice
    is made that the entire family are to return to Poland that is a choice
    that will not violate the rights of the children involved,  bearing  in
    mind their history.  For these reasons I am satisfied that the  removal
    of the appellant is proportionate and  that  this  is  a  proportionate
    response to the fact that the appellant has been convicted  of  a  very
    serious offence and  an  offence  which  cannot  be  said  to  have  no
    repercussions as far as a risk of further offending  is  concerned.  In
    these circumstances I have formed the view that the appellant's removal
    is proportionate, using the  proportionality  test  that  is  contained
    within reg. 21(5)(a) of the 2006 Regulations.

31. I therefore allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and substitute a
    decision that the appeal of Mr Turzynski against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to make a deportation order is dismissed.

DECISION

     The Judge made an error of a point of law and I  re-make  the  decision
    allowing the appeal of the Secretary of State and dismissing the appeal
    of Mr Turzyinski.


No anonymity direction is made.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL




