

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00639/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2013                               |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SJE

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Jayfurally of Callistes Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Ross and Mrs J Holt) who allowed an appeal against the
      Secretary of State's decision that s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007
      applied.  For convenience, I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal.
   2. In the course of  giving  my  reasons  in  this  determination  it  is
      necessary to refer to the appellant's  son.   Although  neither  party
      addressed me on this issue, it is uncontroversial  that  there  is  no
      valid  reason  why  the  appellant's   son   should   be   identified.
      Consequently, pursuant to rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an order prohibiting
      the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead directly or
      indirectly  to  the  appellant's  son's  being   identified.    As   a
      consequence, the appellant should only be identified as "SJE" and  his
      son as "SE".

The Background

   3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 2 April 2001 with leave to
      enter as a visitor valid until 1  October  2001.   On  that  date,  he
      submitted an application for an extension of stay as a  student  which
      was granted until 20 June 2002.  On 17 April 2002 the appellant made a
      claim for asylum based upon a fear of persecution from a criminal gang
      in Jamaica.  That claim was refused on 13 May 2002 and was not subject
      to appeal.  On 26 June 2002 the appellant applied for further leave to
      remain as a student but, it would appear, no decision was  reached  on
      that application.  However, on 30 May 2006 the appellant  applied  for
      indefinite leave on the basis that he was a dependent  of  his  mother
      who was settled in the UK.  On 20 June 2006 the appellant was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain.

   4. On 20 May 2010 the appellant was convicted at Croydon Crown  Court  of
      attempted  robbery  and  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of   8   years
      imprisonment which was subsequently reduced by  the  Court  of  Appeal
      (Criminal Division) to 6 years imprisonment.  On 12  August  2012  the
      appellant was served with a notice that he was liable  to  deportation
      under the automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act 2007.
       Thereafter, on 14 September  2012  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
      deportation  order  against  the  appellant.   The  appellant   became
      eligible for release on licence on 16 September 2012 but  was,  on  11
      September 2012 detained under the immigration  laws.   On  7  November
      2012, he was granted bail by the First-tier Tribunal.

   5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  under  para  398  of  the
      Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC  395
      as amended) on  the  basis  that  he  had  not  established  that  his
      circumstances were "exceptional".  The First-tier  Tribunal,  however,
      allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  on  the
      basis that his deportation would be  a  disproportionate  interference
      with the family life established between him and his mother and son in
      the UK.  The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  by
      the First-tier Tribunal on 14 May 2013.  Thus the appeal  came  before
      me.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   6. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant relied upon Article 8  of
      the ECHR.  His earlier asylum claim was not pursued.   The  First-tier
      Tribunal had a substantial bundle of documents  running  to  some  305
      pages submitted on behalf of the  appellant.   Contained  within  that
      bundle are witness statements from the  appellant  (pages  8-13);  the
      appellant's mother (pages 14-17); and the appellant's sister (pages 18-
      21).  All three witnesses gave oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

   7. The facts maybe summarised as follows.   The  appellant  came  to  the
      United Kingdom when he was 19 years of age from Jamaica.  He  has  two
      sisters who live there but his father is  deceased.   His  mother  has
      lived in the UK since 2000.  Following a relationship  which  has  now
      ended, the appellant's son (SE) was born on 15 August 2007.  He  is  a
      British citizen.  The appellant's son lived with his mother for only a
      short while of about 6-8 weeks.  Thereafter, the appellant's son lived
      with the appellant and his mother who shared  his  care.   His  sister
      also lived with them together with her two children.  Between December
      2008 and September 2009 when the appellant was arrested, the appellant
      and his son lived separately from the appellant's mother but  she  was
      still involved in looking after him.  After  the  appellant's  arrest,
      the appellant's son went to live with the appellant's mother  and  his
      sister and her two  children.   Since  the  appellant's  release,  the
      appellant, his son, his mother and his sister  and  her  two  children
      have lived together.  Those children are aged 15 and 8.  The  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal was that whilst he was  in  prison  the
      appellant's mother brought his son to visit him once or twice a  week.



   8. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  in  2005  the
      appellant had been involved in a very serious  car  accident  and  had
      sustained a major head injury.  The appellant's evidence was  that  he
      did not  have  any  medical  condition  for  which  he  was  receiving
      treatment but he suffered from memory loss.  At para 12 the First-tier
      Tribunal quoted from a social services  report  (at  page  43  of  the
      bundle) where it is stated that:

           "Father  is  dependent  upon  [his   mother]   emotionally   and
           practically and has not functioned as an independent person  for
           years.  He had acquired a brain injury and I  have  sent  out  a
           fax....requesting for outcome of scan.   Possible  side  effects
           was   reported   to   include   aggression,    impatience    and
           forgetfulness. "

   9. The appellant's mother gave evidence  concerning  the  effect  of  the
      injury on the appellant (at para 13  of  the  determination)  that  he
      became:

           "...aggressive, impatient and forgetful.  Sometimes things have
           to be explained more than once to him."

      He also became dependent upon her emotionally and could not function
on his own.

  10. The appellant's mother gave evidence  that  the  appellant  now  looks
      after his son and takes him to school and provided personal  care  for
      him.  Her evidence was that the relationship between the appellant and
      his son was very close and that she  thought  it  would  be  seriously
      detrimental to the appellant's son if the appellant had to  return  to
      Jamaica.

  11. The appellant's sister also gave evidence that as a result of the 2005
      car accident the appellant's behaviour had changed and that  he  would
      easily become agitated and  forgetful.   Her  evidence  was  that  the
      appellant became very reliant  on  his  mother.   She  said  that  the
      appellant was a very caring and loving father and  that  he  was  very
      much involved with his son's life and that they are really close.  She
      gave evidence that the appellant helps with  his  son's  homework  and
      speaks to his teacher and they play and watch football together.

  12. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant  relied  upon  a  report
      prepared by Dr Walker dated  14  December  2012  who  is  a  Chartered
      Psychologist  with  expertise  in  the  field  of  child  and   family
      psychology.  The report is at pages 290-302 of the appellant's bundle.
       The First-tier Tribunal summarised Dr Walker's reports as follows  at
      paras 17-18:

           "17.  In relation to the appellant, Dr  Walker  noted  that  his
                 presentation suggested that  he  may  have  some  cognitive
                 deficits.  At times  his  ability  to  process  information
                 appeared limited as did his short term  memory  and  verbal
                 expression skills.   He  benefitted  from  having  time  to
                 process  information  presented  in  jargon  free  language
                 before being required to respond.  He told Dr  Walker  that
                 he  had  experienced  some  difficulties  since   his   car
                 accident.

           18.   Dr Walker's assessment of the appellant's son SE, was that
                 he views his father as a  primary  attachment  figure.   He
                 appeared relaxed when in close proximity to his father  but
                 displayed signs of separation anxiety when  separated  from
                 him for a period of time and when unsure as to when he  was
                 returning.   Dr  Walker  has  further   stated   that   the
                 relationship between SE and the appellant is such  that  SE
                 experiences his father as playing a very  significant  part
                 in his life.  Whilst it is noted that the  appellant  could
                 maintain contact with SE via technology,  for  a  child  of
                 SE's  age  it  is  the  direct  contact,  involvement   and
                 anticipation that his father is in his everyday  life  that
                 will  aid  his  emotional  development.   Separation  could
                 result  in  SE   experiencing   cognitive,   psychological,
                 emotional,    behavioural,    physical    and     practical
                 difficulties."

  13. Having set out the circumstances of the appellant and  his  family  at
      paras 19 and 20, the First-tier Tribunal dealt  with  the  appellant's
      offending as follows:

           "19.  We have considered the evidence in relation to the offence
                 for which the appellant was convicted.  He pleaded  guilty,
                 on the second day  of  trial  to  one  count  of  attempted
                 robbery of an individual  and  was  sentenced  to  8  years
                 imprisonment.   He  appealed  against  the  length  of  his
                 sentence.  .....  At  paragraph  18  of  the  judgment,  Mr
                 Justice Hickinbottom states,

                       "we consider the position of [SJE] to  be  different.
                       Although involved in a joint venture to rob [Q] using
                       the steering wheel lock as  a  weapon,  the  evidence
                       suggested that his role was not as great as  that  of
                       [O], whose fingerprints and DNA linked  him  both  to
                       the weapons and to the jewellery.  [O] attacked  [Q],
                       whereas [SJE] did not.  [SJE] certainly did not  play
                       a greater  part  than  [O]  in  the  events  of  that
                       evening.   However,  in   our   view,   the   greater
                       difference between the men was in  respect  of  their
                       criminal records.  [SJE] is 28.  His record  is  very
                       light.   He  has  received  cautions  and  fines  for
                       driving matters and  for  possession  of  cannabis  -
                       nothing near  as  serious  as  this  crime  or  [O's]
                       previous convictions...Serious as this  offence  was,
                       bearing in mind [SJE's] role in it and his relatively
                       good previous record, we consider that  the  sentence
                       of 8 years was  excessive,  and  manifestly  so.   We
                       consider that, after  a  trial,  the  sentence  would
                       appropriately have been seven years;  and  after  his
                       lat plea, it ought to have been six years."

           20.   The appellant has been assessed as a medium risk  of  harm
                 to the public.  We note  that  he  was  released  from  his
                 custodial sentence on 16 September  2012  into  immigration
                 detention.  He was granted immigration bail on  7  November
                 2012 and remains on licence until 17 September 2015. "

  14. Having set those matters out, at paras 25 and 26 of its  determination
      the First-tier Tribunal briefly considered para 398 of the Immigration
      Rules and noted that the public interest in deporting the appellant as
      a result of him receiving a  term  of  imprisonment  of  6  years  was
      "strong" and would only be displaced "in exceptional circumstances".

  15. At  para  26  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's
      circumstances were not "exceptional":

           "26.  The appellant's circumstances, as we find them,  are  that
                 he now lives in a close family unit with  his  mother,  son
                 and sister.  We accept that  the  appellant  has  cognitive
                 difficulties which will make it very difficult for  him  to
                 obtain employment.  We accept that he is very close to  his
                 son and is dependent upon his mother.  Whilst we find  that
                 the appellant's circumstances are difficult, we do not find
                 them to be exceptional.  Accordingly the appeal  under  the
                 Immigration Rules is dismissed."

  16. The appellant does not challenge that finding.

  17.  Having,  therefore,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under   the
      Immigration Rules, the First-tier Tribunal went on at paras  27-32  to
      consider the appellant's case under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The First-
      tier Tribunal said this:

           "27.  The fact that we do not find any exceptional circumstances
                 in  this  case,  does  not  mean   that   the   appellant's
                 deportation  is   proportionate,   accordingly,   we   have
                 considered the matter outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
                 under Article 8 ECHR.

             28. We accept that the appellant's deportation will  amount  to
                 an interference with is family life with his mother and son
                 and engages Article 8 ECHR.  Given that  the  appellant  is
                 subject to automatic deportation, the deportation order  is
                 in accordance with the  law.   The  issue  is  whether  the
                 deportation order is proportionate to the legitimate aim of
                 the maintenance of law and order.

             29. We have taken into account that a primary consideration  as
                 to the balancing exercise is the interests  of  welfare  of
                 the appellant's son who  is  now  aged  6.   We  find  that
                 notwithstanding that the appellant has not been the primary
                 carer for the first 5 years of his son's life, he does have
                 a strong emotional attachment with is son.  We  accept  the
                 evidence of Dr Walker, that his son regards  the  appellant
                 as a primary  attachment  figure.   We  consider  that  the
                 effect on his son, of the appellant's deportation, could be
                 extreme as set out in Dr Walker's report.  The  appellant's
                 son is a British citizen who  is  in  the  custody  of  his
                 grandmother and therefore would remain in the UK.  We  find
                 that the prospect of  his  son  being  able  to  travel  to
                 Jamaica for visits is  negligible,  for  financial  reasons
                 alone.  We find that the likelihood is that the  effect  of
                 deportation  would  be  permanent  separation  between  the
                 appellant and his son.  We find  that  the  appellant  does
                 have cognitive difficulties  as  described  in  the  social
                 services report.  We accept the evidence that he is totally
                 reliant upon his  mother  emotionally.   We  regard  it  as
                 highly unlikely  that  he  would  be  able  to  obtain  any
                 employment in Jamaica.   We find that he could be destitute
                 there.  We accept that the appellant  has  effectively  cut
                 all ties with Jamaica, having lived in the  United  Kingdom
                 for 12 years without returning home.

             30. We acknowledge that the appellant has been convicted  of  a
                 serious criminal offence and was sentenced to a long period
                 of  imprisonment.   We  consider  that  the  strong  public
                 interest in the deportation of those convicted  of  serious
                 criminal offences weighs heavily  in  favour  of  it  being
                 proportionate.  However, we consider that the  interference
                 on the appellant's family life and the effect on his 6 year
                 old son also weigh heavily against  his  deportation  being
                 proportionate.  We have had regard to LD  (Article  8  best
                 interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010]  UKUT  278  (10  August
                 2010) in which it was stated that the interests and welfare
                 of minor children are  a  primary  consideration.   Weighty
                 reasons would be required to justify  separating  a  parent
                 from a lawfully settled minor  child  or  separation  of  a
                 child from a community where they had lived most  of  their
                 life.  The general conditions in the country of removal are
                 also  relevant  to  the  assessment.   In  considering  the
                 general conditions in Jamaica, we have had  regard  to  the
                 appellant's evidence,  in  relation  to  his  asylum  claim
                 concerning the presence of a "gang" culture there, which is
                 supported  by  background  evidence,  and  the  appellant's
                 vulnerability  due  to  his  lack  of  ties  and   economic
                 standing.

             31. We have also had regard to QJ (Algeria) v SSHD [2010]  EWCA
                 Civ 1478 (21 December 2010) in which the  Court  of  Appeal
                 distinguished between the interests of the  child  being  a
                 primary  consideration  but  not  necessarily  the  primary
                 consideration where  there  might  also  be  strong  public
                 interest considerations in deportation cases.

             32. We have carefully weighed the competing interests  in  this
                 case.   Whilst  we  find  that  the  public   interest   in
                 deportation  is  strong,  we  conclude  that,   given   the
                 appellant's personal  characteristics  and  the  effect  of
                 being separated from his  son  and  family  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, his deportation would amount to a disproportionate
                 interference.  Taking all of above factors into account, we
                 come to the conclusion that the appellant's deportation  is
                 disproportionate to the legitimate aim of  the  maintenance
                 of law and order."

  18. Accordingly, the Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal under Article
      8.

The Secretary of State's Grounds

  19. The Secretary of State's grounds, upon which permission to appeal  was
      granted, are as follows:

           "1.   It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal  has  erred
                 in law.  At paragraph 20 the Tribunal has  noted  that  the
                 appellant has been assessed as a medium risk of harm to the
                 public.  However, it is  respectfully  submitted  that  the
                 Tribunal has failed to make any findings of  their  own  in
                 regards to the appellant's risk of harm or re-offending and
                 have only found at paragraph 30  that  his  offence  was  a
                 serious one.

              2. It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal  has  failed
                 to provide adequate reasons for  what  role  the  appellant
                 plays in his son's life given that he does not have custody
                 of his son.  Given that the Tribunal has found at paragraph
                 29 that he is totally reliant on his mother emotionally, by
                 failing to provide these reasons it is submitted  that  the
                 Tribunal's findings as to the best interest of his son  and
                 whether it is proportionate to remove him are flawed.

              3. It is further submitted that the  Tribunal  has  failed  to
                 provide  adequate  reasons  as  to  how  the  appellant  is
                 dependant upon his mother  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.
                 Whilst the Tribunal has found at paragraph  20  (sic)  that
                 the appellant would be destitute, the Tribunal  has  failed
                 to provide adequate reasons for  this  finding,  especially
                 given that he has 2 sisters in Jamaica  who  could  support
                 him and provide him with emotional support  as  his  mother
                 has done.  It is submitted that the Tribunal has failed  to
                 provide adequate reasons as to why the  appellant's  mother
                 and son could not relocate to Jamaica.  It is  respectfully
                 submitted that there are no insurmountable obstacles to the
                 appellant's mother and son from joining him in Jamaica  and
                 that any separation would be of choice and  not  necessity.
                 It is submitted that financial reasons for being unable  to
                 visit the appellant is not  adequate  reasons  for  finding
                 that the appellant  would  not  be  able  to  continue  his
                 relationship with his son if deported.

              4. It is also respectfully submitted  that  the  Tribunal  has
                 failed to provide adequate reasons for why the  appellant's
                 child's best interests outweigh the  public's  interest  to
                 deport him.

              5. It is respectfully submitted that  by  failing  to  provide
                 adequate reasons for these issues the  Tribunal's  findings
                 on proportionality is flawed.

              6. Permission to appeal is respectfully sought so that a fresh
                 decision can  be  made  in  regards  to  the  human  rights
                 decision."

  20. In his submissions, Mr Avery who represented the  Secretary  of  State
      focussed upon ground 1.  He made no oral submissions  in  relation  to
      the remaining paragraphs 2-6 although he stated that the Secretary  of
      State continued to rely on them.  I will return to the  other  grounds
      shortly.

Discussion: (1) Ground 1

  21. Mr Avery submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to  take
      into account the evidence in the OASys report (at pages 328  and  429)
      that the appellant was a "medium risk" of causing serious harm to  the
      public.  He accepted that the Tribunal had referred to  that  risk  at
      para 20 of its determination but had made no  mention  of  it  in  its
      reasons for finding the appellant's deportation to be disproportionate
      in paras 27-32.  The only reference to the  offence  was  in  para  30
      where it was described as a "serious  criminal  offence".    Mr  Avery
      submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of proportionality
      was, consequently, unbalanced.  He also submitted that the  First-tier
      Tribunal had not, even in para 19 where it dealt with the  appellant's
      offending, considered the actual circumstances of his  offence.     Mr
      Avery relied upon the First-tier Tribunal's finding  under  the  Rules
      that the appellant's circumstances were not "exceptional" and he  also
      referred me to the recent decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.

  22. Mr Jayfurally, on behalf of the appellant submitted  that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal had referred to the appellant's risk of re-offending  in
      para 20 and it should not be understood not to have had that  in  mind
      when shortly after in its determination it  reached  its  findings  on
      proportionality.   He  acknowledged  that   perhaps   the   First-tier
      Tribunal's reasoning could have been fuller but, he submitted, it  had
      done enough and it was open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  reach  the
      conclusion that it did.

  23. Both ground 1 and Mr Avery's submission supporting it seeks  to  argue
      that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account  a  relevant
      matter, namely the appellant's risk of re-offending  in  reaching  its
      conclusion that his deportation would not be proportionate.    In  its
      terms, this ground does  not  argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision was not properly open to it on the evidence.  In  particular,
      it raised no issue of perversity.

  24. It is clear that in paragraph 20 of its determination  the  First-tier
      Tribunal acknowledged and accepted that the appellant  was  a  "medium
      risk of harm to the public".  At  para  19,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      quoted  a  passage  from  the  Court  of  Appeal  (Criminal  Division)
      judgement setting out the elements of the appellant's offending  which
      that court considered relevant in setting the appropriate sentence for
      the appellant and, in particular, in concluding that the sentence of 8
      years was excessive and that the appropriate sentence  was  one  of  6
      years imprisonment.

  25. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make  specific  reference  to
      that in para 30 of its determination, it did note that  the  appellant
      had been convicted of a "serious criminal offence"  and  that  he  was
      "sentenced to a long period of imprisonment".  The First-tier Tribunal
      then noted that:

           "We consider that the strong public interest in the  deportation
           of those convicted of serious criminal offences  weighs  heavily
           in favour of it being proportionate."

  26. The Tribunal's determination has to be read as a whole.  The  Tribunal
      set out the appellant's risk of re-offending in para 20 and dealt with
      the circumstances of his offending at para 19.   It  would  require  a
      wholly unjustified distortion in the First-tier  Tribunal  process  of
      reaching its decision to conclude that what had been set  out  clearly
      and unequivocally in paras 19 and 20 had simply been omitted from  its
      thinking in paras 27-32 (in particular at 30) in weighing  the  public
      interest against the interference with the appellant's family life  in
      finding that his deportation would not be proportionate.

  27. In my judgement, the Tribunal did have well in mind the risk that  the
      appellant posed to the public.  Nothing that the Tribunal said in para
      30 suggests otherwise and the Tribunal's clear finding that there  was
      a "strong public interest" that  "weigh  heavily"  in  favour  of  the
      appellant's deportation being proportionate was a proper reflection of
      the seriousness of his criminal offending consistent with the approach
      of the Secretary of State set out in para 398 of the Immigration Rules
      and the legislative policy in favour of deporting "foreign  criminals"
      in the UK Borders Act 2007.  Nothing, in my  judgement,  said  by  the
      Tribunal in para 30 of its determination is inconsistent with the view
      (most recently) expressed by Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria) at [54] where  he
      said:

           "54.  ...while the authorities demonstrate that there is no rule
                 of exceptionality for Article 8,  they  also  clearly  show
                 that the more pressing the public interest  in  removal  or
                 deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8
                 if it is to prevail.  The pressing  nature  of  the  public
                 interest ... is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
                 Parliament's express declaration  the  public  interest  is
                 injured if the deportation is not effected.  Such a  result
                 could in my judgement only be justified by  a  very  strong
                 claim indeed."

  28. As I have already indicated, ground 1  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      grounds of appeal relied upon by Mr Avery in his oral submissions does
      not seek to challenge the rationality  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision.  Rather, it is restricted to  arguing  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  fell  into  error  in  failing  to  take  into  account  the
      appellant's risk of re-offending.  For the reasons I have given,  that
      ground is not made out.

Discussion: (2) Remaining Grounds

  29. Mr Avery did not seek to address me on the remaining grounds  set  out
      in the Secretary of State's  application  for  permission  to  appeal.
      These grounds argue, in essence, that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
      to give adequate reasons for its findings:

              1) that the appellant is  dependent  upon  his  mother  beyond
                 normal emotional ties so as to give rise to "family life";

              2) as to the role that the appellant plays in his  son's  life
                 given that he does not have custody of his son;

              3) that the appellant's mother and son could not  relocate  to
                 Jamaica;

              4) that the best interests of the appellant's  child  outweigh
                 the public interest in deporting the appellant.

  30. Although Mr Avery made  no  oral  submissions  in  relation  to  these
      grounds,  Mr  Jayfurally  briefly  dealt  with  the  grounds  in   his
      submissions.

  31. In relation to a so-called "reasons" challenge  the  correct  approach
      was recently summarised by the Chamber President (Blake J)  in  Shizad
      (Sufficiency of Reasons: Set  Aside)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00085
      (IAC) at [10] as follows:

           "10.  We would emphasise that although there is a legal duty  to
                 give a brief explanation of the conclusions on the  central
                 issue on which the appeal is determined, such reasons  need
                 not be extensive if the decision as a  whole  makes  sense,
                 having regard  to  the  material  accepted  by  the  Judge.
                 Although a decision may contain an error of law  where  the
                 requirements to give adequate reasons  are  not  met,  this
                 Tribunal would not normally set aside  a  decision  of  the
                 First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of
                 law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and  the
                 relevant Country Guidance is taken into account, unless the
                 conclusions that the judge  draws  from  the  primary  data
                 before him were not reasonably open to him."

  32. Again, I emphasise that neither Mr Avery nor the  grounds  argue  that
      the First-tier Tribunal's decision was "not reasonably" open to it.

  33. In respect of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  mother,  the
      evidence from the witnesses was that, as a result of the  injuries  he
      suffered in the  serious  car  accident  in  2005,  he  was  dependent
      emotionally upon his  mother  with  whom  he  lived.   That  was  also
      supported by the social services report although it  is  not  entirely
      clear whether that was an independent view reached or one  based  upon
      what the report writer had been told.    At  para  29  the  First-tier
      Tribunal stated that:

           "29.  We accept the evidence that he is totally reliant upon his
                 mother emotionally."

  34. It does not seem that the evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  head
      injury and its consequences was directly challenged before the  First-
      tier Tribunal.  In any event, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to
      accept that evidence and to find, as it  did  in  para  29,  that  the
      appellant was "totally reliant" upon his mother.  On the basis of that
      finding, even though the appellant is 32 years of  age,  the  Tribunal
      was entitled to find  that  that  amounted  to  "family  life".   That
      finding is entirely consistent with the jurisprudence  concerning  the
      nature of "family life" between an adult offspring and its parents set
      out in summary by the Upper Tribunal in Ghising (Family Life -  Adults
      - Ghurkha Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at [50]-[62] and approved by
      the Court of Appeal in R (Gurung and Others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  8
      at [46].

  35. As regards the appellant's relationship with his son,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had before  it  an  expert  report  of  Dr  Walker  which  is
      summarised at paragraph 17 and 18 of the determination which I set out
      earlier.  On the basis of that report, the Tribunal  was  entitled  to
      find that the appellant was a "primary attachment figure" for his  son
      and that his son would experience, as the First-tier Tribunal  put  it
      in  para  18,  "cognitive,  psychological,   emotional,   behavioural,
      physical and practical difficulties".  That was Dr Walker's view  even
      in the light of the fact that the appellant's son also lived with  the
      appellant's mother who had custody of him.  It was the reality of  the
      appellant's relationship with his son  to  which  Dr  Walker's  report
      spoke and which the Tribunal was fully entitled to take into  account,
      despite the  appellant's  mother  having  custody  of  the  child,  in
      reaching its findings on the impact upon the appellant and  his  son's
      "best interests" if the appellant were deported.

  36. In relation to the claim that the Tribunal failed to provide  adequate
      reasons as to why  the  appellant's  mother  and  his  son  could  not
      relocate to Jamaica, in response  to  an  enquiry  from  me  Mr  Avery
      accepted that it was the Secretary of State's position that it was not
      reasonable to expect a British citizen child to relocate  outside  the
      European Union.  That was the Secretary of State's confirmed  position
      before the Upper Tribunal  in  Sanade  and  Others  (British  Children
      -Zambrano - Dereci) India [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC)  and  clearly  it
      continues to be so.  I need say nothing more about this  ground  other
      than to state that it is without merit.

  37. Turning to the issue of the child's best interests, it is  clear  that
      the Tribunal correctly directed itself on the relevance  of  the  best
      interests of the appellant's son and that they  were  not  necessarily
      determinative (see ZH(Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 per Lady Hale  at
      [26]).  Those interests can be outweighed by the  public  interest  in
      the deportation of a "foreign criminal" if sufficiently pressing  (see
      SS(Nigeria) per Laws LJ at [58]).  At para 31 the First-tier  Tribunal
      reminded itself that the best interests of the appellant's son were "a
      primary consideration but not necessarily the  primary  consideration"
      and then reminded itself that  "there  might  also  be  strong  public
      interest considerations in deportation cases" before finding that  the
      appellant's deportation would not be  proportionate.   The  First-tier
      Tribunal took those into account,  as  it  was  required  to  do,  and
      "carefully" weighing them against the public interest, concluded  that
      the impact upon the  appellant  and  his  son  outweighed  the  public
      interest.  The First-tier Tribunal's reasons, linked to their  earlier
      factual findings,  adequately  explain  to  the  reader  its  ultimate
      conclusion that the Secretary of State has failed  to  establish  that
      the appellant's deportation is proportionate.

  38. Reminding myself of what was said in  Shizad,  whilst  the  First-tier
      Tribunal reasons  may  not  be  extensive,  their  decision  that  the
      appellant's deportation would be disproportionate makes sense  reading
      the determination as a whole.  The Tribunal makes clear finding on the
      nature and dependency of the appellant's relationship with his  mother
      and also clear findings on the nature of the relationship between  him
      and his son and the likely effect on  his  son  if  the  appellant  is
      deported to Jamaica where it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant's son  to  relocate  as  a  British  citizen  and  with  the
      attendant financial difficulties of visits  by  his  son  to  Jamaica.
      Having regard to the best interests of the  appellant's  son  and  the
      impact upon the appellant's family life if deported, the Tribunal  was
      entitled to find,  despite  the  serious  nature  of  the  appellant's
      offending which it expressly recognised and the strong public interest
      in deportation given that offending, that the Secretary of  State  had
      not  established   that   the   appellant's   deportation   would   be
      proportionate.

  39. As I have already  indicated,  neither  the  grounds  nor  Mr  Avery's
      submissions  challenged  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   assessment   of
      proportionality on the basis it was irrational or  perverse.   A  mere
      disagreement  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   finding   that   the
      appellant's Art 8 rights outweighed the public interest  does  not  in
      itself demonstrate any legal error  even  if  not  every  judge  would
      necessarily have reached the same view given the serious nature of the
      appellant's offending.  The appellate function of the  Upper  Tribunal
      is to correct any legal error identified in the First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision.   In this appeal, there are none.

  40. For the above reasons, the Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.



Decision

  41. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in allowing the appellant's
      appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  That decision stands.






                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















