

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00570/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th January 2019 and 29th April   |On 10 May 2019                       |
|2019                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                 LUIS MORAIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh (pro bono on 9th January 2019), Ms R
Moffatt on 29th April, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan on 9th January, Mr D Clarke on 29th
April, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

            By a decision promulgated on 23rd January 2019 I set aside  the
            decision of the First-tier Tribunal for the following reasons:


               1. On 18th September 2017, the SSHD took a decision to make a
                  deportation order on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  in
                  accordance with regulation 23(6)(b) and regulation  27  of
                  the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016
                  against Mr Morais.


               2. Mr Morais had been convicted of assault occasioning actual
                  bodily harm for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  18  months
                  imprisonment and made the subject of a restraining  order.
                  He was also convicted for breach  of  a  non-  molestation
                  order and sentenced  to  18  months  imprisonment  to  run
                  consecutively.   The   total   sentence   was   3    years
                  imprisonment. He did not appeal sentence or conviction.


               3. Mr Morais appealed  the  deportation  decision  submitting
                  that as an EU National, deportation was  'unsuitable'  and
                  that his  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  upon  his
                  children. He appeared  in  person  before  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal and, in a decision promulgated on 26th June 2018,
                  First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird allowed the appeal, finding
                  that Mr Morais had been residing in  the  UK  continuously
                  from  2002  until  the  expulsion  decision   dated   18th
                  September 20178[1]; he thus achieved the  third  level  of
                  protection (enhanced protection)  and  imperative  grounds
                  for his removal were required.


               4. The respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal
                  on the following grounds:


                            ....
                      4.At the hearing the judge found that:
                           . [Mr Morais] can only be deported on imperative
                             grounds of public  security,  having  acquired
                             this  protection  by  virtue   of   10   years
                             residence in the  UK  prior  to  incarceration
                             [42];
                           .  [Mr  Morais']  offences  cannot  be  seen  as
                             threats to  the  public  or  sections  of  the
                             public, as the offences took place against his
                             former partner [42];
                           . The appellant does not pose a threat to public
                             security [43].
                      The [SSHD] considers the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                      has erred in the following ways:
                      5.The [SSHD] submits the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
                      has  applied  the  wrong   test   when   establishing
                      'imperative' protection, by applying a purely  binary
                      calculation to conclude that the appellant  has  been
                      resident  in  the  UK  from  2006  -  2017.  As   the
                      respondent had already stated in his decision  letter
                      that  the  appellant  had  been  unable  to  show   a
                      continuous 5 year  period  exercising  Treaty  rights
                      until  2014,  it  was  incumbent  on  the  First-tier
                      Tribunal Judge, if he disagreed, to make  a  contrary
                      finding and explain how the 10  years  period  relied
                      upon had been reached. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
                      makes no such findings  in  respect  of  a  permanent
                      right  of  residence  (PRR)  see  [31-31],  and   the
                      Tribunal only considers temporal factors rather  than
                      examining whether [Mr Morais] has  been  residing  in
                      accordance  with  the  directive  for  the  requisite
                      period.  It  is  necessary  in  EEA  cases  for   the
                      appellant to show they have acquired permanent rights
                      of residence before they can  move  on  to  the  next
                      stage of preferential protection. Reliance is  placed
                      on CJEU JUDGMENT (Joined cases C-316/16 and  C-424/16
                      which  provides "Accordingly the Court concludes that
                      the enhanced protection linked to a 10-year period of
                      residence in the host member State is available to an
                      EU citizen only if he first satisfies the eligibility
                      condition for the lower level of  protection,  namely
                      having a right of permanent residence after  residing
                      legally in the host Member  State  for  a  continuous
                      period of five years."
                      6.As  the  [SSHD]  considered  [Mr  Morais]  did  not
                      acquire PRR until 2014, he would not have  been  able
                      to show imperative protection until  2019,  by  which
                      time continuum would have been broken by a period  in
                      prison. The [SSHD] submits  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                      Judge has  made  a  material  error  in  finding  [Mr
                      Morais]   has    imperative    protection,    without
                      establishing a prior period of PRR  first.  Similarly
                      [Mr Morais] is unable to show  much  in  the  way  of
                      integration.
                      7.The  respondent  also  considers   the   First-tier
                      Tribunal Judge is  wrong  to  conclude  that  because
                      [his] violence has been against his ex-partner,  this
                      equates to him not being a danger to the public [53].
                      The [SSHD] submits that the ex partner is a member of
                      the  public  ,  who  should  not  be   differentiated
                      against, simply because of the relationship. If there
                      was no ongoing risk from  [Mr  Morais]  ,  the  court
                      would not have considered  it  necessary  to  put  in
                      place the indefinite restraining order to prevent [Mr
                      Morais] from contacting the ex partner. Moreover, the
                      fact that [Mr Morais] broke  that  restraining  order
                      demonstrates a wider disregard of laws  and  societal
                      values....[Mr Morais'] offending behaviour is clearly
                      an issue to warrant state intervention. There  is  no
                      suggestion that underlying character, one which could
                      pose a threat to  any  sector  of  society  has  been
                      adequately  managed.  It  is   considered   that   to
                      effectively  discount  the  offending  behaviour  and
                      minimise the  potential  victims  the  [sic]  in  the
                      manner which the Tribunal did, amounts to a  material
                      error of law.
                      8.....without  'imperative  protection  -  which  the
                      [SSHD] does not accept has been properly determined -
                      all he needs to show is that [Mr  Morais]  meets  the
                      criteria of regulation 27(3).  The  [SSHD]  maintains
                      that deportation on 'serious grounds'  is  warranted,
                      bearing in mind [Mr Morais']  violent  offending  and
                      disregard for Orders of the Court, so  that  for  the
                      above  reasons  and  those  given  in  the   [SSHD's]
                      decision letter dated  18/09/17  it  remains  in  the
                      public  interest  to  deport  him  as   quickly   and
                      efficiently as possible.
                      ...


               5. Mr Walsh accepted that  the  decision  by  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge that the threats to his former partner were
                  not threats to public order was an error  but  took  issue
                  with whether it was an error of law such as to  cause  the
                  decision to be set aside.


               6. Mr Walsh also accepted that the comment by the  First-tier
                  Tribunal judge that the sentence imposed could be seen  to
                  be harsh was not appropriate but that it did not amount to
                  an error of law in the context of this appeal.


               7. Mr  Walsh,  who  was  representing  Mr  Morais  pro  bono,
                  provided a very helpful skeleton argument.


               8. The respondent accepted  Mr  Morais  had  been  exercising
                  Treaty Rights from 2009 until 2016 - a  continuous  period
                  of 7 years - and that he had acquired permanent residence.
                  In the reasons for the decision the SSHD disputed that  Mr
                  Morais had been resident in the UK since 2002: he referred
                  to Mr Morais' broken National  Insurance  record  for  the
                  years  2004-5  and  2005-6,  and  2007-8  and  2008-9.  He
                  accepted that Mr Morais had made a full year  of  National
                  Insurance contributions for the year  2002-3  and  2003-4,
                  2006-7. Because of this the SSHD did not  accept  that  Mr
                  Morais  had  been  continually  resident  in  the  UK  and
                  exercising his Treaty Rights since 2002.


               9. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the SSHD submitted that Mr
                  Morais had failed to show that he had been resident in the
                  UK for a continuous period of 10 years;  that  there  were
                  serious grounds of public policy and public security  that
                  required Mr Morais' removal from the UK.


              10. The First-tier Tribunal judge identified the issue  before
                  her in [27] of her decision namely


                      "firstly whether  [Mr  Morais]  has  established  five
                      years' continuous residence in the United  Kingdom  in
                      accordance with the Regulations and therefore  can  be
                      said to be permanently resident in the United Kingdom.
                      Or secondly whether [Mr Morais] has acquired ten years
                      continuous residence in the  United  Kingdom.  If  [Mr
                      Morais] satisfies ten years' then in  accordance  with
                      Regulation 27 the Secretary of State has to show  that
                      there are imperative grounds for deporting [him]  from
                      the United Kingdom on grounds of public  security.  If
                      he fails to acquire ten years but nonetheless acquires
                      five years' continuous residence then serious  grounds
                      of public policy and public security have to be  shown
                      before he can be deported."


              11. It is unclear why the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  thought
                  she had  to  determine  whether  Mr  Morais  had  acquired
                  permanent residence, given that the SSHD accepted  he  had
                  (as confirmed by Mr Tufan  before  me).  Nevertheless  she
                  went on to accept Mr Morais' evidence, that of his  cousin
                  and the witness statement of his ex-partner  that  he  had
                  been residing in the UK  since  2002  and  had  only  gone
                  abroad on holiday with his family.  She  also  found  that
                  even if the period after 2002 was broken,  which  she  did
                  not accept, he could rely on the period  from  2006  until
                  the expulsion decision in 2017 , to  establish  10  years'
                  residence. In paragraph 35 she states


                       "...[Mr   Morais]   has   established    [continuous
                       residence for 10 years]. The mere  fact  that  there
                       are partial national insurance contributions for two
                       years between 2005 and 2007 does not mean  that  [Mr
                       Morais] was not residing in the  United  Kingdom  at
                       that time. The evidence that has been provided  both
                       by the [SSHD] and [Mr  Morais]  shows  that  despite
                       that time [Mr  Morais]  has  been  residing  in  the
                       United Kingdom  continuously  from  2006  until  the
                       decision to deport him was taken in 2017."


              12.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  Mr  Morais'
                  offending in  the  context  of  'imperative'  grounds  for
                  removal. She did not consider them in  the  context  of  a
                  person who has permanent residence ie level 2  protection:
                  serious grounds of public policy and public security  save
                  to state in [43]


                      "...Finally  I  must  consider  whether  [Mr  Morais]
                      continues to pose a present  and  genuine  threat  to
                      public security. On the evidence before  me  he  does
                      not."


              13. Mr Tufan submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had
                  erred in law in finding that Mr  Morais  had  acquired  10
                  years residence such that he acquired 'imperative grounds'
                  protection. He submitted that the 10 years could  only  be
                  acquired  if  a  person  had  already  acquired  permanent
                  residence  and  thereafter  acquired  a  further  5  years
                  residence in the UK. He submitted that in order to acquire
                  'imperative grounds' he not only had to show that  he  had
                  five years' permanent residence (which the  SSHD  accepted
                  he had shown in 2016) but that he  had  been  residing  in
                  accordance with the Directive for 10 years and this  could
                  only have been achieved in 2021 if the appellant  had  not
                  been imprisoned and subject to an expulsion decision.


              14. This omits to take into consideration the  provision  that
                  once  a Union Citizen  acquires  the  right  of  permanent
                  residence, the right to  reside  is  not  subject  to  the
                  continuing exercise of Treaty Rights (see [53] and [54] C-
                  316 and C-424/16).


              15. [61] C-316 makes clear that a person must have a right  of
                  permanent residence  as a prerequisite for eligibility for
                  protection against expulsion under the enhanced  '10-year'
                  protection. Mr  Walsh  accepted  that  in  calculating  10
                  years, the residence must be legal residence but submitted
                  that  the  10  years  residence  could  be  accrued  by  a
                  combination  of  residence  both  pre-   and   post-   the
                  acquisition of permanent residence provided that there was
                  a total 10 years lawful residence. There was no suggestion
                  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  Mr  Morais  had  been
                  unlawfully residing in the UK.


              16.  Paragraph  5  of  the  grounds  takes  issue   with   the
                  calculation by the judge of the 10 years.  But  the  judge
                  heard evidence, saw the documentary evidence and reached a
                  conclusion that he had been in the UK since 2002 and  that
                  his residence had not been broken. As an  alternative  she
                  finds that Mr Morais can rely upon the period  since  2006
                  until the expulsion  decision.  The  judge  gave  adequate
                  reasons for finding he had been resident in the  UK  since
                  2002. There is no error of law in that finding.


              17. There is no requirement that a person has to be exercising
                  Treaty rights for the 10 year period to be able to acquire
                  enhanced protection. None of the case law to which  I  was
                  referred required the  10  year  period  of  residence  to
                  commence with an initial period of five  years  exercising
                  Treaty Rights. If that were the case I would expect  there
                  to have been some suggestion or dicta to that effect.


              18. The two significant decisions referred to - C-400/12 and C-
                  316/17 & C-424/16 both discuss enhanced protection and how
                  it can be lost.


              19. In C-400/12 MG  v  Portugal  the  operative  part  of  the
                  judgment is recorded as


                       Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must   be
                       interpreted as meaning that a period of imprisonment
                       is, in principle, capable both of  interrupting  the
                       continuity  of  the  period  of  residence  for  the
                       purposes of that  provision  and  of  affecting  the
                       decision  regarding  the  grant  of   the   enhanced
                       protection provided for thereunder, even  where  the
                       person concerned resided in the  host  Member  State
                       for the 10 years prior to imprisonment. However, the
                       fact that that person resided  in  the  host  Member
                       State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment may  be
                       taken into consideration  as  part  of  the  overall
                       assessment required in order  to  determine  whether
                       the integrating links  previously  forged  with  the
                       host Member State have been broken.


              20.  Paragraphs  67  to  69  of  C-316/16  consider   enhanced
                  protection. National Authorities are required to take into
                  account "all the relevant factors". In [68] the court says


                       "...an  overall  assessment  must  be  made  of  the
                       person's situation on each occasion at  the  precise
                       time when the question of expulsion arises"


              21. The First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  consider  all  the
                  circumstances. She  only  considered  how  many  years  Mr
                  Morais had been resident.


              22. The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  do  not  in
                  detailed terms raise the issue of "all  the  circumstances
                  when  the  question  of  expulsion"  arose.  Nor  did  the
                  decision letter, which referred only to the assertion that
                  Mr Morais had not acquired  enhanced  protection.  But  in
                  paragraph 6, the grounds state:


                       "Similarly [Mr Morais] is unable to show much in the
                      way of integration".


              23. Mr Walsh submitted that the question of what else  had  to
                  be taken into account in determining whether  someone  had
                  enhanced protection, other than 10 years residence had not
                  been before the First-tier Tribunal  judge  and  thus  the
                  only issue she had to determine was whether Mr Morais  had
                  been resident for 10 years. It could not, he submitted  be
                  an error of law for her not to  determine  something  that
                  was not before her.  Mr Tufan submitted that the  question
                  of integration  had  been  raised  before  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal. It is correct that the issue of integration  was
                  brought to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal  judge
                  but, it  seems from the judgment, this was in the  context
                  of submissions made by the SSHD in relation  to  the  mid-
                  level of protection as a person with permanent  residence,
                  not enhanced protection.


              24. It does appear  that  the  issue  whether  Mr  Morais  was
                  entitled to enhanced protection is not merely  a  question
                  of how long Mr Morais  had  resided  in  the  UK  was  not
                  brought to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal judge.
                  The submissions seem, from the judgment, to  have  centred
                  around the SSHD's submission that Mr Morais had  not  been
                  continually  resident  for  10  years  and  was  thus  not
                  entitled to  enhanced  protection;  although  the  judge's
                  comments about public order and on the sentence passed  do
                  indicate that she was  aware  that  something  else  ought
                  perhaps to have been considered.


              25. Although the question of whether Mr Morais, with 10  years
                  residence, was entitled to enhanced protection should have
                  been considered  by  the  judge  in  the  context  of  the
                  circumstances as a whole  it  seems  that,  despite  there
                  being reference to his conduct and the  sentence,  it  was
                  not considered properly. There is  no  finding  as  to  Mr
                  Morais' integration or whether his  circumstances  are  or
                  were such that he lost what  enhanced  protection  he  may
                  have had. Although this was not brought to  the  attention
                  of the First-tier Tribunal in terms, she was  required  to
                  reach a decision in accordance with  the  law,  which  she
                  failed to do.


   1. The issues before me were firstly whether Mr Morais  was  entitled  to
      enhanced protection on the basis of integrative links arising from  10
      years lawful residence and if so  whether  he  meets  the  'imperative
      grounds of public security test. Secondly if  he  does  not  meet  the
      enhanced protection  criteria,  whether  the  'serious  grounds  test'
      (level 2) is met. Finally, there was the question whether  deportation
      would breach the appellant's Article 8 rights. Neither  representative
      made submissions on this latter point, agreeing that it in fact  added
      little to the issues to be decided by me.

   2. I had the following documents before me:

                 . Respondent's bundle as before the First-tier Tribunal;
                 . Appellant's bundle as believed to be before  the  First-
                   tier Tribunal listed as 42 pages but not  including  the
                   document stated to be on page 42;
                 . Diagnostic and Developmental Assessment by the  National
                   Autistic Society on the youngest child  dated  following
                   assessment on 28th March 2018;
                 . Appellant's bundle of documents for the  Upper  Tribunal
                   pages 1 to 15a;
                 .  Response  to  the  pre-action  protocol  request   from
                   Chelmsford Family Court;
                 . Respondent's revised skeleton argument dated  7th  March
                   2019;
                 . Appellant's skeleton argument undated;
                 . Speaking note prepared by Ms Moffatt  dated  11th  March
                   2019.

   3. I  heard  oral  evidence  from  Ms  Newman,  (the  appellant's  former
      partner), Mrs DaLuz (the appellant's mother) with the assistance of an
      interpreter, and from the appellant. The appellant amended his witness
      statement prior  to  signing.  I  heard  oral  submissions  from  both
      representatives.

   4. The appellant, a Portuguese citizen, born on 2nd  November  1985,  has
      been continuously residing in the UK  since  2002,  exercising  Treaty
      Rights.  He  acquired  permanent  residence  in  2007.  The  expulsion
      decision is dated 18th September 2018, made following his  conviction,
      after a contested trial, on 8th February 2017 for assault  occasioning
      actual bodily harm  and for breach of  a  restraining  order.  He  was
      sentenced on 8th March 2017 to 18 months imprisonment on  each  count,
      to run concurrently.  He  was  also  made  subject  to  an  indefinite
      restraining order preventing him from contacting Ms Newman directly or
      indirectly, save through solicitors.

   5. According to the sentencing remarks, the  content  of  which  was  not
      challenged, the appellant met Ms Newman some 14  years  prior  to  the
      conviction. They have 2 daughters born 2007 and 2010:

             ...the relationship began to change when she  became  pregnant
             with your youngest daughter. You had been taking steroids  and
             became aggressive and irrational in your behaviour,  she  told
             us. And in 2014 you started dabbling in cocaine but  it  later
             increased she told us  to  a  daily  habit.  You  accepted  in
             evidence that you  were  a  heavy  cocaine  user,  spending  a
             substantial amount of money per week.  You  kept,  during  the
             relationship, asking her for money threatening  to  smash  the
             house up if you didn't get it. Ms Newman estimated  that  from
             2014 until the end of your relationship, she  spent  something
             reaching �10,000 on your drug addiction.
             On  20th  September  14,  an  argument  started.  You   became
             aggressive towards her and punched  her  twice  in  the  face,
             striking her right jaw, the second punch  far  heavier.  As  a
             result she fell to the floor and blacked out.....she  did  not
             at that stage report the matter to the police and forgave you,
             but the relationship did not improve because of your continual
             demand for money and your ever increasing  cocaine  habit  and
             thus on other occasions, not indictments -  counts,  you  used
             unpleasant  and  aggressive  violence  upon  her...9th   March
             2016...16th  April  2016...Again  she  did  not  report  these
             matters to the police ....but thereafter you  were  constantly
             and  continually   phoning   or   texting   her....21st   June
             [2016]...you struck her...on 23rd  June  [2016]  at  last  she
             reported your behaviour to  the  police  and  applied  to  the
             Family Court for a non-molestation order,  which  was  granted
             and continued until 6th January [2017].
             Following service of this order...you denied  having  received
             it, lying to the jury about it and accusing  that  officer  of
             lying. You flouted its conditions....
             Although the incidents of violence  described  by  Ms  Newman,
             save count 1, do not form  counts  on  the  indictment,  I  am
             entitled to take them into account as  additional  aggravating
             features....
             Looking that the guidelines in assessing your culpability  and
             harm, there is a proven history of violence by you towards  Ms
             Newman and an abuse of both power and trust...


   6. The appellant's evidence as to dates was vague. I accept that this may
      have been in large part because he was being asked about matters  that
      took place several years ago. He  said  he  had  taken  2  courses  of
      steroids, of about 5 to 6 weeks each, around 2010 when he was  working
      as a bouncer/doorman. He did not say  when  he  first  started  taking
      cocaine but was sure that he had not been taking cocaine at  the  same
      time as the steroids. He said that after his arrest (August 2016) that
      he started to wean himself off cocaine to the extent that he was  drug
      free by the time of his trial; that he stopped taking drugs  in  about
      February 2017, and that he didn't know when he  stopped  taking  drugs
      altogether, but he had stopped before he went to prison.  He  said  he
      was no longer taking any drugs. He denied hiding drugs whilst  he  had
      been taking them. The  appellant  produced  no  drug  testing  results
      either for his time in  prison  or  since  his  release;  he  said  he
      recalled being tested for drugs once in Maidstone prison; he  had  not
      volunteered for regular drug tests; he had  not  undertaken  any  drug
      related courses other than the one he said he  had  completed  in  HMP
      Chelmsford for which he did not have a certificate.  He  said  he  had
      been to hospital once because of cocaine use; he  had  spoken  to  his
      doctor two or three times about giving up;  there  as  no  documentary
      evidence from the GP.

   7. His cousin provided a witness statement to the First-tier Tribunal and
      an undated letter to the Upper Tribunal but did  not  attend  to  give
      oral evidence; according to the appellant this was because she  had  a
      business to run. In her statement she said she had not had much to  do
      with the appellant prior to his arrest in August 2016 but  that  after
      his arrest she saw him regularly to offer him support and  friendship.
      She said that she believed "he had been taking drugs  and  he  stopped
      using them". She says she is aware that he did a drug abuse course  in
      HMP Chelmsford although he did not get a certificate. She does not say
      when she thinks he stopped taking drugs, and nor does she say how  she
      was aware he had done a drug abuse course

   8. Ms Newman's evidence was that the appellant's behaviour had changed in
      2009 when he took steroid. She thought it was around July, just before
      she discovered she was pregnant in August. He  became  irrational  and
      violent. She confirmed that she realised  he  was  taking  cocaine  in
      2011; she found some, but he had been violent and aggressive prior  to
      her discovery that he was taking cocaine. She referred in a  telephone
      call with CAFCASS to the appellant having alcohol problems when he was
      trying to give up cocaine and that he had been to hospital on  several
      occasions because of excess use of cocaine.

   9. The appellant expressed remorse and dismay at his violence. He said in
      oral evidence that he realised he  was  guilty  of  the  offences  the
      moment he committed but he pleaded not guilty and his trial was  fully
      contested. He did not provide an explanation why he  had  pleaded  not
      guilty if he knew  he  had  committed  the  offences;  in  later  oral
      evidence he said he had accepted his  guilt  when  he  was  sentenced.
      According to the report of the telephone call he had with the  CAFCASS
      officer on 26th October 2016 he was denying his had assaulted her  and
      had been defending himself. He denied  receiving  the  non-molestation
      order Ms Newman obtained from the  Family  Court;  he  continued  that
      denial in his witness statement before me (which although  amended  on
      the day of the hearing, did not amend  that  paragraph)  but  in  oral
      evidence he accepted he had received it. He had moved out of the joint
      home a few months before he was arrested ie around  March/April  2016.
      He confirmed that until his arrest  in  June  2016  he  had  seen  his
      children through their maternal grandparents  but,  according  to  the
      CAFCASS report, this had  stopped  because  the  maternal  grandmother
      threatened him. He had sought a Child Arrangement Order after that. He
      had not seen them after his arrest.

  10. Ms Newman's evidence e was that after he moved out, he  had  seen  the
      children through her parents, but she had stopped  this  because  they
      had said they were no longer willing to facilitate the visits  because
      of his violent threats. She did not know the nature  of  the  threats,
      she had not witnessed any between the appellant and  her  parents  and
      only knew what she had been told. She confirmed that the appellant had
      made a child arrangement order  application  but  that  after  he  was
      released from prison she contacted his mother and  they  arranged  for
      him to see the children at her home. She recognised that  there  would
      be an impact upon the children  having  seen  violent  and  aggressive
      behaviour, but she had no fears  that  he  would  be  violent  to  the
      children. Because he now complied with the restraining order there was
      no risk of  them  witnessing  any  violence  or  aggressive  behaviour
      towards her. She had been speaking to his brothers and  his  brothers'
      wives while he was in prison and  since  his  release.  She  said  his
      behaviour had become much calmer and more  focussed.  He  didn't  skip
      work and she accepted that he was no  longer  on  drugs.  He  saw  the
      children  every  week  and  they  occasionally  stayed  overnight.  In
      response to a question from me she said she  was  not  merely  relying
      upon what the appellant's brothers said about his behaviour  and  that
      he as now drug free, but  she'd  also  spoken  to  their  wives,  some
      friends and most of all her children. She said they wanted to see him,
      were very happy when they saw him and if they expressed the  slightest
      doubt about seeing him then she would not make them go; they had never
      expressed any doubt and she had no worries about any risk to them.

  11. The youngest child is on the autistic spectrum. The  report  does  not
      refer to the appellant other than in passing; it was prepared when  he
      was in prison. The report recommends that changes in routine should be
      managed by pre-warning and supported visually. before me is dated

  12. I have placed no weight on the witness  statement  or  undated  letter
      from  the  appellant's  cousin;  she  was  not  available  for  cross-
      examination and it was not possible to obtain any detail of  what  she
      said such as to support or not support the  appellant's  account.  She
      does not refer to helping the appellant give up drugs, rather that  he
      had stopped taking drugs.

  13. I have placed  no  weight  on  Mrs  DaLuz's  evidence.  She  was  very
      reluctant to accept that the appellant had committed  the  crimes  for
      which he had been convicted. She described his behaviour  as  'normal'
      during the period he was on bail at a time when he  was  taking  drugs
      and on his own evidence he was aggressive. She said that when he  came
      out of prison she had discussed with him doing courses to address  his
      offending behaviour, but she could not recall the course or when  that
      discussion took place. I do not  believe  that  discussion  ever  took
      place given that she did not acknowledge that  he  had  committed  the
      crimes.  I have concerns  that  if  the  appellant  did  mistreat  the
      children, although  she  said  she  would  inform  Ms  Newman  of  any
      mistreatment, she would not in fact do so because of her reluctance to
      accept her son was guilty of violent crime against Ms Newman.

  14. The appellant dissembled n some respects. He was  not  forthcoming  in
      his acknowledgement of the difficulties that had existed in  terms  of
      contact through Ms Newman's parents but, given Ms Newman's evidence, I
      have no reason to doubt that he has genuine love and affection for his
      children. I have no reason to doubt but that he is caring and  is  not
      violent or aggressive towards them. In so far as his  drug  taking  is
      concerned, he was vague and  sometimes  inconsistent  as  to  when  he
      ceased taking drugs. He was, I find, honest that it was a process  and
      was not an immediate curtailment  of  drug  taking.  I  find  that  he
      started taking steroids in 2009 and although he  may  not  have  taken
      cocaine at the same time, I find that he started taking  cocaine  very
      shortly  afterwards.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  drug   taking   was
      instrumental in aggression towards Ms Newman and that this  aggression
      started whist she was pregnant with  their  youngest  child.  Although
      possibly not culminating in actual physical violence for some years, I
      find that the aggression was such as to cause significant difficulties
      in their  relationship  (as  referred  to  by  Ms  Newman)  and  which
      frequently resulted in him leaving the home.

  15. Ms Newman was very impressive. She  was  thoughtful  and  despite  the
      appellant's previous aggressive behaviour and violence towards her she
      was concerned to maintain a relationship between him and the children.
      She was aware of the impact upon them of witnessing violence  and  had
      taken care to ensure that they had a relationship with  their  father;
      this was not because  of  what  he  wanted  but  because  she  saw  it
      important for the children to see him. The affection they hold for his
      is borne out in the copy letters in the bundle. Although there  was  a
      lack of evidence from the appellant 'proving' that he was drug free, I
      am satisfied that her assessment could be relied upon. I am  satisfied
      d that although she did not deal  immediately  with  his  violent  and
      aggressive behaviour when it started in 2009, her  current  views  and
      attitude are such that if there were any relapse in his drug taking or
      behaviour, she would immediately take steps to  stop  him  seeing  the
      children. I accept her evidence that she believes him to be drug  free
      and tat belief is  not  only  genuinely  and  sincerely  held  but  is
      sufficient to enable me to find that on the evidence before me, he  is
      now drug free.

      Integrative links

  16. Mr Morais has been resident in the UK since 2002 when he was 17  years
      old. He acquired permanent residence in 2007. He has continued to live
      in the UK and, save for his time in prison, has worked  more  or  less
      continuously. He had a long-standing relationship with Ms Newman which
      finally broke down after violence and aggression in around March/April
      2016. His violent and aggressive behaviour commenced in  mid-2009  and
      gradually became worse, fed  by  illegal  drug  use.  There  had  been
      periods of time before that when they had  not  lived  together.  They
      have two children born 2007 and 2010. He  speaks  fluent  English  and
      apart from occasional holiday visits out of the UK, the whole  of  his
      adult life has been in the UK. He speaks Portuguese, but it is unclear
      whether he can read or write Portuguese. His close family, there  than
      one brother, is in the UK although they have little or  no  effect  on
      his criminality. His former partner had to obtain a restraining  order
      in 2016, which he broke. He is  subject  to  a  life-long  restraining
      order preventing him from having any direct contact with   his  former
      partner and indirect contact is only permissible through a  solicitor.
      He continued to take illegal drugs until  sometime  in  2017.  He  was
      sentenced to a cumulative period of imprisonment of  3  years  on  8th
      February 2017. The expulsion decision is dated 18th September 2017.

      In B v Land Baden-Wurttemberg (C-316/16) and Secretary of State for
      the Home Department v Vomero (C-424/16) the ECJ gave a preliminary
      ruling on 17th April 2018  and held, in response to the four questions
      before it:


         Was it a prerequisite of eligibility  for  the  protection  against
         expulsion provided for in Directive 2004/38 art.28(3)(a)  that  the
         person concerned have a right  of  permanent  residence?  Yes.  The
         court noted that the protection against expulsion provided  for  in
         the directive gradually increased in proportion to  the  degree  of
         integration of the EU citizen concerned in the host  Member  State.
         Thus, whereas a citizen with a permanent  right  of  residence  may
         only be expelled on 'serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
         security', a citizen who had resided in the host Member  State  for
         the previous ten years may only be expelled on 'imperative  grounds
         of public security'. Accordingly, the enhanced protection linked to
         a 10-year period of residence was available to an EU  citizen  only
         if he first satisfied the eligibility condition for the lower level
         of protection, namely having a right of permanent  residence  after
         residing legally in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
         of five years.
         How should the period corresponding to  the  'previous  ten  years'
         within the meaning of Directive 2004/38 art.28(3)(a) be calculated?
         The 10-year period of residence must be calculated by counting back
         and that period  must,  in  principle,  be  continuous.  The  court
         observed, however, that  Directive  2004/38  did  not  specify  the
         circumstances which were capable of interrupting the 10-year period
         of residence for  the  purposes  of  the  acquisition  of  enhanced
         protection. The court therefore held  that  an  overall  assessment
         must  systematically  be  made  of  the  situation  of  the  person
         concerned at the time when the question of expulsion arose. In that
         assessment, the national authorities had to take all  the  relevant
         factors  into  consideration  in  each  individual  case  and  must
         ascertain whether the periods of absence from the host Member State
         involved the transfer  to  another  State  of  the  centre  of  the
         personal, family or occupational interests of the person concerned.
         Did periods of imprisonment automatically deprive a person  of  the
         enhanced protection  in  Directive  2004/38  art.28(3)(a)?  No.  To
         determine whether detention  periods  had  broken  the  integrative
         links  previously  forged  with  the  host  Member  State,  it  was
         necessary to carry out an overall assessment of  the  situation  of
         the person concerned at the  precise  time  when  the  question  of
         expulsion arose. Thus, periods of detention did  not  automatically
         deprive a person of the enhanced protection. The court also pointed
         out that the overall assessment of  the  situation  of  the  person
         concerned must take into account the strength  of  the  integrative
         links forged with the host Member State  before  his  detention  as
         well as the nature of the offence, the circumstances in which  that
         offence was committed and the behaviour  of  the  person  concerned
         during the period of imprisonment.
         At what point in time  should  compliance  with  the  condition  of
         having 'resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  previous  ten
         years' be assessed? At the date  on  which  the  initial  expulsion
         decision was adopted. However,  where  an  expulsion  decision  was
         adopted but its enforcement was deferred for a  certain  period  of
         time, it may be necessary  to  carry  out  a  fresh  assessment  of
         whether the person concerned represented a genuine, present  threat
         to public security.


  17. Mr Morais has been in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  10  years,
      counting back from the expulsion decision. The period of  imprisonment
      does not, per se,  break any integrative links he may  have  acquired.
      In this appeal it is  relevant  to  consider  whether  Mr  Morais  had
      acquired integrative links during his residence in the UK.

  18. The consumption of cocaine in the manner undertaken by  the  appellant
      of  necessity  involves  the  illegal  possession  of  cocaine  which,
      although not charged, is a  criminal  offence.  The  violence,  albeit
      maybe not actual physical violence, and aggression meted  out  to  his
      partner commenced whilst she was pregnant  with  their  second  child.
      Such behaviour, although directed  at  only  one  person,  so  far  as
      alleged, is in any event a threat to public order. The possession  and
      consumption of illegal drugs  is  a  threat  to  public  order.  I  am
      satisfied that Mr Morais' behaviour since 2009 is such as to  conclude
      that he had not acquired integrative links at that time,  irrespective
      of the fact that he remained in the UK. His continued  consumption  of
      illegal drugs and his continued aggression towards his partner  was  a
      continuing threat to public order. Despite having the  centre  of  his
      life in the UK, continuing to live  and  work  in  the  UK,  and  have
      children, his behaviour is not that of a man who is integrated into UK
      society.

  19. Mr Morais is not a man who  had  acquired  integrative  links  over  a
      period  of  10  years  prior  to  his  arrest   and   that   therefore
      consideration had to be given to whether he had lost them. He had  not
      acquired such links.

  20. I find that Mr  Morais  is  not  entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
      protection from expulsion.

      Permanent residence

  21. As a person with permanent right of residence, a decision to remove Mr
      Morais can only be taken on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and
      public security.  In assessing this, regulation 27 and Schedule  1  of
      the 2016 Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 are  to
      be considered.

  22. It cannot be otherwise but that  his  personal  conduct  represents  a
      genuine present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
      fundamental interests of society - he is the subject of  a  life  time
      restraining order. Of particular relevance to the  proportionality  of
      the decision as to whether there are serious grounds of public  policy
      and public security such that he is deported, adverse  to  Mr  Morais,
      are his lengthy period of illicit  drug  taking,  his  aggressive  and
      violent behaviour not only to his  former  partner  but  also  to  his
      partner's parents, his  criminal  conviction  and  sentence,  that  he
      breached a non-molestation order and that he is the subject of a life-
      time restraining order.

  23. Matters that go to the decision being disproportionate that are to  be
      taken into account include the fact that  he  has  not,  save  to  the
      extent that his children witnessed the violence against  his  partner,
      been violent towards the children and there was no evidence  that  the
      children have been significantly harmed by his behaviour, he is not  a
      persistent offender; he has worked more or less consistently, he is no
      longer taking illicit drugs, he sees his children  on  a  regular  and
      frequent basis, he is a caring and  loving  father  and  the  children
      would be very upset if they no longer saw him or had regular  frequent
      physical contact with him with occasional overnight stays, one of  the
      children is autistic and a change in her routine in seeing  him  could
      have a serious impact,  the  children's  mother  who  is  responsible,
      thoughtful and very conscious of the best interest of the children  is
      firmly of the opinion that he should remain in the UK so that they can
      continue to develop their relationship with him. Although he  has  not
      developed integrative links such as to enable him to claim the highest
      threshold, since his release from prison he has become  more  focussed
      on his work, has not succumbed to illicit drugs  and  has  placed  the
      development of his family at the centre of his life. He is  determined
      to be at low risk of re-offending by OASys.

  24. Mr Clarke submitted that little weight could be placed on Ms  Newman's
      evidence with regard to Mr Morais'  reform.  He  expressed  continuing
      concern at the indications in the CAFCASS  report  as  to  Mr  Morais'
      violence and drug taking and that the  behaviour  was  such  that  the
      children ought to be considered to be at risk from him because of  the
      impact on children of adverse behaviour by a parent. I do  not  accept
      that submission in this case. Ms Newman gave  evidence  that  she  had
      spoken to social services and to the CAFCASS officer; there was and is
      no continuing interest by social services in  the  children  and  they
      were never placed on the 'At  Risk'  register.  This  reflects  social
      services being of the view that Ms Newman was a fit and proper  person
      to be able to manage and deal with her ex- partner's behaviour and was
      legitimately able to decide whether and to what extent he  should  see
      the children. Although Mr Clarke referred  to  the  reference  in  the
      CAFCASS report  to  their  intention,  if  the  Children  Arrangements
      Application was pursued,  to undertake a full assessment as indicative
      of continuing  concern,  this  is  misplaced.  Firstly,  the  Children
      Arrangements Application was not pursued because Mr Morais was sent to
      prison. Secondly, there is a presumption of no  order  in  the  family
      courts and it would only be if the  parents  could  not  agree  as  to
      future contact that a further application would be  made  which  would
      then necessitate a further CAFCASS report based on the situation as it
      was then. On  the  basis  of  Ms  Newman's  evidence  before  me,  the
      considerations that arose at the  time  that  CAFCASS  prepared  their
      disclosed  report,  such  considerations  would   no   longer   apply.
      Furthermore, given that the children were 'known' to  social  services
      at the time of the trial and conviction, if there were any concerns by
      social services about the contact between Mr Morais and his  children,
      then they could be expected to initiate action of their own volition.

  25. The best  interests  of  the  children  clearly  lie  with  Mr  Morais
      remaining in the UK and being able to maintain  regular  and  frequent
      physical contact with them; this cannot  be  achieved  through  skype,
      face time etc. Weight has to be placed on the views of Ms Newman given
      that she is the victim of Mr Morais' criminality and the great concern
      and effort she has put into enabling the children  to  foster  a  good
      relationship with their father.

  26. That is now and  remains  drug  and  offence  free  and  continues  to
      maintain  this  relationship  renders,   I   find,   his   deportation
      disproportionate.

  27. In so far as the other matters that are required to be  considered  as
      set out in regulation 27 and Schedule 1, I am satisfied  that  on  the
      current evidence the appellant is drug free and,  although  previously
      involved in illicit drugs which is of wide societal harm, the societal
      harm is now reduced.

  28. Taking all of these matters into account and considering the  evidence
      as a whole I find that the deportation of Mr Morais on serious grounds
      of public policy and public security is not justified.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be remade.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal and make the following decisions:
     i) The appellant has not acquired the necessary integrative  links  to
        enable him to be treated as having a continuous period of 10  years
        residence prior to the expulsion decision;
    ii) As a person with permanent residence, the appeal of  the  appellant
        against his deportation is allowed; there are no serious grounds of
        public policy and public security such as justify his expulsion.

                                    Date 2nd May 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] Typographical error corrected

