
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00505/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th August 2018                           |On 24th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              edvinas lucinskis
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Walker of Counsel instructed by Atlas Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Juss promulgated on 20 February 2018, in  which  Mr  Lucinskis'  appeal
    against the decision to deport him dated 23 August  2017  was  allowed.
    For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  with  Mr  Lucinskis  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. I found an error of law in  Judge  Juss'  decision  promulgated  on  20
    February 2018 following the first hearing of  this  appeal  on  15  May
    2018.  The background to this appeal is set out in  the  error  of  law
    decision contained in the annex and will  not  be  repeated  here  save
    where reference to the background facts is needed.   This  decision  is
    the re-making of the appeal.

 3. In my error of law decision promulgated on 2 July 2018, the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was set aside, with the preserved finding that  the
    Applicant had not acquired permanent residence in the United Kingdom, a
    point which neither party had sought permission to  appeal  on  and  on
    which no submissions were made during the error of law  hearing  on  15
    May 2018.  The parties were directed to  file  and  serve  any  further
    evidence to be relied upon no later than 14  and  21  days  before  the
    relisted hearing respectively in respect of any of the live  issues  in
    the appeal.

 4. At the hearing on 24 August 2018, the  Appellant  sought  to  submit  a
    skeleton argument and further documentation, primarily directed towards
    the issue of whether the Applicant had a permanent right  of  residence
    in the  United  Kingdom.   However,  as  was  clear  from  my  previous
    decision, there was a preserved finding of fact that the Applicant  did
    not have permanent residence.  The Appellant had not sought  permission
    to cross-appeal this finding nor in fact had any mention been  made  of
    this point prior to the day of the  re-making  hearing.   Further,  the
    directions for filing of any further documents had  not  been  complied
    with.  There was no good explanation for the matter  not  being  raised
    previously nor any formal application for permission  to  appeal  being
    made and I declined to allow the point to be argued, with the preserved
    finding of fact as previously indicated.

The appeal

Applicable law

 5. Pursuant to regulation 23(6)(b) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 (the  "EEA  Regulations"),  the  Respondent  may
    deport an EEA national where that person's removal is justified on  the
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health.   Any  such
    deportation must be in accordance with regulation 27 which provides  as
    follows:


        1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA  decision
           taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
           health.
        2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
        3) ...
        4) ...
        5) The public policy and public security requirements of the United
           Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by  these
           Regulations in order to protect  the  fundamental  interests  of
           society, and where a relevant decision is taken  on  grounds  of
           public policy or public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles -
             a)  the  decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
                proportionality;
             b) the decision must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                conduct of the person concerned;
             c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine,
                present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
                fundamental interests of society, taking into  account  past
                conduct of the person and that the threat does not  need  to
                be imminent;
             d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or  which
                relate  to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                justify the decision;
             e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
                themselves justify the decision;
             f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,  even  in
                the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided  the
                grounds are specific to the person.
        6) Before taking a relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
           policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  heath,
           family and economic situation of P, P's length of  residence  in
           the United Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the
           United Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's  country  of
           origin.
        7) ...
        8) A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements of this
           regulation are met must  (in  particular)  have  regard  to  the
           considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of public
           policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society
           etc).

 6. Further to regulation 27(8), Schedule 1 provides as follows:

       Considerations of public policy and public security


        1. The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of  public  policy
           or public security  values;  Member  States  enjoy  considerable
           discretion, acting within the parameters set by the EU Treaties,
           applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own
           standards of public policy and  public  security,  for  purposes
           tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.

       Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom


        2. An EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national  having
           extensive familial and societal links with persons of  the  same
           nationality or language does not amount to  integration  in  the
           United Kingdom; a  significant  degree  of  wider  cultural  and
           societal integration must be present  before  a  person  may  be
           regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.
        3. Where an EEA national or the family member of  an  EEA  national
           has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent  offender,
           the longer the sentence, or the more numerous  the  convictions,
           the greater  the  likelihood  that  the  individual's  continued
           presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present and
           sufficiently serious threat affecting the fundamental  interests
           of society.
        4. Little weight is to be attached to the  integration  of  an  EEA
           national or the family member of  an  EEA  national  within  the
           United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were  formed  at
           or around the same time as -
             a) the commission of a criminal offence;
             b) an act otherwise  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
                society;
             c) the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was  in
                custody.
        5. The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA  national  or  the
           family member  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
           substantive evidence of not demonstrating a threat (for example,
           through demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member
           of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or  rehabilitated)
           is less likely to be proportionate.
        6.  It  is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
           requirements in the United Kingdom that  EEA  decisions  may  be
           taken to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right  otherwise
           conferred by these Regulations in the case of abuse of rights or
           fraud, including -
             a) entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person to
                enter or to attempt to enter, a marriage, civil  partnership
                or durable partnership of convenience; or
             b) fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, or assisting
                another to obtain or to attempt to obtain, a right to reside
                under these Regulations.

       The fundamental interests of society


        7. For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests
           of society in the United Kingdom include -
             a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
                laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the
                immigration   control   system   (including   under    these
                Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;
             b) maintaining public order;
             c) preventing social harm;
             d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;
             e) protecting public services;
             f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an
                EEA national with a conviction (including where the  conduct
                of that person is likely to cause, or has  in  fact  caused,
                public  offence)  and  maintain  public  confidence  in  the
                ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;
             g) tackling offence likely to cause harm to  society  where  an
                immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify  but
                where there is wider societal harm (such as offences related
                to  the  misuse  of  drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-border
                dimension as mentioned in Article 8391) of the Treat on  the
                Functioning of the European Union);
             h) combating the effects of persistent offending  (particularly
                in relation to offences, which if taken  in  isolation,  may
                otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation
                27);
             i) protecting the rights and freedoms of  others,  particularly
                from exploitation and trafficking;
             j) protecting the public;
             k) acting in the best interests of  a  child  (including  where
                doing so entails refusing a child admission  to  the  United
                Kingdom, or otherwise  taking  an  EEA  decision  against  a
                child);
             l) countering terrorism and  extremism  and  protecting  shared
                values.

Explanation for the refusal

 7. In the decision letter dated 23 August 2017, the  Respondent  sets  out
    the Appellant's immigration  and  criminal  history  as  follows.   The
    Appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 2010  but  there
    is no record of his entry and officials were only aware of his presence
    in the United Kingdom when he received a caution on 17  June  2012  for
    battery.

 8. On 29 April 2014, the Appellant was convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm and sentenced to a 10 month  referral  order  (which
    was revoked on 31 March 2015) and ordered to pay compensation.

 9. On 31 March 2015, the Appellant was convicted of battery and  sentenced
    to a 6 month referral order and ordered to pay  compensation.   On  the
    same date, he was convicted of harassment to which he was sentenced  to
    a 6 month referral order to run concurrently, to pay costs and a victim
    surcharge.

10. On 4 August 2015, the Appellant was convicted  of  theft  (shoplifting)
    and sentenced to a 6 month conditional discharge  and  ordered  to  pay
    costs and a victim surcharge.    This was later varied to  a  community
    order with 50 hours unpaid work.

11. On 4 February 2016, the Appellant was convicted of theft  (shoplifting)
    and sentenced to a community order with unpaid work and ordered to  pay
    a victim surcharge.  He was also convicted on that date for breach of a
    conditional discharge.

12. On 31 March 2016, the Appellant was convicted  of  theft  (shoplifting)
    and sentenced to a community order with 80 hours unpaid  work,  ordered
    to pay a victim surcharge and costs.

13. On 19 August 2016, the Appellant was convicted  of  wounding/inflicting
    grievous bodily harm and sentenced to  20  months'  imprisonment  in  a
    young offenders institute and ordered to pay a  victim  surcharge.   On
    the same date he was also convicted  of  battery  and  sentenced  to  4
    months' imprisonment to run concurrently.

14. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years and  therefore  made  the  decision  to
    deport on grounds of public policy only.

15. In consideration  of  regulation  27(5)  and  Schedule  1  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, the Respondent noted that the Appellant had been convicted
    of 11 offences on 6 occasions, including whilst on referral orders from
    previous convictions and that the offences included unprovoked violence
    and had escalated in severity.  In particular, regard was  had  to  the
    sentencing remarks for the last offence and it  was  decided  that  the
    Appellant's behaviour was  contrary  to  the  six  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society set out in Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations.  The
    Appellant was considered to be of a  high  risk  of  offending,  was  a
    persistent offender and posed a significant risk to the general  public
    such that overall he represented a  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to society.

16.  The  Respondent  considered  the   Appellant's   deportation   to   be
    proportionate having had regard to his age, that he was 19  years  old;
    that he had not been resident in the United Kingdom for five years  and
    had not adapted or integrated into life in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant speaks the language of his home country and could be assisted
    by his parents on return to Lithuania, using skills  and  education  to
    obtain employment or pursue further studies on return.

17. With regards to rehabilitation, the Respondent had no evidence  of  any
    rehabilitative work undertaken by the Appellant whilst in  custody  and
    considered that his family would be unlikely to  provide  such  support
    given they were unable to prevent past offending.

18. The Respondent gave separate consideration to the Appellant's right  to
    respect for private and family life under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights, through the prism of paragraphs 398 to 399A
    of the Immigration Rules and sections 117A to 117D of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    The Appellant  has  no  partner  or
    children in the United Kingdom (no evidence of any named partner  being
    submitted)  and  nor  did  he  meet  the  private  life  exceptions  to
    deportation.   The  Respondent  did  not  find  any   very   compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

19. The Appellant had  also  claimed  that  his  deportation  would  breach
    Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights but the Respondent
    did not accept he would be destitute or homeless on return.

20. Finally, the Appellant's appeal was certified under  regulation  33  of
    the EEA Regulations  such  that  he  could  be  removed  pending  final
    determination of his appeal and he was  so  deported  from  the  United
    Kingdom in 2017.  The Appellant either did not request readmission  for
    the purposes of his appeal under regulation 41 of the EEA  Regulations,
    or this was not approved by the Respondent and he did not appear at the
    oral hearing.

The Appeal

21. The Appellant initially appealed on the basis that he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and was thus subject
    to the higher public policy threshold in regulation 27(2)  of  the  EEA
    Regulation and in any event, on the  basis  that  he  did  not  pose  a
    genuine, present or sufficiently serious threat in the United Kingdom.

The Written Statements

22. In his written statement dated 14 September 2017, the Appellant  states
    that he came to the United Kingdom with his immediate family in  August
    2010 and his parents have been working in the United Kingdom ever since
    (save for periods of maternity leave and ill-health).  The  Appellant's
    younger sister is in school in the United Kingdom and  his  brother  is
    studying  at  college.   The  Appellant  has  no  family  remaining  in
    Lithuania.

23. The Appellant claimed to have integrated socially and  culturally  into
    the United Kingdom, receiving education and medical treatment  here  as
    well as being in a relationship and developing friendships.  He  stated
    that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  him  returning  to
    Lithuania, where he would have no one to  support  him  financially  or
    emotionally and where he has no accommodation.

24. In a separate written statement dated 18  August  2017,  the  Appellant
    stated that he was now residing in  Lithuania  without  any  income  or
    accommodation.  He had some help from social stations for food  but  it
    was sometimes hard  as  he  wasn't  registered  in  Lithuania.   As  to
    accommodation, he stayed with friends who helped him with a little  bit
    of money but also stayed at the railway  station  overnight  sometimes.
    The Appellant's mother sent him a cheap mobile  phone  after  which  he
    could contact people.  The Appellant is unable to find employment as he
    is registered as living in the United Kingdom.   The  Appellant  misses
    his family and wants to help them particularly because of his  father's
    illness.

25. Irina Lucinskaja, the Appellant's  mother,  in  her  written  statement
    signed and dated 18 August 2017, describes her family  history  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She stated that the  Appellant  had  been  removed  to
    Lithuania but he had no employment  and  did  not  speak  the  language
    there.  She was unable to send him money as he could not  open  a  bank
    account and he is now homeless.

The Oral Evidence

26. Ms Irina Lucinskaja, the Appellant's mother, attended the oral hearing,
    adopted her written statement and gave oral evidence  through  a  Court
    appointed interpreter.  She stated that she had arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom with  her  partner  and  two  children  (one  of  whom  is  the
    Appellant) in 2010 and that she has been working as a cleaner  for  six
    years.

27. The Appellant is currently residing in Lithuania, but his mother is not
    sending him any money as she can not afford to do  so  and  instead  is
    only able to send him some presents, like clothes.  The  Appellant  was
    working on a construction site the week before the hearing but was only
    being offered temporary jobs for a week at a time  as  he  can  not  be
    offered  anything  permanent  or  full-time  without  registration   in
    Lithuania.

28. The Appellant and his family declared that they were leaving  Lithuania
    in 2012 so their registrations ended.  To re-register, you need to have
    a residential address and the Appellant does not have one, a person has
    to agree to you using the address and no one will because they would be
    liable for additional taxes.   The  Appellant  has  been  staying  with
    friends and acquaintances that he had previously been  to  school  with
    but his mother does not know  his  address  as  they  won't  allow  the
    Appellant to disclose it to anyone.

29. In cross-examination, the Appellant's mother stated that  there  is  no
    family remaining in Lithuania so he is only  supported  temporarily  by
    old acquaintances who let  him  stay  for  a  week  or  a  month.   The
    Appellant's mother sends presents to the Appellant via a van service to
    a local post office where he can collect them.  The Appellant's  mother
    can not send money to the Appellant as he does not have a bank  account
    or registration in Lithuania and she could not afford to do so  anyway.
    Registration is required to do anything by law in Lithuania.

30. The Appellant and his mother communicate via messenger when he has  the
    money to top up his internet and she tries to call him  when  possible.
    The  Appellant's  mother  was  asked  if  the  Appellant  can  pay  for
    essentials like food if he is able to pay for internet,  to  which  she
    said that of course he eats but is looking thin and buys  the  cheapest
    internet or uses wifi when he can.

31. The Appellant's mother confirmed that she thought her son had committed
    crime in the United Kingdom because he was associating with bad  people
    and that she is sure he has not  committed  any  crimes  following  his
    deportation to Lithuania.  She thought this was because he had grown up
    and understands now how not to get into trouble rather than because  it
    was easier for him to do so in Lithuania.

32. In the absence of  any  documentary  evidence  about  the  registration
    system in Lithuania, I asked further questions  of  the  witness.   She
    stated that she did not know  if  there  is  a  legal  requirement  for
    registration.  In terms of accommodation, if you are renting, you  need
    your landlord's permission or ask them to register you but if  you  own
    your own property, you can stay without any registration.  In terms  of
    work, you can be registered on a temporary basis for work, perhaps  for
    one or two weeks.  Without registration, you are not able to use public
    medical services.  The Appellant's  mother  was  not  sure  what  state
    support may be available for accommodation, she thought there were some
    hostels but they were used by people with problems and alcoholics.

33. The Appellant had been working a week at a time in different places and
    had been paying friends for accommodation and buying food.

Closing submissions

34. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that the following factors
    weighed heavily in the balance for the assessment  of  proportionality.
    First, the  Appellant's  age  and  that  his  offences  were  primarily
    committed as a minor between the ages of 15 and 18;  and  that  he  was
    given relatively low sentences including referral orders, a conditional
    discharge and community orders with only one custodial sentence for the
    last conviction.  It was submitted that these sentences  suggested  low
    level offending and  although  the  sentencing  remarks  for  the  last
    offence, with reference to the pre-sentence report, showed a high  risk
    of reoffending, this would need to be  reassessed  over  time  and  two
    years have since passed.

35. The Appellant has had a good record since being in custody and also  in
    immigration detention and it was submitted that he has taken  on  board
    interventions which would have been put in place in custody  such  that
    he no longer poses a threat to the United Kingdom.

36. All of the Appellant's family live in the United Kingdom and he has  no
    family support in Lithuania, only relying on old friends.  His economic
    situation  is  poor  and  he  has  not  been  able  to  find  permanent
    accommodation or employment.  The Appellant has  made  little  progress
    building a life for  himself  in  Lithuania  because  of  his  lack  of
    registration there.  Although the Appellant  does  not  claim  to  have
    spent most  of  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  spent  a
    significant part of it here between the ages of 12 and 18; during which
    time he has completed his education and become socially and  culturally
    integrated, speaking English fluently.

37. In relation to Article 8 (as expressed in the Immigration Rules in  the
    context of deportation cases) and the factors in  section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, it was accepted on  behalf  of
    the Appellant that he could not meet either of the  express  exceptions
    to deportation despite the family life he  has  with  his  parents  and
    siblings but in any event it was submitted that his  deportation  would
    be a disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life relying on the same factors as set out above in
    relation to the EEA Regulations.

38. On behalf of the Respondent, concerns were raised about the submissions
    that the Appellant's offending was of a  low  level  reflected  by  the
    sentencing as this was wholly inconsistent with the sentencing  remarks
    for the last offence and a referral order would have been  made  solely
    on the grounds of the Appellant's age rather than by reference  to  the
    seriousness of the offence.  The index offence was  tried  in  a  Crown
    Court as the Appellant was 18 at the time of the offence.

39. It was submitted that the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending  had  decreased  was  pure  speculation  with  no  reliable
    evidence to support it.  The threat posed by the Appellant was  clearly
    demonstrated by the sentencing remarks and the Appellant's  history  of
    being a repeat violent offender, with unprovoked attacks of  increasing
    seriousness, from actual bodily harm in 2014, to an attack on a  former
    partner in 2015 and grievous bodily harm and assault in 2016 for  which
    the Appellant showed no remorse.  The fact that the Appellant  has  not
    offended since does not carry any significant weight given the  ongoing
    deportation  proceedings.   Further,  it  was  submitted  that  if  the
    Appellant had not offended in Lithuania, it shows that he has  achieved
    some level of rehabilitation there which he had not been able to do  in
    the United Kingdom.  However, the  issue  of  rehabilitation  was  less
    weighty in the absence of permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Overall it was  submitted  that  the  Respondent  had  shown  that  the
    Appellant posed a genuine and present threat to more than  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of the United Kingdom.

40. As regards to proportionality, it as submitted that there was no up  to
    date evidence from the Appellant himself although he  continued  to  be
    legally  represented  and  therefore  presumably  in  touch  with   his
    solicitors to give instructions for  the  appeal.   The  only  evidence
    available as to his current  circumstances  was  from  the  Appellant's
    mother as  a  second  hand  account  and  it  was  submitted  that  she
    exaggerated her evidence to try to help her son.

41. There is no evidence before the Upper Tribunal as to  any  registration
    requirement in Lithuania or why the Appellant could not register, could
    not open a bank account, could not obtain accommodation or  employment.
    The Appellant has now been living  in  Lithuania  for  around  a  year,
    paying rent for accommodation and working regularly even if in a series
    of temporary jobs.  There is no reason as to why he could not  now,  or
    in  due  course,  register  in  Lithuania  and  obtain  more  permanent
    accommodation and employment  (even  if  registration  is  required  to
    achieve this).  Further, on the balance of probabilities, the Appellant
    can be supported by his family in the  United  Kingdom  and  has  found
    support from family/friends in Lithuania to date.  There is also a lack
    of evidence to suggest that the Appellant has not been able  to  access
    any social assistance in Lithuania.

42. The Respondent  remained  of  the  view  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    integrated into the United Kingdom given the escalation of his offences
    for at least half of his time in the United Kingdom  which  his  family
    were unable to control or help prevent.

43. The Appellant is an  adult,  living  independently  in  Lithuania,  who
    speaks fluent Lithuanian and Russian.  Although he has close family  in
    the United Kingdom, that is not sufficient to show his  deportation  is
    disproportionate.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Respondent can only deport the Appellant on the grounds  of  public
    policy or public security in accordance with Regulation 23 of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  In accordance with those  provisions  set  out  above,  I
    consider first the personal conduct of this Appellant and  whether  his
    personal conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests in society.  Although
    the Appellant's conviction or criminal history does not itself  justify
    a decision to deport, that is an appropriate place to start.

 2. The Appellant's criminal history is set  out  in  detail  above,  which
    includes  violent  offences  of  an  increasingly  serious  nature  and
    offences committed whilst subject to orders from  a  previous  offence.
    The Sentencing Remarks in relation to the last offence are  informative
    both as to the seriousness of that offence  and  the  Appellant's  past
    history but also as to the assessment of future risk (at that point  in
    time).  These include as follows:

         "... Your previous convictions are very worrying in my  view.   You
         have five convictions covering nine offences.   In  2012  you  were
         reprimanded for an offence of battery, first offence  of  violence.
         In April 2014 for an offence of actual bodily harm, because of your
         age you were given a Referral Order.  But the facts  of  that  case
         bear quite a lot of similarity to your behaviour on this  occasion.
         You attacked brutally a fellow pupil at school  damaging  his  knee
         seriously; and then a year later you were  back  in  front  of  the
         Courts in March 2015 for yet another  violent  offence  and  again,
         because of  your  age,  a  Referral  Order  was  passed.   On  this
         occasion, you attacked your former partner  and  hurt  her.   Since
         March  2015,  you  have  been  convicted  of  various   shoplifting
         offences, but it is the previous violence  offences  which  are  of
         great concern to this Court.

         I can set out the facts fairly briefly.  On  this  particular  day,
         two brothers were out for the day enjoying themselves on a  bicycle
         and they had spent the day cycling.  On their way  home  when  they
         met you coming in the opposite direction.  You  had  some  sort  of
         music on, blaring out from a loudspeaker and the older of  the  two
         brothers, Matthew, sang along with it.  For no apparent reason, you
         lost it, you lost your temper.  You kicked out at his bike, causing
         him to fall over and then as he was getting out,  you  punched  him
         three times in the chest.  Fortunately for Matthew you didn't cause
         any injuries and that is the offence of common assault.

         But Matthew's young brother, who was 16, so two years younger  than
         you, came bravely to his brother's  assistance  and  for  that  you
         kicked him, you punched him with sufficient force to his  chest  to
         rupture his spleen.  He was in a great deal of discomfort and pain,
         unable to cycle home, he had to push his bike home.   When  he  got
         home he complained to his mum that he was feeling very unwell.  She
         thought it might just be a stitch, because he was too frightened to
         say what had actually happened for some time.  It is  a  factor,  I
         think, is perhaps not insignificant.

         Shortly afterwards, while sitting with his mum on the settee he had
         a fit, he started shaking, he lost vision, which must have  been  a
         terrifying thing for a 16 year old to have to go through  and  then
         he was admitted to the Queen  Elizabeth  hospital  in  Kings  Lynn,
         where he was diagnosed with having a ruptured spleen and two broken
         ribs.  The injuries were such that he had to remain in hospital for
         some six nights.

         And you were arrested because  you  were  in  the  same  school  as
         certainly the elder brother Matthew who was able to  identify  you;
         and to your credit you made admissions to the Police that you - and
         you say you just lost your temper, which is something, I'm  afraid,
         has happened in the past.

         I've been read effectively a victim  personal  statement  from  the
         brothers' mother and particularly the younger one, Christopher; who
         suffered the ruptured spleen.  Fourth months later he was still  in
         discomfort and the injuries were still mending and this attack  has
         had a serious effect on his life.  As  a  16  year  old  he's  been
         unable to take part in any sport and that will be  for  some  time.
         It's also psychologically undermined his  confidence.   He  is  now
         very unconfident about going out and fears being out alone  because
         of what you did to him.

         ...

         I turn now to the pre-sentence report.  ... They have come  to  the
         conclusion that you do pose a high risk  of  serious  harm  to  the
         public and with that conclusion I agree.  It  seems  that  you  are
         prone to lose your tempter and last out and harm people  and  cause
         serious injury to people.

         ...

         The pre-sentence report writer failed  to  see  any  remorse.   I'm
         urged by your Counsel,  Mr  Polak,  that  you  are  remorseful  and
         indeed, it is true in  your  interview  you  did  seem  to  express
         remorse to the Police Officers."

 3. Although I bear in mind that those remarks are now over two years  old,
    as is the pre-sentence report; there is no further report or assessment
    of the risk posed by the Appellant before me to  update  the  position.
    There is also nothing before me to  show  any  rehabilitation  work  or
    interventions in custody completed  by  the  Appellant.   There  is  no
    statement from the Appellant dealing with his  reasons  as  to  why  he
    claims not to be of any continuing or future risk.   I  note  that  the
    Appellant's mother stated her view that the Appellant got into  trouble
    because he was in the wrong group of  friends,  but  I  note  that  the
    Appellant's offences were committed alone and not as part of  a  group,
    so a change in social circles carries little if any weight.

 4. The submissions on behalf of the Appellant that he does not continue to
    pose a serious or significant risk in the future are not  supported  by
    any  evidence,  not  even  any  recent  statement  from  the  Appellant
    expressing why he would not offend further.  The  Appellant's  mother's
    statement  that  she  thought  the  Appellant  had  grown  up  and  now
    understands the seriousness of his actions does little to  counter  the
    previously found  risk  of  reoffending,  nor  is  it  persuasive  that
    anything has changed.

 5. Taking into account the  above  factors  as  well  as  the  Appellant's
    criminal history of increasingly serious violent offences and,  in  his
    favour, that there is no evidence of any offending since he has been in
    Lithuania; I find that he does pose a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society in
    the United Kingdom.

 6. The final issue to consider  is  whether  the  Appellant's  deportation
    would be proportionate bearing in mind the  specific  factors  set  out
    above in Regulation 23 and Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations.   I  find
    it is for the following reasons.

 7. The Appellant is a single adult male, now 21 years of age,  who  is  in
    good health.  He claims to have been in the United Kingdom  since  2010
    but it has only been accepted that he has been here since  2012.    The
    Appellant has spent most of his formative teenage years in  the  United
    Kingdom but has spent the majority of his life in Lithuania  and  where
    he still has friends and acquaintances (of sufficient quality that they
    have assisted him on return), even if his immediate family  is  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant speaks fluent  Lithuanian,  Russian  and
    English  and  could  use  his  education  and  experience   to   obtain
    employment, as he has done since removal.   I  find  that  even  before
    deportation he had continued social, linguistic and  cultural  ties  to
    Lithuania and these have been further strengthened on his return.

 8. Since his return to Lithuania around  a  year  ago,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has been able to reintegrate and to a reasonable  extent  re-
    establish himself there.  Although his initial statement shortly  after
    arrival described the  difficult  circumstances  he  found  himself  in
    without his family and immediate support, he has since found employment
    and accommodation (albeit both of a temporary nature) and  is  able  to
    support himself financially  (paying  rent  for  accommodation,  buying
    usual essentials and  paying  for  internet/phone),  albeit  with  some
    assistance from friends and some gifts from his family  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There is no recent written statement from the  Appellant  and
    nothing to suggest that he sought permission to return  to  the  United
    Kingdom to appear at his appeal hearing.  It  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect at least an updated written statement setting  out  his  current
    position, particularly if it continued to be as difficult as originally
    claimed and as difficult as his mother continued to suggest.  As it is,
    there is only very limited  second  hand  evidence  before  me  of  the
    current situation.

 9. I found the Appellant's mother's evidence to be exaggerated as  to  the
    difficulties faced by the Appellant in Lithuania  taking  into  account
    the matters immediately above and the lack of any  supporting  evidence
    as to why the Appellant needed to be registered  to  further  integrate
    and establish himself there or as to why he had not  or  could  not  be
    registered now or in the future.  In her evidence she was reluctant  to
    admit that the Appellant had been working and supporting himself,  even
    if in difficult circumstances and with only temporary work.

10. There is nothing before me to suggest that the Appellant  will  not  be
    able to register himself in Lithuania (even if that is a  pre-requisite
    to permanent accommodation, employment or for such things as opening  a
    bank account on which there was nothing beyond the  evidence  given  in
    oral testimony) and in any event continue to  integrate  and  establish
    himself further in Lithuania, continuing the progress  he  has  already
    made in this regard, using his skills, education and experience  to  do
    so and continue with  the  social  relationships  he  has  already  re-
    established from when he lived in Lithuania as a child.

11. Further, there is nothing to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    pursue rehabilitation  in  Lithuania,  nor  that  that  would  be  more
    detrimental compared to rehabilitation  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant retains the support of his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    albeit they do not have the same face-to-face contact as before and  so
    far it seems that  he  has  been  able  to  refrain  from  any  further
    offending in Lithuania - something which he did not achieve  whilst  in
    the United Kingdom, although the threat of and  continuing  deportation
    proceedings may have assisted the Appellant in this regard.

12. The Appellant completed his secondary education in the  United  Kingdom
    and his immediate family are  resident  here,  including  his  parents,
    adult brother and younger sister.  I accept that he  has  at  least  to
    some extent socially and culturally integrated into the United  Kingdom
    given the length of his residence and  education  here,  but  there  is
    little if any evidence of any significant or wider integration.  I also
    attach  some  weight  to  the  Respondent's  view,  which  is  also  in
    accordance with Schedule 1to the EEA Regulations, that the  Appellant's
    offending history over a number of years shows a  lack  of  integration
    into the United Kingdom due to the lack of respect  for  its  laws  and
    personal well-being of individuals living here, particularly given  the
    nature of the offences committed.

13. In all of the circumstances, I find that the Respondent has established
    that there are grounds of public  policy  to  justify  the  Appellant's
    deportation from the Untied Kingdom; which is a proportionate  decision
    having taken into account the genuine and  present  risk  he  poses  to
    fundamental interests of society in the United Kingdom even taking into
    account his length of residence, relatively young  age  (including  the
    relatively young age at which most  of  his  offences  were  committed,
    albeit the most serious  one  committed  as  an  adult)  and  that  his
    immediate family are in the United Kingdom.  I  therefore  dismiss  the
    appeal under the EEA Regulations.

14. In the alternative, it is accepted on behalf of the Appellant  that  he
    can not meet any of the  exceptions  to  deportation  on  human  rights
    grounds set out either in section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 or in the Immigration Rules and it would  therefore
    it would only be if there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the exceptions to outweigh the  significant  public  interest  in
    deportation in this case that  the  Appellant  could  succeed  on  this
    alternative basis.

15. The Appellant has not identified any further relevant circumstances and
    no separate substantive submissions were made on his behalf to  suggest
    that there was anything further or different to that  already  set  out
    above which could be taken into account in the Appellant's favour.   In
    circumstances  where  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  either  of   the
    exceptions to deportation and  has  not  identified  any  further  very
    compelling circumstances, it is  clear  that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation is not  outweighed  in  this  case.   In  more  traditional
    Article  8  terms,  the  Appellant's  deportation  would   not   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life.


Notice of Decision

For the reasons given in my decision promulgated on 2 July 2018, the  making
of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law.  As such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
follows:


    Appeal  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.


    Appeal dismissed on human rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]        Date       19th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


ANNEX

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00505/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2018                              |On 24th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Edvinas lucinskis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar of Counsel, instructed by Atlas Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss promulgated  on  20  February  2018,  in  which  Mr
    Lucinskis' appeal against the decision to deport him  dated  23  August
    2017 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr Lucinskis as the Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Lithuania, born on 6 September 1997, who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010 with  his  parents
    and sibling.  The Appellant has a number of criminal convictions in the
    United Kingdom, starting on 29 April 2014  when  he  was  convicted  of
    burglary and theft of a dwelling  and  of  assault  occasioning  actual
    bodily harm for which he was sentenced to concurrent 10- month referral
    orders.  Those referral orders were revoked on 31 March 2015  when  the
    Appellant was convicted of battery and of pursuing a course of  conduct
    which amounted to harassment, for which he was sentenced to  concurrent
    six-month referral orders.

 3. On 4 August  2015,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  theft  and  was
    sentenced to a conditional discharge of six months, subsequently varied
    on 4 February 2016 to a community order including 50 hours unpaid work.
     On 4 February 2016, the Appellant was convicted of theft and sentenced
    to a  community  order  until  3  January  2017  with  an  unpaid  work
    requirement.   He  was  also  convicted  of  breaching  a   conditional
    discharge on the same date with no additional sentence imposed.   There
    were further convictions for theft on 31 March 2016 for  which  he  was
    sentenced to a community order with an unpaid work  requirement  of  18
    hours.

 4. On 19 August 2016, the Appellant was convicted  of  wounding/inflicting
    grievous bodily harm which was sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment  in
    a young offenders institute.  On the same  date  he  was  convicted  of
    battery for which he was  sentenced  to  4  months  in  prison  to  run
    concurrently.  Orders for costs and  victim  surcharges  were  made  in
    relation to most of these offences.

 5. On 31 August 2016, the Respondent served the Appellant with a liability
    to deportation notice, to which he responded on 5 September 2016 and 13
    July 2017.

 6. The Respondent made a decision to deport the  Appellant  on  23  August
    2017 for the following reasons.  First, it was not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been resident in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with
    the  EEA  Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years,  in
    particular there was a lack of documentary evidence of residence and of
    the Appellant or his parents having been in  continuous  employment  or
    education to show that  they  have  exercised  treaty  rights  for  the
    required period.  The Appellant had not therefore acquired a  permanent
    right of residence  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations") so consideration was given to
    his deportation on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  under  regulation
    23(6)(b) and with reference to the principles  set  out  in  regulation
    27(5).

 7. The Respondent considered  that  the  Appellant  had  a  propensity  to
    reoffend and that he represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to  justify  his  deportation  grounds  of
    public policy.  When considering whether deportation was proportionate,
    account was taken of the Appellant's age and health, him being 19 years
    old and in good health was no evidence to show that he had  adapted  to
    life in the  United  Kingdom,  including  as  shown  by  his  offending
    behaviour.  The Appellant speaks Lithuanian and it was considered  that
    his parents could assist him  with  his  return  and  in  addition  any
    skills, work is education received in the United Kingdom could be  used
    on  return  to  Lithuania.   Friendships  and  relationships  could  be
    maintained on return.

 8. The Respondent considered rehabilitation but noted that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant undertook any rehabilitative work whilst in
    custody and that family members are unlikely to provide  him  with  the
    necessary support to aid rehabilitation on release from detention given
    they were unable to prevent the offences occurring.

 9. The Respondent separately considered the Appellant's right  to  respect
    for private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights, with reference to paragraph 398 and following  of  the
    Immigration Rules and sections 117Ato D of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  The Appellant's deportation was considered to  be
    conducive to the public good and in the public interest  following  his
    conviction.  The express exceptions to deportation on  the  grounds  of
    private and family life did not apply to the Appellant and  there  were
    no very compelling circumstances over and  above  those  exceptions  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.

10. The Appellant separately claimed that his removal  to  Lithuania  would
    breach Article 3 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  on  the
    basis that he would have no financial or emotional support  on  return,
    no accommodation in Lithuania  and  would  therefore  be  homeless  and
    destitute.  However, the Appellant's parents had supported him  in  the
    United Kingdom and the Respondent considered that they  would  continue
    to do so on his return to Lithuania and that  he  could  in  any  event
    utilised skills in order to gain employment or further  his  education.
    There is also a social welfare  system  in  Lithuania  which  would  be
    available to the Appellant.

11.  Finally,  the  Respondent  certified  the  Appellant's  appeal   under
    regulation 33 of the 2016 Regulations such that he  could  be  deported
    from the United Kingdom prior to the final outcome of any appeal.   The
    Appellant was in fact deported prior  to  the  hearing  of  his  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 11 January 2018.

12. Judge Juss allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 20  February
    2018 on EEA and Article 8 grounds.  I set out below the detail of  that
    decision.

The appeal

13. The Respondent appeals on three grounds.  First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decided the appeal under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 when the decision under challenge was made under
    the 2016 Regulations which applied to this appeal.  Secondly, that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to give clear adequate reasons for  allowing
    the appeal and failed to take into  account  the  matters  set  out  in
    relevant authorities in paragraph 27 to 31 of the decision when  making
    findings  in  this  appeal.   Thirdly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    constitute an ongoing risk to the public.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Farrelly on 8 March  2018  on
    all grounds.

15. At the oral hearing, Mr Wilding on behalf of the Respondent  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal, his skeleton  argument  and  made  supplementary
    oral submissions.  He noted that the Appellant did not dispute that the
    wrong version of the  EEA  Regulations  had  been  used  by  First-tier
    Tribunal and the only issue as to whether that was a material error  of
    law on the facts of this case.  Although it was not submitted that  the
    new regulations significantly moved the goalposts in cases such as this
    one, it was said that they did crystallise the questions  which  needed
    to be asked when considering deportation of an EEA national.   Reliance
    on the wrong regulations meant that the First-tier Tribunal did not ask
    itself the right questions.  In any event, it was  submitted  that  the
    other grounds of appeal were far more detailed and undoubtedly material
    to the outcome of the appeal.

16. As to the reasons given for finding that the Appellant did not  present
    a future risk, three were identified in paragraphs  34  to  36  of  the
    decision.  The first reason  given  is  completely  irrelevant  to  the
    question and could not amount to a reasonable why the Respondent is not
    discharged the burden of establishing a future threat.

17. The second, relies on a statement that persistent  offending  does  not
    equate to a high risk of reoffending but does not go  on  to  make  any
    findings of fact beyond that generalisation.  The lack of reasoning and
    the  contradiction  in  the  findings  was  submitted  to  be  arguably
    perverse.  It is relevant and there is a need to consider  the  pattern
    of offending behaviour by this Appellant.  On  a  smaller  point,  with
    regards  to  rehabilitation,  this  factor  carries  less   weight   in
    circumstances where a  person  does  not  have  a  permanent  right  of
    residence.

18. The third reason simply quotes from the sentencing remarks  in  respect
    of the Appellant but  makes  no  findings  and  offers  no  reasons  in
    relation to them.

19. Overall it was submitted that paragraph 37 and 38 do  not  contain  any
    proportionality assessment and provides  no  elaboration,  analysis  or
    reasons for the finding that the Judge was  unable  to  find  that  the
    Appellant presents a genuine, present in sufficient  a  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

20. Mr Gajjar on behalf of the Appellant relied on the rule 24 response and
    submitted that when the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was read as
    a whole, the findings reached were open to it on the  evidence  and  it
    was properly reasoned.  As part of that approach,  it  was  noted  that
    there was no OASys report in respect of the Appellant, albeit that  was
    not one of the express reasons given for any of the findings.

21. The Appellant accepted that the  wrong  regulations  were  applied  but
    submitted that ultimately the factors were the same and were all  taken
    into account in this decision, with appropriate and relevant  authority
    set out and  reference  made  to  the  weight  given  to  prospects  of
    rehabilitation.  In the rule 24 response there  was  reference  to  and
    quotes  from  Hansard  material  on  the  introduction  of   the   2016
    Regulations, but no Pepper v Hart application had been made to rely  on
    such material and none was pursued such that I disregard that  material
    submitted.

Findings and reasons

22. I deal first with the second and third grounds of  appeal  together  as
    they deal with the substance of the decision and are  determinative  of
    this appeal on the facts of this case.  In relation to these grounds of
    appeal, it is necessary to set out in some detail the findings made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 34 to 36 of the  decision,  which
    states as follows:

         "34. I am satisfied that the Appellant succeeds in his  appeal  and
         that the burden on the SSHD as specified in Arranz (EEA Regulations
         - deportation - test: Spain) [2017] uKUT 294 (IAC)  by  Mr  Justice
         McCloskey has  not  been  discharged.   I  have  had  regard  to  3
         particular matters in this regard.  First, there is the position of
         the Appellant  himself.   He  was  sentenced  to  imprisonment  and
         quickly thereafter upon release removed Lithuania,  without  having
         the opportunity to demonstrate that he  was  reformed  person.   In
         Lithuania itself he  has  been  trying  to  find  work  (in  itself
         laudable behaviour) and has not committed any further offences.

         35.  Second, there is the RL itself.  It's sets out a list  of  the
         Appellant's offences under the heading 'Assessment of  Threat'  (at
         para 26) before concluding that "your client has been identified as
         a person who is at a high risk of offending" (para 29) but this  is
         not the case.  The Appellant may have been a 'persistent  offender'
         (RL para 20) but this does not mean he is for that  reason  a  high
         risk of offending.  In any event, these considerations have  to  be
         balanced against the 'Proportionality'  of  the  decision  and  the
         Appellant's prospects  for  'Rehabilitation'  (both  of  which  are
         considered in the RL at Paris 34 - 39 and 40 - 44 respectively).

         36.  Third, and in respect  of  all  these  considerations,  it  is
         ultimately of some considerable  relevance  to  bear  in  mind  the
         remarks of the sentencing  judge  themselves.   At  Norwich  Ground
         Court, Judge Holt in his sentencing remarks (at C1 - C6) began with
         the observation that the appellant  was  18  at  the  time  of  the
         offences committed.  This is  consistent  with  the  evidence  I've
         heard from the Appellant's parents that he had fallen in  with  the
         wrong crowd at a young age when teenagers are  most  vulnerable  to
         peer  pressure  he,  moreover,  pleaded  guilty  at  the   earliest
         opportunity.  The judge went on  to  say  that  the  Appellant  had
         previous convictions which "are very worrying in my view".  He told
         the Appellant  that,  "you  have  five  convictions  covering  nine
         offences" (line B-D at C).  The Judge said of the  Appellant  that,
         "to your credit you made admissions to the police that  you  -  say
         you lost your temper, which is something, I'm afraid, has  happened
         in the past" (line A at  C4).   The  Appellant's  violent  offences
         must, nevertheless, be seen for what they are.  They were  serious.
         They caused serious injury.  The judge knows how the Appellant  had
         attacked a person by the name of Matthew and  his  younger  brother
         Christopher, who was 16 years  old  and  who  suffered  a  ruptured
         spleen, and four  months  thereafter  was  in  discomfort  and  the
         injuries were still mending and  this  attack  has  had  a  serious
         effect on his life.  As a 16-year-old he's been unable to take part
         in any sport and that will be for some time." (line B-C at C4)."

23. Judge Juss goes on in paragraphs 37 to say nevertheless the test is  as
    set out in regulation 21(5)(c) and  the  burden  of  proving  that  the
    Appellant  is  a  person  who  represents  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society rests upon the Secretary of State.  The task of the Tribunal
    was said to be to make a predictive  evaluative  assessment  of  future
    events based on the relevant factual matrix.  On that basis, the  Judge
    found himself unable to find such a threat.   Thereafter  in  paragraph
    39, Judge Juss begins by saying this is because..."  and  then  quoting
    selective parts  of  the  sentencing  remarks.   There  is  no  further
    reasoning or explanation as to the relevance of these  remarks  or  why
    they provide reasons for the conclusion given in paragraph 38.

24. I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in  failing
    to give  adequate  or  comprehensible  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant did  not  pose  an  ongoing  risk  to  the  public,  or  more
    accurately being unable to find that the Appellant presented a genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.  As to the three  reasons  given  set
    out above, the first is clearly irrelevant.   It  should  not  be  held
    against the Respondent that swift  action  has  been  taken  to  deport
    someone in these circumstances pursuant to the unchallenged certificate
    under regulation 33 of the 2016 Regulations, nor  used  as  a  positive
    factor on behalf of the Appellant by suggesting that he has been unable
    to show that he was no longer a threat.

25. The second reason makes  no  findings  whatsoever  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant does present a risk of reoffending  or  not  in  the  general
    statement that the persistent offender does not mean  for  that  reason
    alone that the Appellant is at high risk of reoffending  for  short  of
    any reasoned analysis of all of the circumstances in  this  case.   The
    reference to these considerations in any event having  to  be  balanced
    against the proportionality of  the  decision  and  the  prospects  for
    rehabilitation is not then followed through with any such assessment.

26. The third and final reason offered refers  to  the  sentencing  remarks
    which on any reasonable and rational view cannot be read in a  positive
    way for the Appellant given  that  they  show  a  worrying  history  of
    persistent offending, including  for  violent  offences  of  increasing
    seriousness and  the  very  significant  adverse  consequences  on  the
    Appellant's victims.  When sentencing the Appellant there were a number
    of statutory aggravating features taken into account, in particular the
    Appellant's previous convictions and that one of them was also  for  an
    unprovoked  violent  attack.   The  pre-sentence  report  came  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant poses is a high-risk of serious  harm  to
    the public and reference is made to the Appellant being prone to losing
    his temper, lashing out, causing harm and serious injury to people,  as
    well as to showing no remorse for  the  last  offence.   The  selective
    quoting in the First-tier Tribunal's decision in paragraphs 36  and  39
    does not reflect a fair reading of the sentencing remarks and  provides
    no rational reasoning in support of the conclusions reached,  nor  does
    the statement which seems to find that these sentencing remarks are not
    directly on point at the beginning of paragraph 37 go on to  reach  any
    actual conclusion.

27. In reaching the decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  fundamentally
    failed to have regard to material considerations  and  failed  to  make
    necessary findings of fact to reach a lawful conclusion as  to  whether
    the Appellant presented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   The
    reasons that were given for the decision are either not relevant, reach
    no actual conclusion, or are inconsistent with the evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For these reasons the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains material errors of law  and  therefore  must  be  set
    aside.

28. As to the first ground of appeal,  there  is  no  dispute  between  the
    parties that the First-tier Tribunal applied the wrong  regulations  in
    considering the appeal.  For  the  reasons  already  given  above,  the
    decision must be set aside  in  any  event  and  therefore  it  is  not
    necessary to go into any great detail as  to  whether  this  error  was
    material.  In summary however, I find that the error was material given
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to ask itself the  right  questions
    and fails to identify the factors which needed to be taken into account
    to  lawfully  determine  the  appeal,  in  accordance  with  the   2016
    Regulations and which are not expressly set out  in  the  earlier  2006
    Regulations.  This is an additional reason  why  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of law and must  be  set
    aside.

29. There is no separate appeal against the  conclusion  in  paragraph  40,
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.   However,  given
    that the sole reason for allowing the appeal on this basis was  because
    the Appellant succeeded on EEA grounds, that part of the decision  must
    also necessarily be set aside.

30. There is no challenge by either party to the  findings  made  that  the
    Appellant had not acquired permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    and this finding is therefore preserved in the remaking of the  appeal.
    Although the parties both considered that this was a suitable  case  to
    remit to the First-Tier Tribunal to remake the decision, I  decline  to
    do so as the extent of further fact finding necessary does not  require
    this, having regard  to  the  overriding  objective  and  the  relevant
    Practice Statement.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
remaking of the decision under  appeal  will  be  undertaken  by  the  Upper
Tribunal on the basis identified above.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

 A. The Appellant to file and serve any further  written  statement(s)  and
    evidence to be relied upon, no later than 21 days prior to the relisted
    hearing.

 B. The Respondent to file and serve any  further  evidence  to  be  relied
    upon, no later than 14 days prior to the relisted hearing.

 C. Parties are at liberty to file and serve a further or updated  skeleton
    argument, no later than 7 days prior to the relisted hearing.

Signed   [pic]             Date     22nd June 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

