
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00133/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 December 2014                  |On 17 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR OSITA OMENYIMA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
                    Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by a panel of  the
    First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  J  C
    Grant-Hutchison and Mrs  E  Morton.   The  panel  dismissed  an  appeal
    against a decision by the respondent that the appellant was  liable  to
    deportation as a foreign criminal under section 32(5) of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.

 2) The appellant was born on  28  November  1975  and  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria.  In 2011 he was sentenced to imprisonment for 5 years  by  the
    High Court of Justiciary  in  Edinburgh  following  conviction  on  two
    counts of the supply of a controlled Class A drug, namely cocaine.

 3) Although the appellant did not raise in his grounds of appeal a fear of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Nigeria, in his oral  evidence
    to the First-tier Tribunal he claimed to have a  fear  for  his  safety
    were he to return to Nigeria.  The First-tier Tribunal did not find the
    appellant's alleged fears to be well founded.

 4) So far as family life was concerned, the panel noted that the appellant
    married his wife in Nigeria on 19 August 2009.  Mrs Omenyima had  lived
    all her life in Nigeria until she came to the UK in September 2010 as a
    dependant of her husband.  The couple have two children, born  in  July
    2011 and September 2013.  The older child is a British citizen  because
    at the time of his birth the appellant was  a  serving  member  of  the
    armed forces.  The appellant was convicted the day after the birth  and
    discharged from the Army in September 2011 but by this time  the  child
    had acquired citizenship by birth.  The younger child is not a  British
    citizen but is a citizen of Nigeria.

 5) The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant had committed  a  very
    serious  crime  for  financial  gain   but   still   did   not   accept
    responsibility for it.  He committed the crime when he  was  a  serving
    member of the armed forces and subject to the Army code  of  discipline
    as well as having taken  the  Oath  of  Allegiance.   He  was  formally
    discharged from the Army for misconduct.  Removal of the appellant  was
    not a  disproportionate  breach  of  his  Article  8  rights.   In  the
    circumstances there were options open to the appellant and his  family.
    Although the older  child  could  not  be  removed  from  the  UK,  the
    appellant and his wife had the choice of remaining as a family unit and
    living with their two young children in Nigeria.  They had close family
    there to assist them.  The appellant already had two older children  in
    Nigeria.  English was an official language in Nigeria and neither child
    had entered the education system.  The first child had attended nursery
    but he was under the age of 3 at the date of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in  April  2014.   The  panel  acknowledged  as  an
    alternative that the parents of the older child could choose for him to
    continue to reside in the UK with his mother  as  his  carer.   It  was
    acknowledged by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing  that
    it was open to the mother to make an application for the younger  child
    to remain with her in the UK.  The panel was satisfied that the younger
    child would not be separated from her mother and there was no reason to
    suppose that any application by  her  would  not  be  successful.   The
    children's mother had leave until September 2016 as the parent  of  and
    carer for a British citizen.

 6) The application for permission to appeal was based  on  the  contention
    that the panel erred in failing to consider properly the best interests
    of the appellant's children in the balancing exercise under Article  8.
    The  best  interests  of  the  children  should  have  been  a  primary
    consideration but the panel did not begin to address  the  position  of
    the children until paragraph 54 of the determination after having first
    considered in detail the circumstances of  both  parents.   In  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74 it was considered by the Supreme Court important for the
    judge to ask the right questions in an orderly manner to avoid the risk
    that the best interests of the child might be  undervalued  when  other
    important considerations were in play.  It was further  contended  that
    the panel did not have regard to relevant factors.  Reference was  made
    to the case of Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348, in which regard was given to an
    appellant's poor immigration history.  It was submitted  that  in  this
    appeal the appellant did not have a poor immigration  history  and  was
    lawfully present in the UK as a serving member  of  the  forces,  as  a
    consequence of which the older child was a British citizen.  The  panel
    took into account that the appellant had other children in Nigeria  but
    the evidence of the appellant was that these children no  longer  lived
    there but were in South Africa.

 7) Finally it was submitted that the  panel  took  into  account  evidence
    which it should not have taken into account.  The panel considered  the
    evidence given by the appellant why he would be at risk in Nigeria  but
    this was never part of his appeal, which was  confined  to  Article  8.
    The material about the alleged risk to the appellant was irrelevant.

 8) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the panel failed to make a finding in relation to the best interests of
    the children.  At the hearing Mr Forrest  confirmed  that  he  did  not
    intend to proceed with the third and fourth grounds of the  application
    for permission to appeal, relating to the appellant's alleged  fear  of
    return to Nigeria and whether his  two  older  children  still  resided
    there.

 9) Mr Forrest was asked to identify the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to the best interests of the children.   In  response
    Mr Forrest referred to a  statement  by  the  appellant's  wife.   This
    referred at page 5 to the rights of her son.

10) Mr Forrest submitted that we should examine how  the  First-tier  panel
    conducted the balancing exercise and how they gave consideration to the
    best interests of the children.  Our attention was drawn to a letter of
    9 December 2013 from a health visitor who had been in contact with  the
    family for 8 months.  Mr Forrest submitted that the Tribunal was  aware
    of the need to deal  with  the  best  interests  of  the  children  and
    directed itself to this effect at paragraph 31  of  the  determination.
    Mr Forrest acknowledged, however, that there was no report from  social
    services apart from a letter of 9 December 2013 from  a  social  worker
    who had known the family for  2  months.   Mr  Forrest  also  drew  our
    attention to a letter dated 14 February 2013 from the Resettlement Team
    at the City of Edinburgh Council.  There was evidence before the  panel
    relating to the older child but this was  not  addressed.   Mr  Forrest
    submitted that in terms of JO and  Others  (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 00517 and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  it  was  a  duty  of
    paramount importance to pay attention to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The evidence relating  to  this  might  not  be  immediately
    apparent but the Tribunal had to look for it.

11) Mr Forrest was asked about the circumstances of the younger child.   He
    replied that he was arguing in the interests of the older child.

12) On behalf of the respondent, Ms Pettersen submitted that the case of JO
    had been addressed in the decision letter.  This letter had also  dealt
    with the best interests of the children, about which there  was  little
    evidence.  The Tribunal had  dealt  with  the  issues  in  order.   The
    Tribunal looked at the appellant's situation in Nigeria and  considered
    whether the family could go there as a unit.  It was  unfortunate  that
    the panel had then stated at the start of paragraph 54  that  it  would
    "now consider the children" but this did not  constitute  an  error  of
    law.  The panel  looked  at  the  position  of  the  younger  child  at
    paragraph 56.  The panel recognised that the family had a choice  about
    what to do and the panel was fully aware of all the circumstances.

13) In reply, Mr Forest acknowledged that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules but could under Article  8  if  the  proper
    approach was taken to the decision-making process.

14) At the end of the hearing we reserved our determination.

Discussion

15) We find that the panel did not err on a point of  law.   The  appellant
    had committed a serious offence and this was reflected in the  sentence
    of imprisonment imposed of 5 years.  The hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was in April 2014  and  at  that  time  the  Tribunal  had  to
    consider the terms of paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
    provided in effect that where a person was  sentenced  to  imprisonment
    for 4 years or more it would be only in exceptional circumstances  that
    the public  interest  in  deportation  would  be  outweighed  by  other
    factors.  As was pointed out in MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192,
    great weight was to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals who had been sentenced to imprisonment for 4 years or
    more and therefore were not entitled to the benefit of  the  provisions
    in paragraph 399 or 399A.  At paragraph 42 the  Court  stated  that  in
    such cases "...in approaching the question  of  whether  removal  is  a
    proportionate interference with an individual's article  8  rights  the
    scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation and something very
    compelling (which will be "exceptional") is required  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in removal."  A similar point was made in SS  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 in which Laws LJ stated  at  paragraph  47  "...the
    more pressing the  public  interest  in  removal  or  deportation,  the
    stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is to prevail."

16) Mr Forrest relied on the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74 as requiring questions to be addressed in  a  particular
    order in an appeal involving consideration of the best interests of the
    children.  In Zoumbas the Supreme Court  was  considering  an  argument
    derived from ZH (Tanzania) to the effect that it was important  to  ask
    the right questions in an orderly manner to avoid  the  risk  that  the
    best  interests  of  the  children  might  be  undervalued  when  other
    important considerations were in play.  The Court held in Zoumbas  that
    there was nothing wrong with the Secretary of  State  in  her  decision
    giving her conclusions followed by her reasons.  Lord Hodge, giving the
    judgment of the Court, stated at paragraph 25 that it  was  "legitimate
    for the decision-maker to ask herself first whether it would have  been
    proportionate to remove the parents if they had no children  and  then,
    in  considering  the  best   interests   of   the   children   in   the
    proportionality exercise, ask whether  their  well-being  altered  that
    provisional balance."  We therefore do not accept that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law by not approaching the  issues  in  a  particular
    order, provided the Tribunal properly considered the  relevant  factors
    and gave adequate and sustainable reasons for the  conclusion  reached,
    which it did.

17) The panel used unfortunate wording at the  start  of  paragraph  54  by
    stating: "We now consider the children."  The panel clearly meant  that
    at that point consideration of Article  8  would  begin,  after  having
    looked at other matters raised by  the  appellant  as  reasons  why  he
    should not be deported.  The British citizenship of the older child was
    not "a trump card", as recognised in ZH  (Tanzania)  at  paragraph  30,
    although  it  was  of  particular  importance  and   was   given   full
    consideration by the panel.  The best interests of the children were  a
    primary consideration but not paramount.  The children would lose their
    father if they remained in the UK but the panel was  entitled  to  find
    that this would not  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
    Article 8 rights.

18) Mr Forrest referred to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  JO  and
    Others (section 55 duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517,  in  which  the
    importance  of  being  properly  and   adequately   informed   of   the
    circumstances of a child was stressed.   It  was  recognised,  however,
    that in "...the real world of litigation, the  tools  available  to..."
    the tribunal might be confined to the application or submission to  the
    Secretary of State and the decision letter.  It is noteworthy  that  in
    the present appeal in considering the  position  of  the  children  the
    panel had before it little evidence  about  their  best  interests  and
    virtually no evidence at all relating to the younger child.  The  panel
    fully considered what evidence there was  and  reached  a  decision  in
    accordance with the evidence and supported by the reasons given.

Conclusions

19) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

20) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

21) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.   We  have
    not been asked to make such an order and under the circumstances we  do
    not consider an order to be necessary.



Signed      Date 17 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
