
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00241/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2021                 |On 3 March 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mR Tolulope emauel antonio tiwo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr C Howells, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Vincent solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a citizen of Italy. His date of birth is  12  October
    1993. I shall refer to him as the Appellant as he was before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2006  with  is  mother  and
    sisters.  He has a history of committing criminal offences. He  has  11
    convictions for 21 offences.  On 17  August  2019,  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of possession with intent to supply  class  A  drugs  ("index
    offence") and sentenced to four years imprisonment. As a result of  his
    criminality the Secretary of State made a decision to deport him  under
    Regulation 24 (6) (b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the  2016  Regulations").   The  Appellant  appealed
    against the decision. His appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Taylor in a decision dated 8 July 2019, following a hearing at
    Hendon Magistatrates' Court on 8 July 2019. The Secretary of State  was
    granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 10  March
    2020. Thus, the matter came before me to determine whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge erred.

 3. It was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  Appellant  has
    permanent residence. The First-tier Tribunal rejected  the  Appellant's
    case, that he was entitled to the highest level of protection under the
    2016 Regulations.

 4. The judge said at [23] that the Appellant "has a  poor  and  escalating
    criminal record.", noting that his criminal behaviour started  in  2013
    and that he continued to offend while subject to suspended sentence and
    that he had failed to comply with an unpaid work order. The Judge  said
    that the escalating behaviour  continued  in  2016.  He  described  the
    Appellant's record as "sorry  and  regrettable".  He  noted  that  that
    sentencing judge referred to the Appellant being a "street trader"  and
    having a "significant role"  in  the  supply  of  drugs  and  that  the
    Appellant had "tried to lie his way out  of  his  responsibility."  The
    judge said that the offence committed "has a profound affect on  United
    Kingdom society  in  particular  to  the  lives  of  those  who  become
    addicted. He found that "the Appellant was  significantly  involved  in
    supply and therefore his presence in the  United  Kingdom  was  clearly
    detrimental to United Kingdom society".

 5. The judge directed himself at [24], that he must be satisfied that  the
    Appellant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    to United Kingdom society, applying the serious grounds test.  At  [24]
    he recorded the Appellant's evidence that he had had time to reflect in
    prison and that he was now older and wiser and that he would not revert
    to his previous ways.   The  judge  said  at  [24]  "I  note  that  the
    appellant was arrested in August 2016, some three years  ago,  and  the
    appellant is now aged 25, having spent three years in prison". He noted
    that he was waiting to be released on licence pending confirmation of a
    suitable address.  The  judge  had  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    completed a number of educational courses while in prison and  that  he
    had been tested negative  for  drugs  and  attended  alcohol  and  drug
    awareness courses. The judge found that, "the appellant has  positively
    used his time to attend and complete courses while in custody"

 6. There was a recent OASys report before the  Tribunal  which  the  judge
    said "confirms that the appellant now  recognises  the  impact  of  his
    offending on society and notes that there had been no issues  while  he
    has been serving his sentence. There has been no  disruptive  behaviour
    while in prison and he was  not  considered  to  be  a  risk  to  other
    prisoners".  The judge found that the  Appellant  had  been  "compliant
    with the regime" when in prison.

 7. When considering the OASys report the judge  said  that  the  Appellant
    "had a good network with his friends and family  who  were  a  positive
    influence." The judge said that the report "indicates that there was  a
    low risk to children, adults and staff and a medium risk to the public,
    which is defined  as  a  potential  risk  if  there  was  a  change  of
    circumstance. In  particular,  the  OASys  report  concludes  that  the
    appellant had one (sic) well in custody,  he  had  worked  hard  on  is
    rehabilitation of his own accord"

 8. At [25] the judge turned to the evidence of the Appellant's mother  and
    sisters. They attended the hearing and gave live evidence. They were of
    the view  that  the  Appellant  has  "significantly  changed"  and  had
    "realised the error of his previous ways and that they would advise and
    assist him in his rehabilitation if he was permitted to  remain".   The
    judge concluded that  he  was  "satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a
    supportive family who would minimise the risk of him reverting  to  his
    previous ways if he was permitted to remain."

 9. At [26] the judge concluded that as follows

         "... [A]pplying Regulation 27 (5) (c) to the higher test of serious
         grounds, I cannot be satisfied  that  the  appellant  represents  a
         present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamentals  of
         society. The  appellant  has  a  number  of  previous  convictions,
         applying 27 (5) (d)  and  (e)  general  prevention  cannot  justify
         deportation, and although the appellant has a significant  criminal
         record, the most recent offence is  almost  three  years  old  that
         (sic)  the  appellant  has  submitted   significant   evidence   of
         rehabilitation. Applying  the  principle  of  proportionality,  and
         Regulation 27 (6), the appellant is no aged 25, he has lived in the
         United Kingdom since the age of 13, he states that he has no family
         to return to in Italy, and I have accepted that he has a supportive
         family in the United  Kingdom.  Taking  all  of  the  factors  into
         consideration I do not consider that the test of serious grounds of
         public policy or security is met with regard to this appellant"

The grounds of appeal

10. There is one ground of appeal which is entitled "Misdirection in  law".
    It is asserted that the judge did not have regard  to  the  factors  in
    Schedule  1  of  the  2016  Regs.   The  judge  did  not  consider  the
    seriousness of the consequences  of  reoffending  in  line  with  Kamki
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1715.

11. The judge  "makes  much  "of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    reoffended however, "at best this is a neutral a neutral  consideration
    ". The Appellant has been in prison or immigration detention since 2016
    and therefore his behaviour in the community is untested.

12. There is no finding that the Appellant has "cut ties  with  his  former
    associates" and that this puts him in danger of relapsing into criminal
    behaviour. While the judge found that the Appellant  has  a  supportive
    family, it has failed to prevent him offending in the past.

13. The Appellant is said to present a high  risk  of  re-offending  and  a
    medium risk to the public. The judge failed to consider adequately  the
    probation officer's assessment, and this  is  an  error.  There  is  no
    reasoning as to how the courses that the Appellant undertook  while  in
    custody demonstrate that he is rehabilitated.  No reasoning is given as
    to the Appellant's remorse or whether he has taken  responsibility  for
    his offending since he and his co-defendants attempted to lie their way
    out of responsibility.

14. The Appellant remains a serious threat to the fundamental interests  of
    society, particularly in respect of sections 7 (b), (c), (f),  (g)  and
    (h) of schedule 1, which the judge has failed to consider.

15. There   was a skeleton argument prepared by Mr C Bates dated 21 October
    2020. The submissions in summary are that the judge  did  not  consider
    the credibility of the family members who gave evidence in the light of
    the fact that the Appellant's sister Daniella, claimed not to be  aware
    of the severity of the Appellant's criminal activity which is  not  the
    same as not being aware of  his  criminality.  The  Appellant's  sister
    Mercy  claimed   to   be   unaware   of   the   Appellant's   behaviour
    notwithstanding the shared family unit and his important role  to  her.
    The finding that the supportive family would minimise the risk  of  re-
    offending is inadequately reasoned. The judge did not  make  a  finding
    about the pro-criminal peer group and  whether  the  reference  to  the
    "good network with friends and family" represented a different group.

16. The OASys report risk assessment is based on the mitigating factors  of
    being  subject  to  various  safeguards  and  being  in  a   controlled
    environment.

Submissions

17. In oral submissions Mr Howells said that the key findings are at  [26].
    The judge was swayed by the Appellant having remained  out  of  trouble
    for three years, but during this time he was in custody.  The reasoning
    for finding that the Appellant  is  rehabilitated  is  inadequate.  The
    judge did not apply schedule 1 of the regulations.   He  accepted  that
    the grounds did not take into account the  recent  OASys.   The  recent
    OASys assessed the Appellant as being at low risk of  re-offending  and
    at medium risk to the public.  On this basis Mr Howells  accepted  that
    the ground relating to the OASys was undermined to  a  certain  extent.
    However, the Appellant's criminality is escalating, and he is  assessed
    as posing a medium risk of harm should he reoffend.  The judge erred in
    giving the Appellant credit for remaining  out  of  trouble  for  three
    years. The judge did not take into account the history of re-offending.
     There is no finding that he has severed links with the  negative  peer
    group whom he blamed for his criminality.   While  the  judge  attached
    weight to the Appellant's supportive family as a rehabilitative factor,
    he failed to take into  account  that  he  had  lived  with  them  when
    offending and they failed to prevent this. The judge  did  not  explain
    why the courses  that  the  Appellant  undertook  in  prison  supported
    rehabilitation.

18. Mr Lee relied on his reply to the Respondent's skeleton argument. There
    is no error of law. The grounds are unmeritorious.  He  relied  on  VHR
    (Unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367.   The  decision  was
    open to the judge on the evidence.  He took into account  a  number  of
    factors including the more recent OASys report.

19. The Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that the  evidence  of  the
    family members was genuine. The findings were open to  the  judge.  The
    evidence before the judge was that the Appellant was addicted to  drugs
    at the time of the offending behaviour and that it  was  his  addiction
    that fuelled his criminality. There was no positive evidence of a "pro-
    criminal peer group".

20. The judge was aware that the Appellant had been in  custody  for  three
    years. The judge was entitled to  attach  weight  to  the  evidence  of
    progress that the Appellant had made when in custody.

21. The starting point is reg 27 (5) (d) of the 2016 Regs which mirrors the
    language of Article 27 (2) of the Directive.[1]  The  extent  to  which
    "public offence" and public confidence" are relevant  to  an  expulsion
    decision under the Directive was considered in Straszewski and Kerys  v
    SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 1173.

22. Kamki is not authority for any particular proposition.

23. The judge had in mind the seriousness of any  potential  offending  and
    took into account the OASys assessment.

The legal framework

24. The decision was made under the Immigration  (Economic  European  Area)
    Regulation 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"). The relevant  part  of  which
    read as follows-

    "Decisions taken on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  and
    public health

    27.  (1)  In this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  in the best interests of the person concerned, as provided
                  for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child  adopted
                  by the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations  on  20th
                  November 1989.

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles -

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

         (7)  ....

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.)"[2].

Conclusions

25. I acknowledge what Baroness Hale said in AH (Sudan)  and  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department at [30]:

         "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirections simply
         because they may have reached a different conclusion on  the  facts
         or expressed themselves differently";

26. I take into account what the Court of Appeal said in Lowe v SSHD [2021]
    EWCA Civ 62, specifically at [28] and [29]. [3]

27. The grounds of appeal were drafted without acknowledgement  that  there
    was before the First-tier Tribunal a very recent OASys assessment.  The
    Appellant had been assessed as presenting a low  risk  of  re-offending
    and medium risk of harm. There had been a change in the  assessment  of
    risk of re-offending from high to low. The author if the  grounds  does
    not seem to have been aware of this.  The judge was wholly entitled  to
    attach weight to the assessment made that the Appellant was at low risk
    of re-offending.  He acknowledged that there was a medium risk of  harm
    at [24]. Taking into account the obiter comments made in Kamki, even if
    they had formed part of the ratio of the decision, the judge would  not
    have erred. He clearly had in mind the risk of reoffending and the risk
    of serious harm.

28. The judge was mindful of the Appellant's criminality and the extent  of
    it. He was mindful of the seriousness of the  offences.  This  is  made
    clear at [23].  The judge however, did not find  that  deportation  was
    justified. He was entitled to attach weight to  the  OASys  assessment.
    There was no meaningful challenge to this evidence.  The judge did  not
    set out all the assessment. Mr Lee has referred  to  it;  however,  the
    judge attached weight to what he perceives as the Appellant recognising
    the impact of his crimes and his good behaviour during imprisonment.  A
    proper reading of the report discloses that the Appellant  had  a  drug
    problem when offending and that he had addressed this. Drug taking  was
    identified as a risk factor.  The report also stated that the Appellant
    has a network of friends and family who were a positive influence.  The
    judge was entitled to attach weight to the evidence of the  Appellant's
    family whose evidence was not challenged on credibility grounds by  the
    presenting officer. Their evidence must be considered in the context of
    the link between the Appellant's offending and drug taking.   The judge
    was entitled to conclude that the Appellant was credible and  had  made
    genuine progress.  The judge was  entitled  to  attach  weight  to  the
    conclusions in the OASys assessment in respect of the Appellant  having
    a "good social network of friend and family. The absence of  a  finding
    in respect of a pro-criminal peer group is not material.

29. The judge was unarguably mindful that the Appellant had been in custody
    for the last three years. His focus was on his behaviour in prison  and
    the assessment of risk in the OASys report.  The  suggestion  that  the
    judge erroneously attached weight to the lack of re-offending while not
    acknowledging that he was  in  detention  during  the  relevant  period
    misrepresents the findings of the judge.

30. The skeleton argument raises an issue in respect of the  bail  address;
    however, this is not raised in the ground before  me  and  it  was  not
    raised at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

31. In respect of the schedule 1 factors, there  is  no  substance  in  the
    assertion that the judge did not have regard to them. They have  to  be
    considered in the context of Regulation 27 (5) and relevant  case  law.
    It was not the Secretary of State's case this was a  "most  exceptional
    case[4]" where public revulsion  may  have  a  part  to  play.   Public
    revulsion has no part to play in the Appellant's appeal.

32. The grounds seek to re-argue the decision of the judge  whose  findings
    are grounded in the evidence and adequately reasoned. The judge had  to
    make an assessment of the risk posed by the Appellant. It may be that a
    different judge would have reached a different conclusion. The  grounds
    do not challenge the decision on rationality grounds.  The decision  is
    unarguably rational.  The judge made an evaluative  judgement  of  risk
    which was open to him.



Notice of Decision

33. The Secretary of State's application is refused. The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the Appellant's appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 24 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1] Directive 2004/38/EC
[2] SCHEDULE 1 - CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.
Considerations of public policy and public security
1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy or
public security values: member States enjoy considerable discretion, acting
within the parameters set by the EU Treaties, applied where relevant by the
EEA agreement, to define their own standards of public policy and public
security, for purposes tailored to their individual contexts, from time to
time.
Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom
2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same nationality
or language does not amount to integration in the United Kingdom; a
significant degree of wider cultural and societal integration must be
present before a person may be regarded as integrated in the United
Kingdom.
3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national has
received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the longer the
sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the greater the likelihood
that the individual's continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting of the
fundamental interests of society.
4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA national
or the family member of an EEA national within the United Kingdom if the
alleged integrating links were formed at or around the same time as-
  (a)    the commission of a criminal offence;
  (b)    an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of society;
  (c)    the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was in
  custody.
5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the family
member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive evidence of
not demonstrating a threat (for example, through demonstrating that the EEA
national or the family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed
or rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.
6.   It is consistent with public policy and public security requirements
in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions may be taken in order to refuse,
terminate or withdraw any right otherwise conferred by these Regulations in
the case of abuse of rights or fraud, including-
  (a)    entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person to enter
  or to attempt to enter, a marriage, civil partnership or durable
  partnership of convenience; or
  (b)    fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, or assisting
  another to obtain or to attempt to obtain, a right to reside under these
  Regulations.

The fundamental interests of society
7.   For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
society in the United Kingdom include-
  (a)    preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration laws,
  and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration
  control system (including under these Regulations) and of the Common
  Travel Area;
  (b)    maintaining public order;
  (c)    preventing social harm;
  (d)    preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;
  (e)    protecting public services;
  (f)    excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an EEA
  national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that person is
  likely to cause, or has in fact caused, public offence) and maintaining
  public confidence in the ability of the relevant authorities to take such
  action;
  (g)    tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
  immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there
  is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs
  or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of
  the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);
  (h)    combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
  relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
  unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);
  (i)    protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly from
  exploitation and trafficking;
  (j)    protecting the public;
  (k)    acting in the best interests of a child (including where doing so
  entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or otherwise
  taking an EEA decision against a child);
  (l)    countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared values.
[3] 28.  Importantly, as Kamara shows, decisions of the present character
made by the fact-finding tribunal are "broad evaluative decisions". In his
skeleton argument, Mr Pilgerstorfer submitted (in para. 24) that the
appellate Court is in as good a position as the first instance judge to
appraise whether the facts found and relied upon meet the legal standard.
In my judgment, that submission was contrary to authority, and, with
respect to Mr Pilgerstorfer, when confronted by the court with the
possibility that the submission was incorrect, he qualified the submission
in a manner to which I will return. Yet again, the well-known judgment of
Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at [114] is
relevant.
29.  At [114] - [115], Lewison LJ explained the caution to be exercised by
appellate courts in interfering with evaluative decisions of first instance
judges. Para. [114] is particularly well known, but para. [115] is also of
relevance to the present case. The Lord Justice said this:
    "114.    Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by recent cases
    at the highest level, not to interfere with findings of fact by trial
    judges, unless compelled to do so. This applies not only to findings of
    primary fact, but also to the evaluation of those facts and to
    inferences to be drawn from them. The best known of these cases are:
    Biogen Inc v Medeva Plc [1997] RPC 1 ; Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1
    WLR 1360 ; Datec Electronics Holdings Ltd v United Parcels Service Ltd
    [2007] UKHL 23; [2007] 1 WLR 1325 ; Re B (A Child) (Care Proceedings)
    [2013] UKSC 33; [2013] 1 WLR 1911 and most recently and comprehensively
    McGraddie v McGraddie [2013] UKSC 58; [2013] 1 WLR 2477 . These are all
    decisions either of the House of Lords or of the Supreme Court. The
    reasons for this approach are many. They include
         i.   The expertise of a trial judge is in determining what facts
         are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what those
         facts are if they are disputed.
         ii.  The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the first and last
         night of the show.
         iii. Duplication of the trial judge's role on appeal is a
         disproportionate use of the limited resources of an appellate court
         and will seldom lead to a different outcome in an individual case.
         iv.  In making his decisions the trial judge will have regard to
         the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an
         appellate court will only be island hopping.
         v.   The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any event, be
         recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts of
         evidence).
         vi.  Thus even if it were possible to duplicate the role of the
         trial judge, it cannot in practice be done.
    115. It is also important to have in mind the role of a judgment given
    after trial. The primary function of a first instance judge is to find
    facts and identify the crucial legal points and to advance reasons for
    deciding them in a particular way. He should give his reasons in
    sufficient detail to show the parties and, if need be, the Court of
    Appeal the principles on which he has acted and the reasons that have
    led him to his decision. They need not be elaborate. There is no duty
    on a judge, in giving his reasons, to deal with every argument
    presented by counsel in support of his case. His function is to reach
    conclusions and give reasons to support his view, not to spell out
    every matter as if summing up to a jury. Nor need he deal at any length
    with matters that are not disputed. It is sufficient if what he says
    shows the basis on which he has acted. These are not controversial
    observations: see Customs and Excise Commissioners v A [2002] EWCA Civ
    1039; [2003] 2 WLR 210; Bekoe v Broomes [2005] UKPC 39; Argos Ltd v
    Office of Fair Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318; [2006] UKCLR 1135"
[4] Straszewski and Kerys v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR  1175, para 30.


