

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00073/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 June 2017                           |On 28 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         JOAO CARLOS SERODID SOARES


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person

                                  DECISION

   1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Mayall who, by a determination promulgated on 2 May 2017,  allowed  Mr
      Soares' appeal against a decision that he should be deported from  the
      United Kingdom. Mr Soares is a citizen of Portugal  and  the  decision
      that he was to be removed was taken pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(B) of
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regs").


   2. Although this means that it is the  Secretary  of  State  who  is  the
      appellant before the Upper  Tribunal,  as  it  will  be  necessary  to
      reproduce extracts from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
      it is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   3. Mr Soares arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2001. It was not  long
      after that, in June  2003,  that  he  began  accumulating  a  criminal
      record. On that occasion, he was cautioned for possession a controlled
      drug of Class B. His first conviction, for attempted  theft,  followed
      in November 2003. Since then, he has accumulated a  long  list  of  57
      criminal offences, resulting in convictions  on  34  occasions.  Those
      offences include for possessing Class A drugs, assault, going equipped
      for theft, criminal damage and burglary of a dwelling house.  He  also
      has been convicted on a number of occasions of failing  to  appear  at
      court after having been granted bail and has breached community orders
      and has offended while being subject  to  both  community  orders  and
      suspended sentences of imprisonment. He has been sentenced to terms of
      imprisonment, either suspended or immediate, on no fewer than thirteen
      occasions. It is evident that these offences, mostly of an acquisitive
      nature, have generally been committed to enable Mr Soares to fund  his
      drug habit.

   4. The respondent concluded that the appellant's conduct, taken  together
      with  his  record  of  prolific  offending  and  the  nature  of  that
      offending, meant that he was likely to reoffend in the future so  that
      he posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  so  that
      his deportation was justified under regulation 21 of  the  2006  Regs.
      The  respondent  concluded  also  that  the  decision  to  deport  the
      appellant was proportionate, in terms of Reg 21(5).

   5. The appellant gave oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      judge recorded that:

           "He said that he was now off drugs. He had been on  a  methadone
           prescription in detention but he was now off that  as  well.  He
           would not commit any further offences. He said that in  2016  he
           had lost his job and had gone back to drugs."


      The judge heard evidence from the appellant's  mother  who  also  said
      that the appellant's convictions "were because of drugs".

   6. Next, the judge set  out  a  summary  of  the  appellant's  record  of
      convictions and made clear that he had regard to the OASyS report:


           "This is a detailed report. It sets out his personal history and
           his list of convictions. The overall assessment was that he  was
           of medium risk in the community to the  general  public  and  to
           known adult. The known adult was  his  partner  and  any  future
           partners due to domestic violence offences. However  his  record
           suggested a low likelihood of violent reconviction.  His  scores
           represented a very high likelihood of general offending within a
           24 month period. This  was  likely  to  be  in  the  context  of
           acquisitive crime."


   7. In order to make his assessment of risk in the  context  of  the  2006
      Regs, the  judge  considered  the  evidence  before  him  to  reach  a
      conclusion as to whether or not the appellant had established a  right
      to permanent residence by residing for a  continuous  period  of  five
      years in accordance with the 2006  Regs.  The  judge  found  that  the
      appellant had indeed achieved that, so that  he  enjoyed  an  enhanced
      level of protection against removal in that he could be  removed  only
      if there were serious grounds of public policy or public security. The
      respondent has been granted permission to appeal on the basis that the
      judge fell into legal error in making that finding of fact because, on
      the evidence and on the basis of the position as the judge found it to
      be, the appellant had not in fact established that he had  resided  in
      the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2006 Regs for any continuous
      period of five years.


   8. Alternatively, even if, which the  respondent  does  not  accept,  the
      judge was entitled to find that  the  serious  grounds  test  was  the
      applicable one, on the facts of this case the respondent asserts  that
      it was not reasonably open to the judge  to  conclude  otherwise  than
      that the appellant represented a very high risk of committing  further
      offences. There was, according to the respondent, no  evidence  before
      the judge to support the bare assertion of the appellant that  he  had
      successfully addressed his drug problem or done  anything  to  address
      his other offending behaviour. His evidence, recorded  by  the  judge,
      that "he never hurt  anyone"  shows  no  insight  into  his  offending
      behaviour, given that he has been convicted of offences of assault and
      burglary. The respondent submits also that the judge was wrong to rely
      upon the appellant's evidence to be in a relationship with his  child,
      since the OASyS report records the appellant's  confirmation  that  he
      has not had any contact with his child since 2007.

   9. It is clear  that  the  judge  did  indeed  fall  into  error  in  his
      assessment of the appellant's  evidence  of  having  established  five
      years' continuous residence in accordance  with  the  2006  Regs.  The
      appellant asserted, and the judge found, that he had  been  exercising
      Treaty rights, and so living in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
      the 2006 Regs, by working for a continuous period of  five  years.  At
      paragraph 62 of his decision the judge said this:

           "He gave a detailed account of his employment. In particular  he
           gave a detailed account of his employment from July  2001,  when
           he started to work in hotels, until November 2008 when he worked
           at the Home Office building. He produced payslips in support  of
           that assertion. Apart from short gaps between employments of  no
           more than 4 or 5 months he was continuously employed. He  claims
           that from 2008 to 2013 he worked  as  a  labourer.  He  was  not
           challenged  in  cross  examination  about  this.  Nor   was   he
           challenged about his later employment as a postal worker and  at
           Sainsbury's.


           In the circumstances I accept his employment history as  he  has
           outlined.


           Thus I am satisfied that by November 2008 at the latest  he  had
           been residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for a
           continuous period of 5 years. He had thus acquired the right  to
           Permanent Residence ..."

  10. The difficulty with this reasoning  is  that  the  appellant  had  not
      established that he had  been  exercising  Treaty  rights  by  working
      throughout a continuous period of five years ending in November  2008.
      It was not necessary for the respondent to challenge  his  account  of
      his pattern of work because on the appellant's own account he had  not
      worked continuously throughout the relevant period. The fact  that  he
      was not working for a period of some five  months  was  sufficient  to
      punctuate the continuity of him doing so and that break in  continuity
      cannot simply be swept aside and ignored.  Of course, it  may  or  may
      not be that during the period of five months or so when the  appellant
      was not working he was exercising Treaty rights in some other way  but
      as the judge did not explore that possibility  and  as  the  appellant
      himself did not make any attempt to address that issue  we  simply  do
      not know that to be the case.


  11. I cannot regard that error to be one that is not material because  the
      judge went on to explain why, despite  having  been  resident  in  the
      United Kingdom since June 2001 the appellant did not qualify  for  the
      highest level of protection against removal. Therefore, in determining
      the appeal on the basis that serious grounds were required, the  judge
      applied the wrong level of  protection  to  which  the  appellant  was
      entitled.  Given the  nature  of  the  respondent's  case  as  it  was
      advanced before the judge, as summarised  above  in  the  respondent's
      grounds  in  the  alternative  to  the  primary  submission  that  the
      appellant enjoyed only  the  basic  and  lowest  level  of  protection
      against removal, it simply cannot be assumed that  the  outcome  would
      have been  the  same  had  the  judge  applied  the  2006  Regulations
      correctly.

  12. I have considered carefully what the judge said at paragraph 74 of his
      determination:


           "I should add this. Had I been satisfied that the risk posed  by
           this appellant did amount to  such  serious  grounds  of  public
           policy as would permit deportation under the Regulations I would
           not  have  been  satisfied  that  it  met  the  requirements  of
           proportionality."


       However, I am unable  to  interpret  this  observation  as  providing
      support for a conclusion that the error of the judge in  applying  the
      "serious grounds" level of protection was not a material one. That  is
      because the assessment of proportionality  must  be  informed  by  the
      level of protection from removal to which the appellant is entitled.

  13. For these reasons the decision of  the  judge  to  allow  this  appeal
      cannot stand and will be set aside. Upon hearing from  the  appellant,
      who acts in person and who had not appreciated that he might have been
      called upon to present his case immediately so that  the  decision  on
      his appeal might be remade, I had no  doubt  that  he  was  not  in  a
      position to do so. It is his case that he may well be able to  address
      the evidential gap concerning the period during  which  he  claims  to
      have been living in accordance with the Regulations, although  he  was
      not presently equipped to demonstrate that. He  recognises  also  that
      the issue that is likely to be determinative of the  outcome  of  this
      appeal is whether or not he can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
      Tribunal that he no longer uses controlled drugs and so has no  reason
      to commit further offences to fund a drug habit. It may  be  that  his
      own bare assertion of that fact will not be  sufficient  and  that  he
      will need to provide some form  of  independent  evidence.  Those  are
      matters for him to consider and if he wishes to assemble such evidence
      he should begin to do so without delay and ensure that  it  is  served
      upon the respondent before the hearing that is to follow.


  14. In all the circumstances, as it is clear that the appellant's case  is
      that his present circumstances are fundamentally  different  from  how
      they were at the date of the decision under challenge, a good deal  of
      fresh evidence will need to be  received  and  considered  as  to  the
      appellant's current circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  this  appeal
      should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.




Summary of decision:

           i) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of
              law error of law and his decision shall be set aside.

          ii) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the  extent
              that the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
              determined afresh.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 27 June 2017

