
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00339/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 December 2014                       |On 11 December 2014       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   MR S U
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Yeo of counsel instructed by Renaissance
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the
       Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan who was
       born on 29 May 1959 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State has been
       given permission to appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Warren L Grant ("the FTTJ") who allowed the  claimant's  appeal
       against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  5  February  2014  to
       refuse to revoke  the  deportation  order  made  against  him  on  17
       February 1998.


    2. The claimant entered the UK illegally on 17 March 1994. On  24  March
       1994 he claimed asylum but then did  not  pursue  the  claim.  On  17
       October 1995 he married MPP at Newham Registry Office.  On  19  March
       1996 he was granted leave to remain as a spouse for a period expiring
       on 17 October 1995. On 18 September 1996 he  was  convicted  at  Wood
       Green  Crown  Court  on  an  indictment  containing  two  counts   of
       conspiracy to defraud. On 27 September 1996 he  was  sentenced  to  a
       total of three years and six months imprisonment and recommended  for
       deportation.


    3. On 22 November 1997 the claimant's asylum claim was  refused.  On  17
       February 1998 a deportation  order  was  made  against  him.  Further
       representations were submitted but on 16 March 1998 the Secretary  of
       State refused to revoke the deportation order. The claimant's  appeal
       against the decision was heard on 5 June 1998. The claimant said that
       he was a Christian and claimed to fear persecution from extremists in
       Pakistan who had accused him of blasphemy. His  evidence  about  this
       was not accepted and his appeal was dismissed.  His  application  for
       permission to appeal was rejected and on 13 August  1998  his  appeal
       rights were exhausted. On 8 October 1998 he was deported to Pakistan.


    4. Sometime in 2000 the claimant re-entered the UK clandestinely. On  18
       January 2002 his marriage to MPP was dissolved. On 24  June  2003  he
       lodged an application for leave to remain as the spouse  of  JU.  She
       was and is a British citizen having been granted leave to  remain  on
       account of her marriage to another  man  on  5  May  1990  which  was
       dissolved on 17 April 2001.


    5. The claimant's application for leave to remain  was  acknowledged  to
       his then solicitors on 1 July 2003. On 28 November 2005 the  claimant
       applied for leave to remain as part of the "family exercise".  On  10
       December 2013 the Secretary of State wrote to his current  solicitors
       requesting further information. This was supplied on 19 December 2013
       and at the same time  the  solicitors  claimed  that  the  claimant's
       offence was "spent".


    6. In her refusal letter the Secretary of State treated the letter of 19
       December 2013 as a fresh claim on human rights  grounds.  This  claim
       was refused and the Secretary of State also  refused  to  revoke  the
       deportation order. In a letter dated 12 September 2013 the  Secretary
       of State explained that she was  not  able  to  decide  the  marriage
       application, which was being treated as an application to revoke  the
       deportation order, until a decision had been made whether or  not  to
       revoke the deportation order itself.


    7. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal  7  August  2013.
       Both parties were represented, the claimant by Mr Yeo,  who  appeared
       before me. The FTTJ heard evidence from the appellant and his wife.


    8. The claimant  continued  to  claim  that  he  would  be  at  risk  of
       persecution  in  Pakistan  because  of  his   Christian   faith   and
       allegations of blasphemy made against him.  The  FTTJ  rejected  that
       claim and there is now no appeal against that decision.


    9. Having heard evidence from  his  wife  the  FTTJ  accepted  that  the
       claimant had not  been  fully  frank  with  her  about  his  criminal
       conviction or deportation and she had not been aware  of  the  reason
       for his lack of immigration status until some  10  years  after  they
       married. Since 2005 she had been self-employed  running  an  Internet
       cafe. The income from this  business  supported  both  of  them.  The
       claimant's wife had a daughter  born  in  1992  before  she  met  the
       claimant who lived with them. The claimant's wife  and  daughter  had
       visited Pakistan but because of his lack of  immigration  status  the
       claimant was not able to go with them.


   10. The claimant argued  that  his  application  for  revocation  of  the
       deportation order should be considered under  paragraph  390  of  the
       Immigration  Rules  and  that,  despite  having  been  convicted  and
       sentenced for  a  serious  criminal  offence,  deportation  would  be
       disproportionate to his entitlement to enjoy an Article 8 private and
       family life in the UK.


   11. The FTTJ found that  the  pressing  public  interest  in  deportation
       outweighed any Article 8 human rights claim as these were set out  in
       the Immigration Rules. Deportation would mean a period of  separation
       from the claimant's ties in the UK and the length of that  period  of
       separation  would  depend  on  the  success  or  otherwise   of   any
       application for entry  clearance  which  he  made  from  outside  the
       country. It would not be subject to a 10 year bar but would take into
       account his adverse immigration history.


   12. The FTTJ went on to conclude that a time lag of 10 years was  capable
       of being an exceptional circumstance permitting him to  consider  the
       human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules. Applying  Razgar,
       R (on the Application of)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2004] UKHL 27 principles  and  taking  into  account  the
       provisions of the Immigration  Act  2014  the  FTTJ  found  that  the
       claimant enjoyed a private and family life with his wife and daughter
       and a private life in his church and  community.  His  removal  would
       interfere with that private and family life to such an extent  as  to
       engage the Convention. The Secretary  of  State  delayed  nine  years
       before dealing with his claim and this delay needed to be  viewed  in
       the light of EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UK HL 41. The  FTTJ  concluded
       that, taking into account this delay on the part of the Secretary  of
       State which was not in any way  attributable  to  the  claimant,  the
       conviction related to an offence committed almost 20  years  ago  and
       there had been no suggestion of any criminal behaviour on the part of
       the claimant since he returned to the UK to remove  him  would  be  a
       disproportionate interference with his Article 8 human rights.


   13. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed
       it on Article 8 human rights grounds. He made an anonymity  direction
       to protect members of the claimant's family.


   14. The Secretary of State applied for  and  was  granted  permission  to
       appeal. The grounds argue that the FTTJ erred in law  by  failing  to
       consider the Article 8 deportation provisions in the Immigration  Act
       2014; failing to give proper regard to the Government's  view  as  to
       what were exceptional circumstances; failing to take into account the
       fact that whilst that was admitted delay on the part of the Secretary
       of State which was regrettable this was not determinative; failing to
       address correctly the effects of delay under  EB  Kosovo  principles;
       failing to take into account that the claimant's wife could  relocate
       with him or that they could keep in touch through modern  methods  of
       communication; failing to conclude that the claimant's  circumstances
       were not exceptional; failing to give adequate consideration  to  the
       Secretary of State's public interest policies and the  strong  public
       interest in favour of his deportation.


   15. I have a skeleton argument from Mr Yeo.


   16. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal and  took  me  through  the
       chronology. He accepted that there had been delay on the part of  the
       Secretary of State. I pointed out the reference to paragraph  391  of
       the Rules  in  paragraph  24  of  the  determination.  Paragraph  391
       provides;


          "391. In the case of a person  who  has  been  deported  following
          conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation   of   a
          deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

          (a)     in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
          person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less  than  4
          years, unless 10 years  have  elapsed  since  the  making  of  the
          deportation order  when,  if  an  application  for  revocation  is
          received, consideration will be given on a case by case  basis  to
          whether the deportation order should be maintained, or

          (b)     in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
          person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  4
          years, at any time,

          Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to  the
          Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to
          the  Status  of  Refugees,  or   there   are   other   exceptional
          circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation  is   outweighed   by
          compelling factors."

   17. I asked Mr Walker to address me on the question of  whether,  as  the
       appellant had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than
       four years and  ten  years  had  elapsed  since  the  making  of  the
       deportation order, the continuation of the deportation order was  the
       proper course. Mr Walker said that he could not argue that it was the
       proper course. As a result it appeared that the appeal should succeed
       under the Immigration Rules. However, he submitted that if  this  was
       the case it was not the end of the story as the appellant would  need
       to apply for leave  to  enter  or  remain.  It  would  not  serve  to
       determine his application for leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  of  a
       British citizen made on 24 June 2003. Mr Walker accepted that it  was
       difficult for the Secretary of State to continue to advance a  public
       interest argument where she was not entitled to refuse to revoke  the
       deportation order. He indicated that he did  not  wish  to  make  any
       further submissions.


   18. Mr Yeo submitted that the FTTJ had done a perfectly good  job.  There
       were no errors of law in the determination. The Secretary of  State's
       grounds of appeal were formulaic and in  essence  did  no  more  than
       offer alternative conclusions to those properly reached by the  FTTJ.
       He tentatively advanced, but did not press, an application for costs.
       He accepted that as yet there were no directions from  the  President
       of the Upper Tribunal as to the circumstances in which costs might be
       awarded. I was asked to dismiss the Secretary of State's  appeal  and
       to uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


   19. I reserved my determination.


   20. The Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  are  broadly  drawn,
       formulaic and do little to identify any clear error of  law.  I  find
       that the determination is lengthy, detailed  and  addresses  all  the
       matters touched on in the grounds of appeal. It is not suggested that
       any of the findings of fact are flawed or that any material  evidence
       has been left out of account.


   21. I find that under paragraph 391 of the Rules and because the claimant
       was sentenced to less than four years imprisonment and more  than  10
       years had elapsed since the  making  of  the  deportation  order  the
       Secretary of State had failed to establish that the  continuation  of
       the deportation order against him  was  the  proper  course.  In  the
       reasons for refusal letter dated 5 February 2014 at  paragraph  6  as
       part of her consideration of paragraph 391  the  Secretary  of  State
       referred only to the claimant's "continued exclusion until  10  years
       have elapsed since the making of the Deportation Order would normally
       be the proper course". I find that what should  have  been  addressed
       under paragraph 391 was not the period during which the appellant had
       been outside or within the UK but the total period of time since  the
       deportation order was made, which was more than 10 years.


   22. This conclusion on its own does not mean that the claimant is entitle
       to succeed under the revocation  of  deportation  provisions  in  the
       Rules but it does lead to the conclusion that consideration must  "be
       given on a case by case basis to whether the deportation order should
       be maintained" and that continuation of the deportation order is  not
       likely to be the proper course.


   23. I find that this feeds into and supports the FTTJ's reasoning  as  to
       the weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in  the  Article  8
       proportionality balancing exercise outside the  Rules.  Even  without
       this I would have found that in  this  respect  the  FTTJ  reached  a
       conclusion open to him on all the evidence.


   24. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction  to  protect  the  interests  of
       members of the claimant's family. Whilst I have not been asked to  do
       so I find that it is necessary to make such an  order  for  the  same
       reason. I make an order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication
       of any matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the
       claimant or any member of his family


   25. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law. I dismiss the  Secretary  of
       State's  appeal  and  uphold  the  determination  of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal.






   Signed:........................................   Date:  8 December 2014


   Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden


