
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00171/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 November 2014                        |On 13 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR DAVID GORAL
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: the respondent appeared but was not legally represented



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


      1. The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         ("the Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen  of  Poland
         who was born on 29 September 1985 ("the claimant)".  The  Secretary
         of State has been given permission to appeal the determination of a
         panel comprising First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  OBE  and  non-
         legal  Member  Mr  C  P  O'Brian  ("the  panel")  who  allowed  the
         claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  21
         November 2013 to make a deportation order against him in accordance
         with Regulation 21 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations")  on  the  basis  that  he
         posed a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
         interests of public policy. The Secretary of  State's  Reasons  for
         Deportation letter  dated  11  December  2013  concluded  that  the
         claimant had not acquired a right of permanent residence in the UK.
         He had not shown that he had resided here and exercised his  treaty
         rights for a continuous period of five  years.  After  his  initial
         conviction on 6 July 2005 for driving whilst disqualified, using  a
         vehicle whilst uninsured and resisting or obstructing  a  constable
         he had been convicted on a further 16 occasions for 30 offences; 12
         of  theft  and  kindred   offences,   10   offences   relating   to
         police/courts/prisons,  4  drug  offences   and   4   miscellaneous
         offences. He had been given both custodial  and  a  wide  range  of
         other sentences.


      2. The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard by the panel  on  15
         July 2014. He attended and gave oral evidence but was  not  legally
         represented. The Secretary of State was represented.


      3. The panel set out the claimant's immigration  history.  He  claimed
         asylum on 20 September 1997 but this was  refused  on  20  November
         1999. It was not clear whether he then left the UK. On 22  February
         2001 he applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds. On  17
         February 2004 he applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  the
         dependent of Robert Huczko as part of the family ILR  exercise.  On
         11 March 2004 he was granted indefinite leave to remain and, on  23
         March 2004 he withdrew his human rights application. He  became  an
         EU citizen with the accession of Poland on 1 May 2004.


      4. In paragraph 37 of  the  determination  the  panel  said  that  the
         claimant  appeared  to  have  been  given  his  first  sentence  of
         imprisonment on 9 December 2008 at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court.  The
         panel stated in paragraph 38 that at that point the  appellant  had
         been lawfully resident in the UK for four years and nine months  (1
         May 2004 to 9 December 2008).  The  panel  went  on  to  say;  "The
         respondent was  then  able  to  establish  any  evidence  that  the
         appellant had not been exercising his  freedom  of  movement  as  a
         worker in the United Kingdom which the appellant claimed  he  had."
         As it stands the sentence makes no sense. Perhaps the  panel  meant
         to say;  "the  respondent  was  not  then  able  to  establish...."
         However, if this was the intention it would have been an  error  of
         law because it was not for the Secretary of State to establish that
         the claimant was not exercising treaty rights during  a  particular
         period but for the claimant to establish that he was.


      5. In paragraph 41 the panel  said;  "On  our  interpretation  of  the
         appellant's antecedents  and  an  absence  of  the  certificate  of
         conviction, we are satisfied on the balance of  probabilities  that
         the appellant has achieved his five-year lawful  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom entitling him to a right of permanent  residence  in
         the United Kingdom". There is no clear statement as to when it  was
         thought that this period began or ended. The panel appears to  have
         reached  this  conclusion  because  there  was  no  certificate  of
         conviction to show that the claimant's first conviction  was  on  9
         December 2008. Whilst I accept that there does not appear  to  have
         been a separate certificate of conviction the panel did have a full
         printout from the Police National Computer in which  the  date  and
         details of this conviction are recorded. The claimant told me  that
         he had never denied the date of this conviction, the offence or the
         sentence to the panel or anyone else.


      6. In these circumstances I find that, as contended in  the  Secretary
         of State's grounds of appeal, the panel erred in law in  concluding
         that the claimant had provided evidence of  five  years  continuous
         residence in the UK. There is no record in the determination of the
         claimant having provided evidence that he had been here for such  a
         period. The burden of proof was on him to show that he had.


      7. The  Secretary  of  State's  contention  was  that  any  period  of
         continuous residence would cease on the commencement of a period of
         imprisonment. The panel appeared to recognise this by reference  to
         the relevant authority in paragraph 39. As it was not open  to  the
         panel  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  was  not
         convicted, sentenced and imprisoned on 9 December 2008 it was  also
         not open to the panel to conclude that the  claimant  had  achieved
         five years continuous residence in the UK. The panel also erred  in
         law by failing to make it clear precisely what period  was  thought
         to  have  led  to  5  years  continuous  residence.  The  erroneous
         conclusion that this had been achieved led to  the  equally  flawed
         conclusion that he had a right of permanent residence in the UK and
         to could only be deported on serious grounds of  public  policy  or
         public security.


      8. The panel's conclusions in paragraphs 43 and 44 that  the  claimant
         was "a petty criminal and not somebody who commits serious criminal
         acts, such  as  serious  sexual  offences,  terrorism  violence  or
         importation for (sic) supply  of  drugs"  and  that  "there  is  no
         evidence before us that the appellant poses a  continuous  risk  to
         society and the public at large..." were  not  open  to  the  panel
         without addressing the points summarised  in  paragraph  2  of  the
         grounds  of  appeal,  that  the  claimant  has  not  addressed  his
         behaviour or his drug use, has shown a propensity to  reoffend  and
         his family do not appear to have been able to exert any  sufficient
         influence over him so that he remains at risk  of  reoffending  and
         harm to the public. These factors are set out in greater detail  in
         paragraphs 23 to 32 of the refusal letter.


      9. The panel's conclusions that the claimant was entitled  to  succeed
         on Article 8 human rights grounds are flawed by the errors  of  law
         in relation to the position under the 2006  Regulations.  There  is
         has  been  no  proper  consideration  of  whether  the   claimant's
         circumstances are exceptional.


     10. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and can see no
         good reason to do so.


     11. The errors of law are  such  that  the  decision  is  fundamentally
         flawed and must be set aside. The findings of fact are unclear  and
         cannot  be  preserved.  There  has  in  effect   been   no   proper
         consideration of the appeal in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  In  the
         circumstances the  appeal  should  be  reheard  in  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal.




Signed:........................................
    Date: 8 November 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

