
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 February 2018                        |On 1 March 2018                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LORD BOYD
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                      mr lisandro manuel bento da silva
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Ward, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     DECISION ON FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie promulgated on 2 August 2016 in which he dealt with  the
    claim as to whether an EEA national should be removed as  a  result  of
    criminal misconduct.  The issue  before  him  was  the  application  of
    Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (2006 No 1003).  Unfortunately, that Regulation was not  contained
    in the determination and, had it been, it may have been that the  judge
    would  have  been  reminded  of  the  various  stages   that   required
    consideration.  Regulation 21 provides:-

         (1)  In this Regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.

         ...

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision."

 2. The relevant decision was made on  3  December  2015  and  the  enquiry
    therefore required the judge to  consider  first  of  all  whether  the
    appellant had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of  residence.   That  is
    determined by Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.  Secondly, whether
    he had resided in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of  at
    least ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant  decision.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge considered the question  of  whether  he  had  permanent
    right of residence and decided in paragraph 16 of his determination  as
    follows:-

         "I consider therefore that I am bound to accept that the  appellant
         has lived in the UK in accordance with the EEA  regulations  (as  a
         student) for a period beyond 5 years and has therefore acquired the
         right  to  permanent  residence.   In  accordance  with   the   EEA
         regulations therefore his deportation must be justified on  serious
         grounds of public policy"

 3. Unfortunately that was a  misreading  of  the  student  provisions.   A
    student is defined in Regulation 4  as  a  person  who  is  not  simply
    enrolled at a course of  study  but  also  has  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance cover in the United Kingdom.  It is highly unlikely that this
    appellant had such insurance and there was no evidence one way  or  the
    other to that effect.

 4. Instead the consideration ought to have been directed  towards  whether
    he was  the  dependant  of  his  mother  and  whether  the  mother  was
    exercising Treaty rights during the relevant period such as to give him
    a permanent right of residence.

 5. Thereafter the judge had to consider the somewhat nuanced consideration
    of the impact of criminal misconduct on the ten years of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.  It has  to  be  pointed  out  that,  once  he  has
    acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence,  he  only  then  needs  to
    establish a further five  years  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  to
    qualify  for  the  ten  years  protection,  the  'imperative  grounds'.
    However that is subject to decisions on how imprisonment will have  the
    effect of severing the relevant period.    See  the  judgments  of  the
    Court of Justice in Onuekwere [2014] EUECJ C-378/12  and  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12.

 6. The period with which we are concerned is a period which spans  from  3
    December 2005 to 3 December 2015.  During  that  period  there  were  a
    number of convictions albeit convictions which only resulted in a short
    period of imprisonment.

 7. Consequently the judge was wrong  (as  far  as  we  can  tell)  in  his
    assessment of the  appellant  having  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence and was also wrong not to consider the apparent position that
    he had resided in the United Kingdom for a period of at least ten years
    prior to the relevant decision. By failing to conduct those  enquiries,
    we are satisfied there is a material error of law.

 8. We should say at this stage that there have  to  be  quite  fundamental
    findings of fact in relation to the relevant requirements of  the  2006
    Regulations as well as findings made to  the  extent  of  his  becoming
    involved in life in the United Kingdom and the impact of his removal to
    Portugal.  He arrived at the age of 5  and  has  therefore  spent  very
    little time in Portugal.

 9. In these circumstances we consider that the appropriate forum  for  the
    re-making of the decision is the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  appeal
    will be remitted to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

   1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  an  error
      of law and is set aside.

   2. The re-making of the decision is  to  take  place  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Dated 23 February 2018
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
