
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00554/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 May 2013                                   |On 24 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                       ARFAN ABDULRAHMAN (AKA ASO ALI)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N S Ahluwalia, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Arfan Abdulrahman, was born on 29 November 1980 and is a
    citizen of Iraq.  On 9 August 2012, a decision was made to  deport  the
    appellant.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  18  December
    2012,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 26 June 2001.
     He made a claim for asylum on or shortly after arrival and that  claim
    was refused in September  2001.   His  appeal  to  an  Adjudicator  was
    dismissed on  23  September  2002.   The  appellant  was  convicted  of
    wounding with intent contrary to Section 18 of the Offences against the
    Person Act 1861 having pleaded guilty at Sheffield  Crown  Court  on  4
    January 2005.  On  2  March  2005,  he  was  sentenced  to  ten  years'
    imprisonment for this offence.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant seeks to  rely
    upon new evidence (dated 2 January 2013, that is following the date  of
    promulgation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   determination)   from   a
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Bowen, which seeks to correct an  error  in
    Dr Bowen's earlier report which had  been  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    grounds assert:

         "A central feature of the reasons used to support [rejection of the
         appellant's account of past events in their entirety] that the core
         of his claim was that the panel found that A's sister told Dr Bowen
         that A had been hospitalised for a period of four years  after  the
         death of his brother when A was aged 13-14 (para 44(ii)); this  was
         completely contrary to his claimed involvement with the  PKK  after
         he was 13, undermining the entirety of his claim."

 4. Dr Bowen's new addendum report explains that the appellant's sister had
    not told him that the appellant had been hospitalised  for  four  years
    but rather that he had been confined to hospital for a period  of  time
    and had then received follow-up treatment (i.e. as an  outpatient)  for
    the next four years [ground 3.3].  The grounds rely upon a  variety  of
    jurisprudence including Begum v London Borough of Tower Hamlets  [2003]
    UKHL 5;




    7. Although the county court's jurisdiction  is  appellate,  it  is  in
    substance the same as that of the High Court in judicial  review:  Nipa
    Begum v Tower Hamlets London Borough Council [2000] 1 WLR  306  .  Thus
    the court may not only quash the  authority's  decision  under  section
    204(3) if it is held to be vitiated by legal misdirection or procedural
    impropriety or unfairness or bias or irrationality  or  bad  faith  but
    also if there is no evidence to support factual findings made  or  they
    are plainly untenable or (Secretary of State for Education and  Science
    v Tameside Metropolitan Borough Council [1977] AC  1014  at  1030,  per
    Scarman LJ) if the decision-maker is shown  to  have  misunderstood  or
    been ignorant of an established  and  relevant  fact.  In  the  present
    context I would expect the county  court  judge  to  be  alert  to  any
    indication that an applicant's case might not have been resolved by the
    authority in a fair, objective and even-handed way,  conscious  of  the
    authority's role as decision-maker and of the immense importance of its
    decision to an applicant. But I can see no warrant for applying in this
    context notions of "anxious scrutiny" (R v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department Ex p Bugdaycay [1987] AC 514 at 531G, per  Lord  Bridge
    of Harwich) or the enhanced approach to judicial  review  described  by
    Lord Steyn in R (Daly) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2001] 2 AC 532 at 546-548. I would also demur  at  the  suggestion  of
    Laws LJ in the Court of Appeal in the present case ([2002] 1  WLR  2491
    at 2513, [2002] EWCA Civ 239 , paragraph 44) that the judge may subject
    the decision to "a close and rigorous analysis" if by that is meant  an
    analysis closer or more rigorous that would ordinarily and properly  be
    conducted by a careful and competent judge determining  an  application
    for judicial review.

 5. The grounds also rely on E v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2004] EWCA Civ 49;

    Without seeking to lay down a precise code, the  ordinary  requirements
    for a finding of unfairness are apparent from  the  above  analysis  of
    CICB. First, there must have been a mistake as  to  an  existing  fact,
    including a mistake as to the availability of evidence on a  particular
    matter. Secondly, the fact or evidence must have been "established", in
    the  sense  that  it  was  uncontentious  and  objectively  verifiable.
    Thirdly, the appellant (or  his  advisers)  must  not  been  have  been
    responsible for the mistake. Fourthly, the mistake must have  played  a
    material (not necessarily decisive) part in the  Tribunal's  reasoning.
    [66]

 6. Finally, the grounds also rely on Haile v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 663:
    1. Powerful though these  arguments  are  and  ably  though  they  were
       presented, in my judgment they cannot carry the day. This was really
       a most regrettable mistake for the special adjudicator to have made.
       True, it produced only one  of  six  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
       appellant, but it must inevitably leave a sense of deep injustice in
       the appellant and it cannot confidently be  said  to  have  made  no
       ultimate difference to the result. It is of course most  unfortunate
       that this mistake was not uncovered until it was when and plainly it
       could and should have been. Were the old Ladd v Marshall  principles
       to be strictly applied, then surely the appellant would fall at this
       first hurdle. The fact is however that these  principles  never  did
       apply strictly in public  law  and  judicial  review.  As  Sir  John
       Donaldson MR said in R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
       ex parte Ali [1984] 1 WLR 663, 673:
      "... the decision in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489 has as such  no
      place in that context,"
      although he then added:
       "However, I think that the principles which underlie  issue  estoppel
       and the decision in       Ladd v Marshall, namely that there must  be
       finality  in  litigation,  are  applicable  subject  always  to   the
       discretion of the Court to depart from them if the wider interests of
       justice so require."
    1. Nor am I persuaded that the House of Lords' decision  in  Al-Mehdawi
       precludes this Court having regard to the wider interests of justice
       here, not least given that this is an  asylum  case  rather  than  a
       student leave case as was Al-Mehdawi. Aspects of that  decision  may
       in any event now need to be reconsidered in the light of  the  House
       of Lords' speeches in R v Criminal Injuries  Compensation  Board  ex
       parte A [1999] 2 AC 330.
    1. What then do the wider interests of justice require in this case?  I
       have no doubt that they require the IAT's refusal of leave  of  28th
       March 2000 to be quashed and perhaps even  the  appeal  to  the  IAT
       itself to be allowed so that there would  need  to  be  yet  another
       special adjudication, a  fourth,  unfortunate  though  plainly  that
       would be. That, therefore, seems to be the necessary outcome of this
       appeal.
    1. I would allow in the fresh evidence, set aside  the  judgment  below
       (purely because of the fresh evidence) and quash the  IAT's  refusal
       of leave (again purely because of the fresh evidence). I  would  add
       just this. Although, as I have indicated, it is not impossible  that
       on a fourth appeal to the  special  adjudicator  the  appellant  may
       finally achieve a different result, he should certainly not count on
       that.  He  has  indeed  little  ground  for   optimism.   I   would,
       nevertheless, allow his appeal.

 7. The respondent filed a reply under Rule 24 on 15 February  2013.   This
    reply asserts:

         "However, it is submitted ground 1 is disputed.  Dr  Bowen  changed
         the report post hearing to purportedly reflect an error of drafting
         in the report.  Dr Bowen failed therefore in the duty to the  court
         and the client.  The report can't have been put to the appellant by
         his advisors, or surely the mistake  would  have  been  notice  pre
         hearing?  Therefore, the advisors are responsible for  the  mistake
         and it falls outside the E and R principles.  This is no  error  of
         fact."

 8. Dr Bowen attended the Upper Tribunal initial hearing at  Bradford.   We
    understand that he had done  so  in  order  to  refute  the  suggestion
    contained (so the appellant's representative appears to have  believed)
    in the reply from the Home Office that he  had  in  some  way  deceived
    either the appellant or the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Diwnycz,  for  the
    respondent, confirmed that no implication had been intended.   For  our
    part, we are satisfied that Dr Bowen has acted in accordance  with  his
    duty to the Tribunal as an expert witness. He considered that his first
    report had been inaccurate so he had amended it. We released  Dr  Bowen
    and he was not required to give evidence to the Tribunal.

 9. We have set out above the conditions concerning the admission of  fresh
    evidence relating to errors of fact and as enunciated  by  Carnwath  LJ
    (as he was then) in E & R.  In the present appeal, there appears  prima
    facie to have been a mistake as to an existing fact  although  we  note
    that what Dr Bowen said in his first report was hearsay, recording what
    he had been told the  appellant's  sister,  Ada,  had,  in  turn,  told
    medical staff treating her brother, the appellant.  The problem for the
    appellant in seeking to admit this evidence, in our opinion, relates to
    the alleged mistake on the part of the Tribunal as to "the availability
    of evidence on a particular matter".  This  is  a  problem  which  also
    engages  the  third   of   Carnwath   LJ's   conditions,   namely   the
    responsibility of the appellant or his advisers for the  occurrence  of
    the mistake. There is, of  course,  no  suggestion  that  the  Tribunal
    misunderstood or ignored the evidence that was before them  whilst  the
    "correct" evidence from the appellant's sister was "available"  at  the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing and could have been brought  to
    the Tribunal's attention had the appellant, his representative  or  Ada
    identified the inconsistency in the evidence.   Mr Ahluwalia,  for  the
    appellant, submitted that the appellant, who is suffering  from  mental
    difficulties, was in no position to scrutinise  in  detail  Dr  Bowen's
    report (written in a language that he did not understand) and point out
    to his advisers any errors contained in it.  We reject that  submission
    because (i) there is no evidence to indicate that the appellant  lacked
    the cognitive ability to understand the contents of the  report  or  to
    identify any errors and (ii)  the  importance  of  the  report  in  the
    appellant' appeal was such that its contents should have been explained
    to the appellant and his instructions on the report obtained. Moreover,
    a further problem for the appellant's advisers is that  evidence  which
    they had collated and presented to the First-tier Tribunal was  plainly
    inconsistent; indeed, when those inconsistencies were  pointed  out  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal  in  its  determination,  the  representatives
    immediately sought to clarify the contents of Dr Bowen's report.   This
    is not a case where completely new evidence regarding  matters  unknown
    to any of the parties, the witnesses or the advisers has come to  light
    only after the promulgation of a determination.  The fact that Dr Bowen
    had inaccurately recorded the appellant's sister's  comments  regarding
    the appellant's "hospitalisation" in Iraq could and  should  have  been
    detected by the appellant himself (if his instructions  on  the  report
    had been sought) or his advisers in their preparation of  this  appeal.
    We take the view, therefore, that the appellant  and  his  advisers  in
    this instance cannot satisfy the test enunciated by the Court of Appeal
    in E & R.

10. We also find that the "mistake" in this instance fails to  satisfy  the
    second pert of the test in E & R. The new evidence which the  appellant
    seeks to adduce asserts that  the  appellant,  although  he  was  still
    receiving treatment for his  mental  condition,  was  not  in  hospital
    during a period when he claims to have been active with the  PKK.  That
    evidence cannot, in our view, be properly  described  as  uncontentious
    let  alone  objectively  verifiable.  It  is  contentious  because  the
    respondent submits that the appellant  and  his  sister  are  witnesses
    wholly without  credibility  and  it  is  plainly  incapable  of  being
    verified by reliable third party sources.

11. The fourth E & R test relates to the materiality of the mistake as part
    of the Tribunal's reasoning.   We  are  aware  that  the  test  doesnot
    require the mistake to relate to a "necessarily decisive" part of  that
    reasoning.  However, the role played by the (mistaken) evidence in  the
    analysis  of  credibility  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  needs  to  be
    considered.

12. First, this was a case which the Tribunal correctly observed  that  the
    principles of Devaseelan  (Sri  Lanka)  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  (starred)
    applied because there had  been  a  previous  determination  concerning
    similar facts (the  appellant's  claimed  membership  of  the  PKK)  by
    Adjudicator Spencer in 2002.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    contained   an   lengthy   quotation   from    Adjudicator    Spencer's
    determination:

      The findings made by Adjudicator Spencer relating  to  this  appellant
      are set out at Paragraphs 14 - 18 of his determination as follows:

      "14. I have to judge the  Appellant's  claim  against  the  background
      evidence. I am sceptical of his claim to have been  a  member  of  the
      PKK. In answer to question 12 in his interview he was asked "What  did
      you  do  for  the  PKK?"  and  he  said  "My  job  was  to  distribute
      publications of PKK and also to advise people, normal  people  and  to
      discuss PKK programme and opinion to them.  We  tried  to  bring  more
      people into the party and tell  public  about  the  fact  of  what  is
      happening in the region". The PKK finds no  mention  in  the  list  of
      major  political  parties  at  Annex  B  of  the  Country  Assessment.
      Paragraph 3.16 says that on several occasions in  1996  Turkish  armed
      forces entered northern Iraq in pursuit of members  of  the  Kurdistan
      Worker's Party (PKK), (a Turkish terrorist organisation whose  members
      had been driven into northern Iraq from Turkey  and  Iran)  and  their
      bases. Terrorist activities in northern Iraq and  Turkey  by  the  PKK
      terrorist organisation also resulted in the death of both fighters and
      civilians. In part of his answer to question 29 in the course  of  the
      interview, he indicated that if  the  PKK  knew  a  person  had  taken
      information to the Kurdistan area they would kill him straight away as
      they wanted  to  be  secret.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  some
      contradiction here in the Appellant's description of what he  said  he
      did for the PKK and the desire of the PKK to be secret. In view of the
      reputation the PKK acquired for terrorist activities,  which  involved
      the killing of soldiers and civilians, it is surprising that,  if  the
      Appellant ever was  a  member  of  the  PKK,  he  should  have  become
      disillusioned only at the beginning of 2001.


      15. Nonetheless if the Appellant's account is true it is clear that he
      has become disillusioned with the PKK and has no intention of resuming
      his activities on its behalf. Since the PKK are not state  agents  the
      question therefore is whether or not there is in the KAA  an  adequate
      system of state protection which meets the test in Horvath v Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2000] Imm AR 552. As Lord Clyde  put
      it "There must be  in  place  a  system  of  domestic  protection  and
      machinery for the detection  prosecution  and  punishment  of  actings
      contrary to  the  purposes  which  the  Convention  requires  to  have
      protected. More importantly there must be a readiness to operate  that
      machinery"He quoted with approval the statement by Stuart-Smith LJ  in
      the Court of Appeal "It will require cogent evidence  that  the  state
      which is able to afford protection  is  unwilling  to  do  so...."  At
      paragraph 3.7 of the  Country  Assessment  it  says,  in  relation  to
      northern Iraq, that each of the regions administered by  the  KDP  and
      PUK has a system of justice based on Iraqi legislation with police  to
      enforce  public  order.  There  are  also   hospitals,   schools   and
      universities. Both regions have their  own  administrations  in  which
      several parties have seats". At paragraph  3.22  mention  is  made  of
      reports of hostilities in 2000 between the PUK and the  PKK  and  also
      between the KDP and the PKK. Paragraph 3.25 mentions that in July 2000
      the PUK attempted to push the PKK out of its  territory  and  fighting
      ensued. It seems to me  in  these  circumstances  there  would  be  no
      unwillingness on the part of the authorities either in the KDP area or
      the PUK area of the KAA to afford the Appellant the protection that he
      would require from the PKK, if his claims are true.


      16. There remains the question of whether the Appellant would be  safe
      from the PUK if he were returned to the area controlled by the PUK. On
      the Appellant's account he and his father were arrested by the PUK  in
      September 2000 following an attack on the PKK by both the PUK and  the
      KDP in 2000. They were detained  for  three  months  and  released  on
      condition that  they  would  not  support  the  PKK  and  they  signed
      documents to that affect. As Mr Johal submitted there is  no  evidence
      whatsoever to show that the PUK, or the KDP for that matter, know that
      the Appellant joined  the  guerrilla  movement  in  the  mountains  at
      Qandil. I agree with that submission.  If  returned  to  the  KAA  the
      Appellant would not, as I have indicated, continue his  activities  on
      behalf of the PKK because  he  has  become  disillusioned  with  them.
      Accordingly in my view he would not be at risk of persecution  by  the
      PUK. In these circumstances no question of internal flight to the area
      controlled by the KDP arises.


      17. So far as the claim, put forward on the Appellant's  behalf,  that
      his rights under Article3 of the ECHR would be likely to be  infringed
      on his  return  to  the  KAA,  because  of  his  mental  condition  is
      concerned,  the  position  is  that  there  is  simply  no   evidence.
      whatsoever which indicates that the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  a
      mental condition. Mr Moore in his report indicates that there  was  no
      suggestion that the Appellant had had an  epileptic  fit  neither  was
      there any mention of mental  health  problems  when  he  was  seen  in
      hospital on 1st December 2001.  The  single  entry  on  the  ambulance
      record sheet "? epileptic" is not a sufficient basis to conclude  that
      the Appellant suffers from epilepsy. I notice from the file  that  the
      hearing of the Appellant's appeal was adjourned from 4th April 2002 so
      that medical evidence could be obtained. That had not been obtained by
      27th May 2002 when the matter was listed for mention. A further period
      of three months was allowed for medical evidence to  be  obtained  The
      absence of medical evidence may be attributable to  the  behaviour  of
      the Appellant but, as Mr Khan indicated, another adjournment would not
      have been justified since it was unlikely  that  any  further  medical
      evidence would have been forthcoming. In these circumstances there  is
      no medical evidence to confirm Mr Khan's impression that the Appellant
      is suffering from  mental  health  problems  and  may  have  epilepsy.
      Therefore there is no basis upon which an argument that the return  of
      the Appellant to the KAA would involve an infringement of  his  rights
      under Article 3, by reason of his  mental  condition,  could  possibly
      succeed.


      18. For the reasons given,  therefore,  I  am  not  satisfied  to  the
      requisite degree that there-is  a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
      Refugee Convention reason if the Appellant were to be returned to  the
      KAA. Since the factual situation which gives rise  to  the  appeal  on
      human rights grounds  is  identical  to  that  on  which  the  Refugee
      Convention grounds are based it follows that I am not  satisfied  that
      the Appellant has shown that there would be a real risk  that  any  of
      his human rights would be infringed if he were to be returned  to  the
      KAA. Accordingly I dismiss the appeal on both grounds."

    43.  Having  noted  the  previous  determination  findings  and  having
      considered all of the further evidence now before us, we are  able  to
      make our own findings upon the  appellant's  claim  for  international
      protection.




13. It may be said that Adjudicator Spencer's findings on  credibility  are
    not particularly trenchantly expressed; he appears to  have  been  more
    concerned with the nature of any future risk to the appellant  in  Iraq
    rather than determining the credibility of the appellant's  account  of
    past events.  However,  Adjudicator  Spencer  was  "sceptical  of  [the
    appellant's] claim to have been a member of the PKK".   He  also  noted
    "some contradiction" in the appellant's evidence.  It was  against  the
    background of those  findings  and  observations  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal commenced its own analysis of credibility.  That  analysis  is
    very extensive and detailed but we consider that we should quote it  in
    full:

      We are satisfied for the following reasons that the appellant has  not
      been truthful about his associations with the PKK:

     i)  The appellant has not been internally consistent.  In  his  initial
      interview in 2001 the appellant claimed that his activities  with  the
      PKK  involved  him  distributing  publications,  advising  people  and
      discussing the PKK programme. When he was later interviewed  in  2008,
      the appellant claimed to have been an intelligence  officer  and  that
      this had been found out in 2000. The appellant also initially  claimed
      that he joined the PKK in 1996, but in later interviews said  that  he
      joined the party in 1993.  The  appellant  also  has  given  differing
      accounts relating to the two arrests. In interview in September  2009,
      the appellant claimed that on the first occasion he was arrested at  a
      KDP checkpoint in 1997 and was  detained  for  seven  months.  He  was
      released on condition that he severed his relationship with  the  PKK.
      He then said that he was detained in the PUK area  in  September  2000
      and held for three months. However in interview in October  2010,  the
      appellant said that he was first arrested in the autumn  of  1995  and
      was detained without trial for seven months before being  released  in
      the spring of 1997 in an exchange of prisoners. He was  then  arrested
      again in the autumn/winter of 1996 and detained for three months.  The
      appellant claims that these discrepancies are due  to  the  period  of
      time that has elapsed, his health condition and the drugs that he  has
      taken. However having considered all the evidence in the round, we are
      satisfied that the appellant has not been consistent  because  he  has
      been lying about these core events.

      ii)  According  to  the  medical   evidence,   the   appellant   began
      experiencing distressing  psychiatric  symptoms  from  an  early  age.
      According to Dr Bowen, the appellant said this began when  he  was  14
      and  resulted  in  him  being   hospitalised   and   receiving   depot
      antipsychotic medication at the age of 17. Dr. Bowen's initial  report
      indicates however that the appellant's sister Ada told  medical  staff
      in the UK that the appellant began to experience problems at  the  age
      of 13 or 14 after the death of his brother. She said  to  the  medical
      staff that the appellant was badly affected by  the  death  and  spent
      four years in hospital being treated  for  what  was  believed  to  be
      depression with depot and oral medication. We see no reason why  those
      charged with the appellant's medical care in the  UK  would  not  have
      correctly recorded what they had been told both by the  appellant  and
      his sister, particularly as this related to his medical  history.  The
      account given by the sister would mean that the appellant  spent  four
      years in hospital from the age of  13  or  14.  This  runs  completely
      contrary  to  what  the  appellant  has  said  about  his   continuing
      involvement with the PKK during these years. We also do  not  find  it
      remotely credible that somebody manifesting such psychiatric  problems
      from an early age would have been considered a suitable  candidate  to
      be an intelligence officer for an organisation such as the PKK  as  he
      would not have been trusted. Against the background of the appellant's
      mental  health  problems,  which  according  to  the  evidence  became
      apparent at an early age, we also find the appellant's claims to  have
      been gathering intelligence for the PKK by planting listening  devices
      and also handling information which had come from spy satellites to be
      nonsense.

     iii)     We also do not find it credible  that  if  the  appellant  had
      been detained by the PKK having refused to carry out orders to plant a
      bomb, that he would thereafter  have  been  released  and  trusted  to
      resume his activities such as carrying out guard  duty  whilst  others
      were asleep. The appellant had a telephone interview with  Dr.  Fatah.
      We note from his report at paragraph 24 that the appellant  must  have
      given a different account of how he was able to  escape  the  PKK.  Dr
      Fatah refers to how the appellant was detained and held for  15  days,
      but managed to escape by untying ropes that bound him and  avoiding  a
      sleeping guard. We are therefore drawn to  the  inevitable  conclusion
      that the appellant has again lied about core events.

     iv) The appellant's case is supported by statements  from  his  brother
      Nawshiran Barzinje in Switzerland and his sister Eda Abdulrahman  Aziz
      in Germany. They both refer to the family having  close  ties  to  the
      PKK. The appellant's brother refers to how he was sent for training at
      the age of 13, but was not as heavily involved as  the  appellant.  He
      says that his brother went to training at the age  of  13  and  became
      more involved as he grew older. He also says that  the  appellant  and
      their father were arrested and tortured by the PUK. He also refers  to
      another brother having been killed in military operations for the  PKK
      and says that the family were  told  this  in  1999.  The  appellant's
      sister  describes  how  she  was  working  with  the  PKK  and  was  a
      journalist. She refers to a brother  who  was  killed  whilst  in  the
      military section of the PKK and also how the appellant became involved
      with the PKK between the ages of 13 and 16 going  on  training  during
      holiday periods from school. She also refers to how the appellant  was
      receiving medical treatment in hospital. We bear in  mind  that  these
      two witnesses have both claimed asylum. The appellant's  brother  says
      that  he  claimed  asylum  in  Switzerland  on  account  of  his   own
      connections with the PKK and that he subsequently married  a  European
      citizen and has status to remain in  Switzerland  on  that  basis.  He
      makes no mention of  his  asylum  claim  ever  having  been  accepted.
      Likewise, the appellant's sister in  Germany  says  that  she  claimed
      asylum there in 2006 and says she is still awaiting a decision on  her
      claim. There is no evidence that either of these  witnesses  have  had
      their accounts accepted by the relevant authorities in  the  countries
      in which they now reside. We also bear in mind that  what  the  sister
      now says in her witness statement about the appellant's activities  as
      a teenager is not consistent with what she told  medical  staff  about
      him spending four years in hospital. Having considered the  statements
      of the brother and sister in the round, we attach no weight to them as
      we  are  satisfied  that  they  have  merely  sought  to  bolster  the
      appellant's claim with false evidence.

     v)  We have also noted  that  according  to  the  medical  report  from
      Wathwood Hospital (appellant's bundle page  136)  the  appellant  said
      that he had seven siblings one of whom was in Germany and  another  in
      Switzerland, but the remaining siblings were  all  in  Kurdistan.  The
      appellant told medical staff that one of his  brothers  suffered  from
      mental illness and had killed his  grandfather  and  a  cousin  whilst
      psychotic and had apparently committed suicide whilst  in  prison.  In
      his witness statement,  the  appellant  refers  to  only  having  four
      sisters and two brothers. His case is that one  of  his  brothers  was
      killed whilst working for the PKK and indeed in his witness  statement
      he gives further evidence about how this brother reached the  rank  of
      Baluk Commitant before disappearing in 1998. The  appellant  makes  no
      mention in his witness statement of the  suicide  of  another  brother
      after he had killed two family members. Again the  appellant  has  not
      been consistent about important events in his family life.

     vi) Further according to the Wathwood Hospital report, the  appellant's
      sister had confirmed that the appellant had been a member of  the  PKK
      between the ages of 14 and 19. However, she had  also  said  that  the
      appellant began to experience problems at the age of 13  or  14  after
      the death of his brother who had been the  head  of  their  close-knit
      family after their parents had died. He had been badly affected by the
      death  and  had  spent  four  years  in  hospital  being  treated  for
      depression with the depot and oral medication. After the onset of  his
      illness the appellant had become violent times towards his family.  If
      as the appellant's sister said to the doctors, the appellant's brother
      died when the appellant was about 13 or 14  (i.e.  in  about  1993  or
      1994) and this was after the death of the  appellant's  parents,  then
      this would make it impossible for the appellant's father to have  been
      arrested with him in or about 1997.

      vii)      In  assessing  the   evidence,   we   have   given   careful
      consideration to the report from  Dr.  Fatah  and  note  that  he  was
      reasonably convinced that both  the  appellant  and  his  sister  were
      affiliated to the PKK. We note that he interviewed both the  appellant
      and the appellant's sister and refers to background evidence about the
      PKK. Dr Fatah was able to confirm the appellant's fluency in Kurmanji,
      which Dr Fatah said the appellant  was  able  to  speak  with  a  more
      ideological vocabulary than is normal. There is  however  no  evidence
      before us to suggest that Kurmanji is  only  spoken  by  persons  with
      connections to the PKK, and we do not find it reasonably  likely  that
      this would be the case. There is no evidence before us to suggest that
      the language is uncommon within the region.  The  appellant  may  well
      have had an ideological vocabulary, but  we  bear  in  mind  that  the
      appellant has had several years to develop and embellish his claim and
      indeed has done so for example by latterly claiming to have been a PKK
      intelligence officer. He has several years to learn about the subject.
      There  is  a  reference  to  the  appellant's  sister  having  been  a
      journalist and a quotation within  the  report  about  this  newspaper
      having a woman journalist. There is  however  no  evidence  that  this
      relates specifically to the appellant's  sister.  In  considering  the
      expert report, we also bear in mind that Dr. Fatah does not appear  to
      have been fully aware of  all  of  the  inconsistencies  both  in  the
      evidence of the appellant and what has been said  by  the  appellant's
      sister. We do not accept his conclusions that the  appellant  and  his
      sister were affiliated to the PKK.

     viii)    Claims are  made  about  various  family  connections  through
      marriage to the leadership of the PKK. The  appellant  says  that  his
      sister Njo is married to the cousin of the leader of the PKK and  that
      another sister Heseba is married to the leader's bodyguard. No  cogent
      documentary evidence of these marriage connections  has  however  been
      provided. We also note that according to his statement, the  appellant
      says that Heseba is a police officer, which does not suggest that  she
      has had any problems on account of who she is married to. In  view  of
      our other concerns about the veracity of the evidence given to us,  in
      the absence of supporting documentary evidence supporting  documentary
      evidence, we do not accept what the appellant  or  his  witnesses  say
      about the connections of his siblings to high-ranking PKK members.

45.  We find that the appellant has not shown to the  standard  that  either
      he or  any  members  of  his  family  have  had  involvement  with  or
      connections to the PKK. We do not accept that the appellant  has  ever
      been detained or arrested by the KDP or PUK, or that he has ever  come
      adverse attention of the authorities in the Kurdish region. We do  not
      accept the claims that anyone has ever come looking for the  appellant
      at his family home. We also do not accept that the appellant is of any
      interest to the PKK.

46.  In any event, even if we are wrong in this,  we  note  that  Dr.  Fatah
      says that it is not possible to categorically state that  a  low-level
      member of the organisation such as what the appellant claims  to  have
      been would be at the same risk from the PKK as  high  level  officials
      who had been killed for dissenting. Dr Fatah also  indicates  that  he
      cannot comment on whether or not the appellant would still be at  risk
      from the KDP or PUK. Dr. Fatah is frankly  equivocal  about  the  risk
      that the appellant would face even taking his claim at its highest. We
      therefore conclude that even if there were any truth in the  appellant
      says about his involvement with the PKK the appellant would not now be
      at risk of ill treatment because of this.




14. Paragraphs 47-58 of the determination concern the appellant's claim  to
    have converted to Christianity.  The Tribunal rejected  that  claim  as
    untruthful.  It found  at  [58]  that  it  did  "not  accept  that  the
    appellant has any sincere Christian belief or that he would continue to
    express an interest in Christianity upon his return to Iraq".  We  note
    that none of the findings of the Tribunal relating to  the  appellant's
    claimed conversion to Christianity have been challenged in this  appeal
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,  therefore,  was
    examining the appellant's claimed  membership  of  the  PKK  against  a
    background of (1) the scepticism or misgivings on that issue  expressed
    by Adjudicator Spencer in 2002 and; (2) an entirely fabricated claim by
    the appellant to have converted to Christianity.  It is clear that  the
    Tribunal considered that the appellant was not likely to have taken the
    trouble of fabricating the conversion claim if he  had  considered  his
    claim to have been involved with the PKK was sufficiently compelling to
    lead to a grant of refugee  status.   Whilst  the  materiality  of  the
    "mistake" as  to  the  appellant's  hospitalisation  must  be  examined
    carefully,  the  appellant's  bogus  claim   to   have   converted   to
    Christianity together with Adjudicator Spencer's findings were discrete
    parts of the evidence before the Tribunal which were not connected with
    the "mistake" in any way and which per se would have given the Tribunal
    good reason to doubt the reliability of the appellant as a witness.

15. It is true that the Tribunal refers more than once to  the  appellant's
    apparent hospitalisation at a time when he claimed to have been  active
    with the PKK.  They note that the sister's  evidence  (recorded  by  Dr
    Bowen) "runs completely  contrary"  to  what  the  appellant  had  said
    regarding his involvement with the PKK.  They also considered that  the
    inconsistency between the sister's evidence and that of  the  appellant
    undermined the credibility of the sister, as  well  as  the  appellant.
    However, the Tribunal also made other findings as  to  the  appellant's
    account  and  his  credibility  which  are  not  connected   with   the
    "hospitalisation".   The  appellant's  own  evidence   was   internally
    inconsistent (see paragraph 44(i)).   We  also  observe,  at  paragraph
    42(ii),  that   the   Tribunal,   immediately   after   recording   the
    inconsistency between the evidence of the  appellant  and  his  sister,
    went on to note  that  it  was  not  "remotely  credible  that  someone
    manifesting such psychiatric problems from an early age would have been
    considered a suitable candidate to be an intelligence  officer  for  an
    organisation such as the PKK...".  The Tribunal is referring  there  to
    the appellant's psychiatric problems (which are  not  disputed)  rather
    than the fact that he was in hospital for a number of years.   Further,
    the Tribunal continued by finding that, "against the background of  the
    appellant's mental health problems...  we  also  find  the  appellant's
    claims to have been gathering intelligence  for  the  PKK  by  planting
    listening devices and also handling information which had come from spy
    satellites to be nonsense."  Again, that finding does not arise from  a
    misapprehension on the part of  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  appellant's
    detention in hospital.  The language used here is also  important.   We
    have no doubt that the Tribunal has (as it  stated  it  would  at  [3])
    considered the appellant's account of  past  events  according  to  the
    standard of proof of a reasonable likelihood or real risk.  However, it
    is an indication of just how incredible the Tribunal found much of  the
    appellant's evidence that it should use expressions such as  "nonsense"
    and "not remotely credible".

16. We consider that the  "mistaken"  evidence  did  play  a  part  in  the
    Tribunal's reasoning but we find that Mr Ahluwalia's  submission,  that
    it is impossible "to assert that the Tribunal would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion but for the mistake" is not  made  out.   Mr  Ahluwalia
    submitted that, "the Tribunal may not have reached the same  conclusion
    on A's credibility had it not been mistaken [as regards the appellant's
    hospitalisation]."  We disagree.  The Tribunal has given ample reasons,
    wholly unconnected with the "mistake"  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    credibility.

17. Finally, we note the question posed in Haile regarding the  requirement
    of the "wider  interests  of  justice".   We  are  well  aware  of  the
    importance of  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  to  the  appellant  but,
    following much consideration, we  are  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal's
    findings on credibility can and should stand. For the reasons, we  have
    given we find that the evidence purportedly clarifying the  appellant's
    sister's evidence should  not  be  admitted  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law in finding her evidence  and  that  of  the
    appellant himself to be untruthful.

18. The second ground of appeal concerns the application of J  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 629 to the facts in the appeal and, in particular, the  appellant's
    mental  condition.   It  is  submitted  that  the  panel   irrationally
    concluded  that  Dr  Bowen  was  of  the  view  that  the   appellant's
    deportation was not causally connected  to  a  risk  of  suicide.   The
    grounds also challenge the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  appellant's
    mental illness was not the direct or  indirect  responsibility  of  the
    respondent; the Tribunal had referred to Dr Bowen's assessment that the
    appellant would attempt to commit suicide wherever he might be  living.
    Thirdly, it is  submitted  that  the  mistake  as  to  the  appellant's
    sister's evidence  led  the  Tribunal  wrongly  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant did not have a genuine and subjective fear of return to Iraq.
     In the light of our findings regarding the appellant's credibility set
    out above, we reject that submission.  It is also  submitted  that  the
    appellant's numerous acts of self-harm  and  attempted  suicide  should
    have led the Tribunal to assess the risk to the appellant  particularly
    carefully  but  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  do  so.   As  to  that
    submission, we find that the First-tier Tribunal carried out a detailed
    and exhaustive  examination  of  the  appellant's  risk  of  committing
    suicide at paragraphs 59-72 of its determination;

          59. We have considered the appellant's mental health problems and
              the risks of him committing suicide. Dr. Bowen in his  report
              of 21 November 2012 says that the appellant has complex  dual
              diagnosis presentation of schizophrenia  and  an  emotionally
              unstable personality disorder. We see no reason not to accept
              this diagnosis. Dr. Bowen does not however consider that  the
              appellant's  symptoms  have   worsened   due   to   fear   of
              deportation.

          60. There have been a number of reported instances of  self  harm
              by the appellant. These have included him  stitching  up  his
              lips and eyes. He has made  superficial  cuts  to  his  arms,
              stomach, throat and wrist which have not required  treatment,
              but has also cut himself with a  razor  across  the  abdomen.
              This  injury  required  six  stitches  at  a  local   general
              hospital. On one occasion he prepared a noose,  but  did  not
              make any attempt to hang  himself.  The  appellant's  medical
              treatment has been punctuated by episodes  of  him  deceiving
              medical staff by not taking his medication and by his use  of
              illicit drugs.

          61. Dr Bowen's report sets out the appellant's complex regime  of
              medication which includes two antipsychotic  medications,  an
              intramuscular  depot  preparation  of  Haloperidol  and  oral
              Aripiprazole which have reduced  his  psychotic  symptomology
              and  behavioural  disturbances  to  a  degree.  He  is   also
              prescribed  an  antidepressant   Lofepramine   and   a   mood
              stabiliser Lamotrigine  which  have  positively  reduced  the
              appellant's  depressive  episodes.  The  appellant  is   also
              prescribed a laxative.

          62. We note  that  at  paragraph  3  under  the  heading  of  his
              opinions, Dr. Bowen  says  that  on  occasion  the  appellant
              appears to experience  fleeting  suicidal  ideation  although
              there has been no evidence of a sustained intention to commit
              suicide. However at paragraph 8, when asked if the  appellant
              is likely to commit suicide if deported to  Iraq,  Dr.  Bowen
              indicates that he believes that  there  is  a  high  risk  of
              completed suicide in the medium term  irrespective  of  where
              the appellant is. This is in view of his self  harm  history,
              his  severe  emotionally   unstable   personality   disorder,
              psychotic illness, use of illicit drugs, poor compliance with
              medication and poor response to stressors.

          63. In his addendum to this report of 6 December 2012,  Dr  Bowen
              indicates  that  if  Ariprazole  and  Lamotrigine   are   not
              available in Iraq it is uncertain  how  the  appellant  would
              respond if alternative medication had to be  substituted.  He
              considers that there would be a risk that his mental  illness
              would relapse at least  for  a  period  of  time  during  the
              changeover resulting in increased  psychotic  ideation.  This
              would lead to an increased risk of  self  harm.  Any  relapse
              would be likely  to  necessitate  admission  to  hospital  to
              stabilise his mental state on new medication.

          64. Dr Fatah deals with the Iraqi health care system in section 7
              of his report which runs between paragraphs 98 and 168.  Iraq
              has one of the poorest medical systems in the region and  has
              suffered ever since UN sanctions were first imposed  in  1991
              and the Baath regime cut funding by 90%.  Years  of  conflict
              have also had  a  negative  impact.  Foreign  aid  money  has
              arrived since 2003 funding 240  hospitals  and  1200  primary
              health clinics. There has however been a dramatic decrease in
              the number of doctors in Iraq. Since 2003 to 75%  of  nurses,
              doctors and pharmacists  have  left  the  country.  Dr  Fatah
              refers to the humiliation and taunting  in  public  of  those
              with psychological illnesses and for example in  Sulalmaniyah
              there are a  large  numbers  of  people  with  severe  mental
              disabilities just  walking  the  streets.  There  is  a  high
              percentage of Iraqis suffering from mental health  conditions
              and the available care is said only to scratch the surface of
              the  population's  need.  There  are  three   mental   health
              hospitals in Iraq, two in Baghdad and one in Sulalmaniyah and
              36 psychiatric units throughout  Iraq  with  one  psychiatric
              doctor for every 150,000 of the  population.  Dr  Fatah  does
              refer  to  evidence  of  some  progress  in  the  country  at
              paragraph 142. Since 2009, the Ministry of Health has  opened
              mental health units in  all  hospitals  and  health  centres-
              approximately 3500-across the country and is putting in place
              steps to train staff to cope with the increasing  demand.  In
              January 2009 a two-year WHO endorsed and Dutch funded project
              began focusing on the provision of psychological  and  mental
              health services for people in Iraq's Northern provinces.  The
              impact of these initiatives was said however  to  be  as  yet
              unknown.

          65. As  regards  the  available  medication  in  Iraq,  Dr  Fatah
              indicates that the health service is free to  users  in  Iraq
              meaning that anyone can access free medication however  there
              are often shortages. The cost of antipsychotic medication for
              anyone paying privately was three Iraqi dinars  per  day  the
              equivalent of 10% of one-day's minimum wage at  2006  levels.
              Medication  is  free  in  public  mental  health   hospitals.
              However, shortages of medicines continue to be experienced in
              some  hospitals  and  health  centres.  Dr  Fatah  says  that
              according to psychiatrist Dr. Rizgar Amin, who  is  also  the
              President of the  Kurdish  Medical  Association  in  the  UK,
              Ariprazole and Lamotrigine may be difficult to get hold of in
              Kurdistan and their authenticity may be doubted because  they
              are expensive drugs. He says that there are alternatives that
              are similar in efficacy but are now much cheaper because they
              are not under patent. Dr. Amin also said that Haloperidol and
              Lofepramine might be available as these are cheaper drugs.  A
              doctor  in  Iraq  told  Dr.   Fatah   in   July   2012   that
              Chlorpromazine and Haloperidol were  the  only  antipsychotic
              drugs available in the country and that the new generation of
              drugs are not available in Iraq. He considered that the  side
              effects of these  two  drugs  are  wide-ranging  and  can  be
              serious. There appears to be conflicting evidence as to  what
              psychiatric drugs are actually available in Iraq.  Dr  Amin's
              evidence suggests that un-patented  generic  alternatives  to
              Ariprazole and Lamotrigine are available. Although  Dr  Bowen
              has in his most recent  addendum  report  expressed  concerns
              about changing the appellant medication, he does  not  appear
              to have considered what adverse effect there would be if  the
              appellant  is  treated  with  generic  substitute  drugs  for
              Ariprazole and Lamotrigine.

          66. We also bear in mind that according to the medical  evidence,
              the appellant's psychiatric condition  manifested  itself  in
              Kurdistan during his early teenage years. The  appellant  was
              able  to  obtain  treatment  for  this  notwithstanding   the
              pressures  on  medical  facilities  in  Iraq  following   the
              imposition of sanctions. We say  this  because  according  to
              what his sister told doctors, the appellant was  admitted  to
              hospital for four years as a teenager and received depot  and
              oral  medication.  According  to  her  chronology  this   all
              happened after the death of the appellant's parents.  He  was
              therefore able to  access  this  treatment  without  parental
              support.

          67. The appellant claimed in oral evidence that he was  estranged
              from his three sisters in Iraq. The statements of his brother
              and sister however make no mention of  this  and  bearing  in
              mind the other  credibility  concerns  over  the  appellant's
              evidence, we do not accept what he says  about  this.  It  is
              also clear that the appellant's sister living in Germany  has
              shown a clear interest in the  appellant  by  having  contact
              with medical staff. Further, Mr. and Mrs  Routledge  referred
              to the appellant's brother from Germany  having  visited  the
              appellant and indeed they had visited him in Germany. In  his
              witness statement, the appellant refers  to  his  sisters  in
              Iraq saying that Njo was previously a psychologist but is now
              a housewife, Heseba is a police officer and the other  sister
              Nejeba is a prison officer. According to this  evidence,  two
              of them have good jobs and the other is likely to have  links
              through her previous career to the Iraqi medical  system.  We
              do not therefore accept that practical family help would  not
              be available to the appellant upon return to Iraq. With  such
              help, the appellant has in our view a  better  prospect  than
              most  with  mental  health  difficulties  of  accessing   the
              available health care  and  we  bear  in  mind  that  he  has
              successfully accessed such treatment previously.

          68. It is submitted that the appellant would be at  greater  risk
              to his mental health because of  what  would  happen  to  him
              immediately on return to Iraq. This submission  is  based  on
              the claim that the appellant would be detained  upon  arrival
              in adverse conditions and that these would in themselves lead
              to a deterioration in his condition,  not  least  because  he
              would  be  denied  access  to  medication.  We  have  however
              carefully considered what Dr Fatah has said about what  would
              happen upon return. The KRG does not allow direct re-entry of
              returned asylum seekers from Europe. Return  would  therefore
              be  to  Baghdad  airport.  Dr.  Fatah  refers  to  the  Iraqi
              parliament having banned the forced return of asylum seekers.
              It remains to be seen however whether or not this policy will
              be continued. Returnees from Europe need a guarantor  present
              at the airport who can confirm their identity. Dr. Fatah does
              however say that in some circumstances, guarantors have  been
              able to convince officials at Baghdad to transfer a  returnee
              to Erbil where the family can  then  obtain  the  appropriate
              civil status ID and confirm his identity. Dr. Fatah does  say
              that all the returnees he had spoken to were detained at  the
              airport until their identity  was  proven,  some  for  a  few
              hours, but others for up to  10  days.  Returnees  without  a
              guarantor  present  had   remained   in   airport   detention
              facilities for up to 15 days. At the start of Mr. Ahluwalia's
              submissions, there was some discussion as to whether  or  not
              the appellant has his birth certificate from Iraq. He  denied
              that he has this document. We  do  not  accept  this  however
              because the appellant clearly had a telephone interview  with
              Dr Fatah, and in his report Dr. Fatah says at  paragraph  251
              "Mr. Ali arrived in the UK with  no  identification  document
              except a birth certificate with a photograph of him as a baby
              attached". We do not accept that Dr  Fatah  would  have  said
              this unless he had been told about this by the appellant.  Dr
              Fatah goes on to say at paragraph 255 that if the appellant's
              birth certificate is deemed to be reliable by the authorities
              in Iraq he should be able to obtain replacement ID  documents
              when he returns there. The  birth  certificate  contains  the
              holder's details in the civil register and these can be  used
              to prove  his  identity.  We  also  bear  in  mind  that  the
              appellant has close family members in Iraq one of whom  is  a
              police officer  and  we  find  that  there  ought  to  be  no
              difficulty  in  a  guarantor  demonstrating  the  appellant's
              identity. We do not accept therefore that the appellant needs
              to be detained at Baghdad airport for more than a few hours.

          69. We have also considered what Dr Fatah says in section  10.4.1
              about the procedures at Erbil  airport.  Each  failed  asylum
              seeker is investigated for  insurgent  activities  and  other
              crimes. We have already explained why we do not  accept  that
              the appellant has  had  any  involvement  with  the  PKK.  He
              therefore has nothing to fear from this process. Release only
              occurs once it has been established that the returnee is  not
              accused of any outstanding charges and is not a criminal.  We
              have no doubt that the appellant's police officer sister will
              be able to assist in this process. The only other obstacle to
              release at Erbil is if a returnee cannot show that he is from
              the IKR and is registered as  such.  Again,  the  appellant's
              birth certificate and the help of his family will all  assist
              in this process.

          70. We have noted the risk posed by the  appellant  that  he  may
              commit suicide.  We  confirm  that  we  have  considered  the
              guidance offered in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and  Y  (Sri
              Lanka)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362.  We  find  however  that  the
              appellant will not however suffer ill treatment on account of
              this if removed from the UK for the following reasons:

          a) Firstly, the evidence before us shows that there is access  to
             medical treatment and medication for mental health  issues  in
             Kurdistan and Iraq. This can be sought out by the appellant.


          b) Secondly, we find that there is no causal link between the act
             or threatened act of deportation  and  the  inhuman  treatment
             relied on as violating the applicant's Article  3  rights.  We
             say  this  because  according  to  Dr  Bowen,  the  threat  of
             deportation  was  not  causing  any   deterioration   in   the
             appellant's mental health condition. The Doctor also took  the
             view that there was a high risk of completed  suicide  in  the
             medium term irrespective of where the appellant  is.  Further,
             the appellant can receive the treatment he requires whilst  in
             the UK awaiting removal.   Those  charged  with  his  care  in
             detention can be  made  aware  of  any  possible  reaction  to
             arrangements for his removal and can take appropriate steps to
             avoid the risk of suicide.

          c) Thirdly, in the context of what the appellant does,  and  what
             happens to him after his deportation, this is a 'foreign case'
             and the threshold is high. The risk of suicide  comes  largely
             from the appellant's mental illness and is not the  direct  or
             indirect responsibility of the respondent. This is clear  from
             what Dr. Bowen says about the appellant posing a high risk  of
             completed suicide wherever he may be.


          d) Fourthly, we accept that a risk of suicide can  be  sufficient
             to pass the Article 3 threshold.


          e) Fifthly, we find that there is no real risk of  the  appellant
             being subjected to persecutory or other ill-treatment in Iraq.
             Not only do we find that objectively  his  claimed  fears  are
             without foundation,  but  we  also  do  not  accept  that  the
             appellant has a genuine subjective fear of ill-treatment  upon
             return to Iraq. We say this because we are satisfied that  the
             appellant  has  sought  to  embellish  his  account   of   his
             involvement with the PKK to bolster his  claim  and  has  made
             false  claims  about  the  sincerity  of  his  conversion   to
             Christianity. We find that he has also taken steps  to  secure
             assistance from his brother and sister to  bolster  his  claim
             and we are satisfied in particular that the appellant's sister
             in Germany has altered her  evidence  by  giving  a  different
             account about the appellant's history to  what  she  told  the
             medical staff here in the UK. This all demonstrates  that  the
             appellant has behaved deviously in his  efforts  to  construct
             his case. Further, in as much as it has  been  suggested  that
             the appellant may react badly the loss of hope of ever  having
             contact with his son, the appellant has already been separated
             from his son because of his imprisonment and because there  is
             a Prohibited  Steps  Order  in  force  preventing  any  direct
             contact between them. We therefore find that any  future  risk
             of suicide because of the inability of the appellant  to  have
             access to his children is not well founded.

          f) Sixthly, we do not accept that there  not  are  mechanisms  to
             reduce the risk of suicide  in  Iraq  or  that  mental  health
             services and appropriate drugs are un-available. The appellant
             can, with the assistance  of  his  family  access  appropriate
             medical treatment  to  see  him  through  any  hiatus  in  his
             medication. The respondent cannot be held responsible for  the
             appellant's actions which are entirely  unconnected  with  his
             removal.  We find that any risk of  the  appellant  committing
             suicide in connection with or as a consequence of  his  return
             to Iraq by  the  respondent  does  not  cross  the  Article  3
             threshold.

          71. We have taken account of the opinions of the House  of  Lords
              in N  [2005]  UKHL  31.  Taking  account  of  the  principles
              referred to by their Lordships, and having considered all  of
              the available evidence we find that returning  the  appellant
              to Iraq would be no breach of Article 3, because we find  the
              appellant does not have any form of illness which has reached
              such a critical stage that there are compelling  humanitarian
              grounds for not removing him  to  a  place  which  lacks  the
              medical and social services which he would  need  to  prevent
              acute suffering.

          72. In summary therefore we find that the appellant has failed to
              show to the low standard that there is a  real  risk  of  him
              suffering serious harm or  in-human  or  degrading  treatment
              upon return to Iraq. The appeal under Article 3 of  the  ECHR
              is therefore dismissed.




19. Although the Tribunal found that the  appellant  could  access  medical
    treatment and medication for mental health upon his return to Iraq,  it
    also correctly found  that  the  appellant  had  been  able  to  access
    treatment in the past.

20. We find that there was no error in the Tribunal's  application  of  the
    principles of J to the facts as they found them in this appeal.  It was
    open to the Tribunal to find that the appellant did not have a  genuine
    and subjective fear  of  returning  to  Iraq.   Further,  the  Tribunal
    recorded Dr Bowen's opinion that the appellant was at risk  of  suicide
    wherever he might be and found that Dr Bowen's  opinion,  coupled  with
    the appellant's  lack  of  any  genuine  fear  of  returning  to  Iraq,
    indicated that the fear  of  deportation  to  that  country  would  not
    increase the risk of the appellant 's committing suicide.   We  do  not
    accept, as Mr Ahluwalia submits, that the Tribunal has misunderstood Dr
    Bowen's report.  Moreover, whilst accepting the appellant  does  suffer
    from mental illness, the Tribunal was aware of his ability and tendency
    to behave deviously "in  his  efforts  to  construct  his  case".   The
    Tribunal was right also to find that adequate steps would be taken both
    in the United Kingdom and during the appellant's journey back  to  Iraq
    to prevent or minimise the risk of suicide.  The Tribunal's findings as
    to the availability of treatment for the appellant's mental illness  in
    Iraq were also well-reasoned and based on the evidence before it.   The
    Tribunal has not misunderstood or ignored evidence of relevance nor has
    it taken into account evidence which is not relevant.  The finding that
    the appellant could not succeed in his appeal under Article 2/3 ECHR as
    regards the risk of suicide  was  plainly  open  to  the  Tribunal.  In
    particular, there is nothing in Dr Bowen's reports or the evidence as a
    whole which should have compelled the  Tribunal  to  find  that  appeal
    should be allowed.

21. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that the Tribunal erred in its  analysis
    of the expert evidence of Dr Fatah.  It is  submitted  that  the  panel
    made no findings as regards Dr Fatah's recording in his report that the
    appellant and his sister had a detailed knowledge of the leaders of the
    PKK in their region and that the  appellant's  mental  health  problems
    would have prevented him from learning the Kurmanji language "with  the
    level of ideological vocabulary noted by Dr Fatah".

22. Dealing with that latter point first, we find that it is without merit.
     The Tribunal found that the appellant had  constructed  his  claim  to
    have been involved with the PKK and it was clearly open to the Tribunal
    to conclude that the appellant would have been likely to have taken the
    precaution of learning words and terms associated  with  PKK  ideology.
    We also do not see anything wrong with the Tribunal's finding that  the
    use of the Kurmanji language was not restricted to members of the  PKK.
    Further, we find no obligation upon the Tribunal to deal with each  and
    every item of Dr Fatah's report; for example, the  Tribunal's  findings
    regarding the credibility of the appellant's claim is not undermined by
    the fact that it did not  make  any  specific  findings  regarding  the
    appellant's claimed detailed knowledge of the leaders of the PKK in his
    region.  The Tribunal had already noted that it  was  likely  that  the
    appellant had learnt facts about  the  PKK  in  order  to  support  his
    fabricated claim to have been a member of that organisation.

23. In conclusion, we find that the thorough and detailed determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any error of law such that the
    determination falls to be set aside.

DECISION

24. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

