
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00094/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2019                          |On 10 January 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Jonathan Alex Massi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Gilda Kiai, instructed by Duncan Lewis,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by permission granted on 21 October 2019 against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated on  21  August
    2019 allowing the respondent's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision of 26 January 2018 making a deportation order pursuant to  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016   ("the
    Regulations") on the grounds that it breached his rights under the  EEA
    Treaties.  The judge did not go on to consider the appeal by  reference
    to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   For the avoidance of confusion, we shall refer  to  the  respondent  in
    this appeal as 'the claimant'.

3.   The claimant is an Italian national born on 26  December  1985.   There
    is no challenge to the judge's  finding  that  he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 1988 at the age of 2 years with his mother  and  is  an  EEA
    national who had the right of free movement.  He has  not  returned  to
    Italy since 1990.  On 17 April 2000 aged 14 he  was  convicted  at  the
    Inner London Youth Court of  an  offence  of  taking  a  motor  vehicle
    without consent.  On 27 April 2004 he was convicted of possession of  a
    Class A controlled drug (MDMA) and was fined.  On  6  July  2004,  when
    aged 18, for an offence of assault occasioning actual  bodily  harm  he
    was sentenced to a community punishment order at the Blackfriars  Crown
    Court.

4.   The offences which gave rise to the making  of  the  deportation  order
    were committed on 26 January 2013.  For an offence of possession  of  a
    shotgun with intent to cause fear of violence  and  the  possession  of
    ammunition, namely 150 live exploding  bullets,  he  was  sentenced  to
    concurrent terms of five years' imprisonment, and  for  an  offence  of
    possessing 3.45 kg of heroin, a Class A controlled drug, with intent to
    supply,  he  was  sentenced  to  a  consecutive  term  of  five  years'
    imprisonment.  The total sentence was, therefore,  one  of  ten  years'
    imprisonment.

5.    Following  his  release  from  prison  the  claimant  was  taken  into
    immigration detention and released on immigration bail on 11 May  2018.



6.   The Secretary of State accepts that the claimant  is  entitled  to  the
    highest level of protection under the 2016  Regulations  and  that  his
    offending fell to be considered  under  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.

7.   There is, essentially, a single  ground  of  appeal,  namely  that  the
    judge failed to take  adequately  into  account  the  severity  of  the
    claimant's offences.  In oral submissions before us today Mr Avery,  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, has emphasised what he submits to  be
    the superficiality of the approach of the judge  in  his  judgment  and
    decision and argues that, essentially, he failed  to  engage  with  the
    seriousness of the claimant's offending.  However, the sentencing judge
    described the claimant as "a serious player in the supply of drugs" and
    that the ten-year prison sentence was indicative of the seriousness  of
    the offences.  It is submitted by  the  Secretary  of  State  that,  by
    continuing to maintain that he was forced by threats to his  family  to
    commit the offences, the claimant demonstrates that he  has  not  taken
    responsibility for  his  criminality  and  there  was  no  evidence  of
    remorse.  It is further submitted that the judge failed to  follow  the
    Bouchereau principle and the seriousness of his  crimes  and  the  fact
    that he poses a medium risk to the public demonstrate that he  presents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of  society  when  taking  account  of  his  past
    conduct.  The Secretary  of  State  makes  specific  reference  to  the
    provisions relating to the fundamental interests of society set out  in
    Schedule 1(7) of the Regulations which include the prevention of social
    harm and tackling offences likely to cause harm  to  society  where  an
    immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but there is  a
    wider societal harm such as offences relating to the misuse of drugs.

8.   In his decision the judge, applying the provisions of Regulation  27(5)
    and 27(6) of the Regulations, stated that the earlier  convictions,  in
    themselves, did not justify a decision to deport  but  recognised  that
    the offences committed in 2013 were undoubtedly very serious.  He  also
    acknowledged the obligation to take into account the considerations  of
    public policy and public security  enunciated  in  Schedule  1  to  the
    Regulations and that paragraph  3  makes  clear  that  the  longer  the
    sentence the greater the  likelihood  that  an  individual's  continued
    presence in the United Kingdom represents a sufficiently serious threat
    affecting the fundamental interests of society to justify  deportation.
    He did not find the claimant to  be  a  persistent  offender  and  this
    finding is not challenged.  The judge took the comments  of  the  trial
    judge as a proper starting point and was conscious of the need to guard
    against relying on an explanation given by  the  claimant  in  evidence
    before him relating to threats made to him that lead to his involvement
    in the offences which appears to have been rejected by the  jury.   The
    judge had further reliable evidence of threats, which,  in  themselves,
    did not provide a defence to the relevant offences but did  reveal  his
    being subjected to ongoing pressure and danger.  He also had  an  OASys
    Report that police intelligence did not support the view that he was  a
    serious drug dealer, an assessment that he represented a medium risk of
    serious harm to others in the community and a low risk of  reoffending.
    In oral submissions to us, Mr Avery has emphasised that,  nevertheless,
    statistically there was a  34%  risk  of  further  offending  which  he
    submits is not low.

9.   Although the judge's assessment was  challenged  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, he was entitled, for the reasons that he  gave,  to  accept  the
    opinion expressed in  the  report.   The  claimant  has  been  of  good
    behaviour  since  release  from  prison,   attended   all   supervision
    appointments and resumed employment.  The judge found that the claimant
    had no connection whatsoever with Italy other  than  having  been  born
    there and being of Italian nationality and accepted that he  was  fully
    integrated in the United Kingdom prior to  his  arrest  in  2013  since
    being a very young child, and has not lost his integrative links.

10.  In her Rule 24 Reply and in her oral submissions, Miss Kiai, on  behalf
    of the claimant, has gone through the grounds that are relied on by the
    Secretary of State both in writing  and  orally  emphasised  before  us
    today, and identifies specifically the paragraphs in the decision which
    address the grounds upon which the Secretary of State  relies.   It  is
    neither helpful nor necessary for us  to  go  through  them  one-by-one
    today because,  essentially,  the  Secretary  of  State's  argument  is
    founded on the fundamental submission that  the  judge's  decision  was
    irrational on the material before him and we have already  referred  to
    the important findings that he made and the reasons for them.

11.  It is not for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  substitute  its  own  view  in
    relation to  the  judge's  findings  below;  rather,  its  role  is  to
    determine whether the judge made findings of fact that were  irrational
    or otherwise not open to him on the evidence.  We  are  satisfied  that
    the judge did consider the regulatory requirements and the  fundamental
    interests of society appropriately, and his finding that the imperative
    ground of public security was not met in  this  case  on  the  evidence
    before him was one that was open to him for the reasons he set  out  in
    his judgment.  The claimant may regard himself as  fortunate  that  the
    judge found as he did: other judges  might  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion and, no doubt, were the claimant to reoffend the outcome  of
    any future decision in relation to deportation would be  likely  to  be
    different.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler
did not involve the making of an error of law.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   J R W Goss                              Date 6 January 2020


Mr Justice Goss
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal





