
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00061/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Monday 20 July 2015               |On 23 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR TOMAS ROZNOVJAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented and in person


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         appellant in this particular appeal.

      2. This matter comes before us following the grant  of  permission  by
         First-Tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 28 May 2015 in respect  of  the
         decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burnett  sitting  with  Mr
         Bompas (lay member) promulgated on 12 May  2015  ("the  Decision").
         The matter comes before us to decide whether there is an  error  of
         law in the Decision and, if  so,  to  set  aside  and  re-make  the
         Decision or decide what further course is appropriate.

      3. The appellant is a Czech national born on 5 April 1990.  He arrived
         in the UK sometime in September 2009.  He  has  worked  in  the  UK
         since 2009 although the details of his  employment,  including  the
         exact dates when  he  has  worked  are  sketchy.   From  2011,  the
         appellant has  accrued  18  convictions  for  40  offences.   These
         consist of offences of criminal damage, being drunk and disorderly,
         using threatening words of behaviour, breaches of court orders  and
         theft.  The appellant links his offending to a problem with alcohol
         consumption.  He says that he has reformed and will not drink again
         in the future.

      4. The respondent considers the appellant to be a persistent offender.
          In consequence, the respondent decided on 4 March 2015 to  make  a
         deportation order against him in accordance with regulations  19,21
         and 24 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
         ("the EEA Regulations").  The respondent relied in particular on  4
         convictions.  On 28 August 2014, the  appellant  was  convicted  of
         theft whilst subject to a suspended sentence.  He  was  fined  �100
         but detained for 1 day in lieu of the fine. On  6  September  2014,
         the appellant was convicted of theft of a bottle of wine.   He  was
         sentenced to 14 days but since he was again subject to a  suspended
         sentence, he was also sentenced to 2 weeks imprisonment  concurrent
         to the 14 days, 2 weeks consecutive to the 14 days  for  a  further
         offence of theft and a further term as he was  subject  to  another
         suspended sentence.  In all, the appellant was sentenced to a total
         of 10 weeks imprisonment.  On 23 January 2015,  the  appellant  was
         convicted of assault and sentenced to 1 day to be detained  in  the
         courthouse.  On 29 January 2015, the appellant was convicted  of  3
         offences of theft and given consecutive sentences amounting  to  11
         weeks imprisonment.

      5. The Tribunal allowed the appeal under the EEA  Regulations  on  the
         basis that "we do not find that the appellant as yet  represents  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society" [56].  The Tribunal also  allowed
         the appeal on the basis that the respondent's decision was  not  in
         accordance with the law for failure to follow her published policy,
         an issue to which we return below.

      6. Permission was granted on the basis that the Tribunal had not given
         the respondent the opportunity to make submissions  concerning  the
         policy guidance and may have  misinterpreted  that  guidance  ("the
         Policy Issue").  The grant was also on the basis that the  Tribunal
         may have inadequately reasoned the finding that the  appellant  was
         not yet a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  ("the
         Regulations Issue").

Submissions

      7. By written application received on 17 July 2015, Mr Jarvis  applied
         to amend the respondent's grounds.  He candidly accepted  that  his
         proposed amendment did include some new issues but,  for  the  most
         part, the application was to clarify the respondent's position,  in
         particular in relation to the Policy Issue.  We indicated  that  we
         would hear from Mr Jarvis on the amended grounds and would  form  a
         view thereafter whether to agree to the application to amend.

      8. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing.  We asked  him  via
         the interpreter why he was not represented.  He indicated  that  he
         had been told that he was  not  eligible  for  legal  aid  and  had
         therefore taken no further  steps  to  secure  representation.   We
         indicated that, since he was unrepresented, we would do our best to
         ensure that all legal arguments, particularly those potentially  in
         his favour were fully canvassed.

The Policy Issue

      9. The Policy Issue focuses on a policy  entitled  "Criminal  Casework
         European Economic Area (EEA) foreign national offender (FNO) cases"
         ("the Policy").  The document is said to be valid from  27  January
         2014.  The Policy Issue  is  addressed  at  [48]  to  [54]  of  the
         Decision.  The Tribunal found that the Policy set a threshold for a
         decision by the respondent to deport an EEA national of  two  years
         custody in most cases or one  year's  custody  in  cases  involving
         particular offences (such as drugs, sex or violence).  That was not
         met in this case and so the decision to deport the  appellant  was,
         the Tribunal found, not in accordance with the law.

     10. The respondent's grounds on this issue  are  three-fold.   Firstly,
         the respondent argues that it was unfair for the Tribunal  to  take
         account of  the  Policy  without  at  the  very  least  giving  the
         respondent the opportunity to make submissions about its relevance.
         Mr Jarvis accepted that  ideally  the  respondent's  representative
         should be armed with relevant policy and guidance  but  this  would
         not always be the case. The approach  in  Macnikowski  [2014]  UKUT
         00567 (IAC) should have been followed.

     11. Secondly, the respondent argues that  the  Tribunal  misinterpreted
         the Policy.  In this regard, the original grounds  at  ground  1(A)
         focussed on the Tribunal's failure to refer to the full text as  it
         had ignored a note that caseworkers  should  "see  section  3.2  of
         related link". Mr Jarvis sought to amend this ground as it  appears
         that the link concerned was withdrawn from the Home Office intranet
         on 13 February 2015 and so would not have been in place at the date
         of the respondent's decision.  Instead, Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that
         the Tribunal misinterpreted the Policy.  He argued that it  is  not
         inconsistent or incompatible with the Policy for the respondent  to
         deport a persistent offender and  he  drew  our  attention  to  the
         reference to the Home Office submissions at [17] of  the  Decision;
         the criteria for a persistent offender being one of four  custodial
         sentences in the last four years.  Mr Jarvis submitted that because
         the Policy did not cover the case of a persistent offender, it  was
         neither inconsistent nor unlawful for the respondent's decision not
         to consider the Policy.  Mr Jarvis drew our  attention  to  various
         provisions of the Policy which we set out below when  reaching  our
         decision.  At our request, he also checked the Home Office file  to
         ascertain if any consideration had been given to  the  Policy  when
         the respondent's decision was reached but confirmed that there  was
         no direct reference to it.  The  appellant  had  been  referred  to
         Criminal Casework by the prison.  He indicated  that  the  decision
         had been taken on the basis of persistent offending, meaning as far
         as the decision  maker  was  concerned,  four  convictions  in  the
         previous three years.

     12. Thirdly, by way of a new ground 1(E), Mr Jarvis submitted that,  if
         the Tribunal had been right to find that the respondent's  decision
         was not in accordance with the law for failure to apply the Policy,
         the appropriate course was to allow the appeal on  that  basis  and
         remit the matter to the respondent to make a lawful decision.   The
         Tribunal should not have gone on to decide the appeal by  reference
         to the EEA Regulations.  If the respondent's decision was unlawful,
         the arguments based on the EEA Regulations fall away  and  arguably
         the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to go further. The  appeal  should
         not have been allowed under the EEA Regulations.

The Regulations Issue

     13. The respondent's ground 1(C) argues that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
         make findings in relation to its conclusion that the appellant  did
         not yet pose a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat.
         The Tribunal decided, apparently without evidence  other  than  the
         appellant's assertion, that his offending was alcohol  related  and
         that he would not drink again [33].  There is no  probation  report
         in relation to risk of future  offending  -  probably  because  the
         appellant's offending is below the  threshold  for  preparation  of
         such reports.  However, Mr Jarvis pointed out that, if it  was  the
         appellant's case that he had reformed and no longer had  a  problem
         with alcohol, it should have  been  possible  for  him  to  produce
         something from the prison to that effect.  Mr Jarvis  confirmed  in
         response to a question from us that the  respondent's  position  in
         relation to whether the offending was  "sufficiently  serious"  was
         that the offences had to be considered cumulatively.  However,  the
         respondent's primary position on this issue is  that  the  Tribunal
         failed to engage with whether  the  requisite  threat  existed  and
         failed to consider such things as whether the appellant  understood
         his behaviour, what were the precursors to the offending  and  what
         will happen in the future.

     14. Mr Jarvis also developed submissions in relation to Ground 1(D)  of
         the original grounds  and  Ground  1(F)  of  the  proposed  amended
         grounds.  Ground 1(D) concerns the Tribunal's comment at [41]  that
         the respondent could  have  confirmed  the  appellant's  employment
         history.  In relation to Ground 1(D), Mr Jarvis did accept that the
         Tribunal  could  direct  the   respondent   to   produce   relevant
         information but otherwise the onus was on the appellant to make out
         his case.

     15. Ground 1(F) deals  with  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  periods  of
         imprisonment.  Mr Jarvis submitted that there was an error  in  the
         Tribunal's finding that short periods  of  imprisonment  should  be
         disregarded and did not break the appellant's integration [46].  Mr
         Jarvis agreed with us  though  that  the  comment  made  about  the
         appellant's employment history and the Tribunal's attitude  to  the
         length of the periods  of  detention  appeared  to  relate  to  the
         Tribunal's consideration of  whether  the  appellant  had  acquired
         permanent residence under the EEA Regulations and  would  therefore
         be entitled to the higher level of protection.  Since the  Tribunal
         appeared to accept at [40] that there was not enough  evidence  for
         the Tribunal to find that he had acquired permanent  residence  and
         had proceeded to consider deportation at [47] based on  the  "first
         level of protection", any error would not be material.

     16. Mr Jarvis did however point out that if there were an error in  the
         approach in particular to the effect of the length of detention and
         whether the appellant might have benefited from permanent residence
         [45], this could have infected the Tribunal's reasoning on  whether
         the appellant  constituted  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat and on  the  proportionality  exercise  enjoined  by
         regulation 21(5)(a) of the EEA Regulations.

     17. The appellant also addressed us briefly.  He indicated that he  had
         not committed serious offences; the totality of his criminal record
         was less than 5 months.  He had read the case of  Macknikowski  and
         the facts there were very different.  In that case,  the  appellant
         was not working whereas he had been working and in  that  case  the
         appellant had been convicted for  a  violent  offence  whereas  his
         offences were not generally of that nature.  He indicated  that  he
         was not familiar with the Policy and  could  not  make  submissions
         about it.

Decision and reasons

     18. We have considered whether to allow Mr Jarvis' application to amend
         the respondent's grounds of appeal.  We have decided to do so.  The
         appellant appeared in person and was unrepresented.   As  such,  it
         fell to us to deal with the detail of the respondent's grounds  and
         we do not therefore consider that there was any  prejudice  to  the
         appellant in allowing this late amendment.  The major amendment was
         to the Policy  Issue,  in  particular  the  interpretation  of  the
         Policy.  It would have been wrong to shut out the amendment,  based
         as it was on the correct factual position, prevailing at  the  date
         of decision.

The Regulations Issue

     19. We begin with the Regulations Issue since if the Tribunal was right
         to allow the appeal on the basis that the appellant did not pose  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat, the  allowing  of
         the appeal also on the basis that the respondent's decision was not
         in accordance with the law would be immaterial.

     20. The conclusion of the Tribunal in relation to whether the appellant
         poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat is at [56]
         to the effect that he does not yet present  the  requisite  threat.
         That could suggest that the Tribunal considered that the threat was
         not present.  There are however other indications that the Tribunal
         considered that the threat was not "sufficiently serious"; at  [34]
         the Tribunal notes that the offences were "not that serious in  the
         scheme of criminal offending behaviour".  We also  agree  with  the
         respondent that the evidential  basis  for  the  link  between  the
         offending and the appellant's alcohol  consumption  is  not  clear.
         There are a number of offences which may well  be  so  linked,  for
         example the theft of bottles of  alcohol  and  being  arrested  for
         being drunk and disorderly, but in relation to other  offences  the
         link is less clear.   It  is  not  clear  either  what  weight  the
         Tribunal  placed  at  [33]  on  the   appellant's   own   assertion
         unsupported by independent evidence that his conduct would  improve
         and he would not offend again because he had stopped drinking [13].
          Neither is it clear that this was accepted by the  Tribunal  since
         at [36], the Tribunal goes on to indicate that "currently there  is
         a possibility that the appellant may offend again".

     21. Although, as noted at paragraph [15] above, we do not consider that
         the Tribunal's findings on length of sentence and  integration  are
         relevant as they appear to be part of the consideration of  whether
         the appellant has acquired a right of permanent residence,  we  are
         also concerned that these considerations may have been  taken  into
         account when weighing the seriousness of the offences  against  the
         criteria for deportation in the EEA Regulations, particularly where
         the findings as to whether the  appellant  had  acquired  permanent
         residence are not unambiguous (see for example [45]).

     22. We do not preclude the possibility that  a  pattern  of  relatively
         minor offences could, when considered  cumulatively,  constitute  a
         genuine, sufficiently serious threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society.   We  were  certainly  not  referred  to  any
         authority to suggest it could not.

     23. For the above reasons, we conclude that the Tribunal has materially
         erred in law by failing to adequately reason its finding  that  the
         appellant does not represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society.

The Policy Issue

     24. We set out below the relevant passages of the Policy:-

             "This guidance tells criminal casework (CC) staff the  process
             when  they  consider  if  deportation  of   foreign   national
             offenders (FNOs) and their family members  from  the  European
             Economic Area (EEA) is appropriate...

             You must  be  satisfied  the  person's  conduct  represents  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat which affects
             one of these fundamental interests  of  society  (for  further
             information on the definitions of  serious  public  policy  or
             security  and  imperative  grounds  of  public  security,  see
             section 3.2 of  related  link:  08  Enforcement  action  taken
             against EEA nationals and family members)...

             In cases of EEA FNOs, one of the workflow teams must check the
             CCD referral form to make sure the FNO meets the internal  EEA
             deportation threshold criteria:

                . Custodial sentences of two years (24 months) or  over  for
                  any offences, or

                . Custodial sentences of one year (12 months) or over if the
                  offence is related to:

                  o Drugs

                  o Sex

                  o Violence, or

                  o Other serious criminal activity

             ...

             In the majority of cases the two-year threshold applies for  a
             case to be accepted into CC.  There may be rare occasions when
             CC accepts a case that falls below the threshold, for  example
             on instruction from a Minister or the chief executive...

             If the prison decides to refer an EEA national FNO case to  CC
             for exceptional reasons, they must provide reasons why  it  is
             exceptional.  This means the FNO is identified as one or  more
             of the following:

                . A Multi-Agency Public Protection Agency (MAPPA) case

                . Serving an extended sentence for public protection

                . Serving an extended sentence under  the  Criminal  Justice
                  Act 1991

                . Serving an  indeterminate  sentence  of  imprisonment  for
                  public protection

                . Has a previous conviction for a sexual or violent  offence
                  that attracted a sentence of two years or more

             If none of these factors apply, a workflow team  officer  must
             check the reason for referral with the FNO's offender manager.
              If there are no specific  reasons  given,  the  case  is  not
             pursued.

             ...

             If the FNO does not meet the deportation  threshold  criteria,
             and the prison provides insufficient reasons  to  justify  the
             referral on  exceptional  grounds,  CC  will  not  pursue  the
             case...."

     25. We  have  no  difficulty  with  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that  the
         respondent's decision could only be  unlawful  if  the  Policy  was
         clearly intended  to  apply  to  an  offender  in  the  appellant's
         position and had not been considered.  If the  Policy  was  clearly
         not intended to apply to the appellant's situation, the decision to
         deport could not then be  inconsistent  or  incompatible  with  it.
         However, we were not persuaded by Mr Jarvis'  eloquent  submissions
         that the Policy could not  apply  to  a  persistent  offender.  The
         Policy clearly states that it sets out thresholds  for  deportation
         of EEA nationals which are defined by reference to the length of  a
         custodial sentence of one or, in most cases, two years.   It  makes
         clear that if those thresholds are not  reached  then,  unless  the
         case is referred by the  Secretary  of  State  or  Chief  Executive
         (which would, we assume, be a case of some importance)  or  if  the
         "exceptional" criteria are not met for a referral  from  a  prison,
         Criminal Casework will not pursue the case.

     26. In those circumstances, we do not find  an  error  of  law  in  the
         Decision in relation to the interpretation of the Policy.   On  the
         face of the policy, the appellant's custodial  sentence  was  below
         the threshold.   The  appellant's  case  needed  to  be  considered
         therefore under the Policy, in order to determine whether his was a
         case where, in spite of falling below the  thresholds,  deportation
         action should still be taken  based  on  an  instruction  from  the
         Secretary of State or a Minister or following referral by a  prison
         for an exceptional reason.   There is therefore no error of law  in
         the Decision on the Policy Issue.

DECISION

     27. The First-Tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of an error
         on a point of law.  We set aside the Decision allowing  the  appeal
         under the EEA Regulations.

     28. We re-make the Decision as follows.   As  we  have  concluded  that
         there was no error of law in the Decision allowing  the  appeal  on
         the basis that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with
         the law for the respondent's failure to apply the Policy, we do not
         consider  it  necessary  to  remake  the  Decision  under  the  EEA
         Regulations since it will be for the respondent to  reconsider  the
         appellant's case in light of our conclusion on the Policy Issue and
         the appellant will be given  a  further  right  of  appeal  if  the
         respondent decides to make a further decision to deport.


Signed      [pic]Date  22 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
