
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00581/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th November 2017                     |On 21st November 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         adrian mieczyslaw miskowiec
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    O'Hanlon made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st March 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Poland born on 3rd May 1997.  He  came  to
    the UK aged 9 in 2006.

 3. He has eight convictions for nine offences  committed  between  October
    2013 and September 2016.  The convictions include  burglary  and  theft
    and for assault occasioning actual bodily harm.   The  last  conviction
    was for failure to comply with a community order.

 4. The judge found that the claimant had acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under Regulation 19(3).  His removal could therefore only  be
    justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    in accordance with  Regulation  21.  There  is  no  challenge  to  that
    conclusion n the grounds.

 5. The evidence before the judge was that  the  claimant  lives  with  his
    mother and his brother, who is being treated in a psychiatric hospital.
     He has a girlfriend who lives within walking distance and she has  two
    children, whom he sees very regularly.  Indeed he takes her daughter to
    school three days a week and looks after her when she comes  back  from
    nursery.

 6. The judge acknowledged the serious nature of some of the offending.

 7. He wrote:

         "In addition, the fact that the appellant has been  imprisoned  for
         failing to  comply  with  the  requirement  of  a  community  order
         suggests that there has been a lack of regard for  the  law  and  a
         lack of remorse for  his  offending  behaviour  which  indicates  a
         propensity to reoffend and that the appellant represents a  genuine
         and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public  to  justify  his
         deportation on grounds of public policy."

 8. The judge concluded:

         "However, Regulation 21(5)(a) of the 2006 Regulations requires  any
         decision to  comply  with  the  principle  of  proportionality  and
         specifically provides that a person's previous criminal convictions
         do not of themselves justify the decision.  It is also necessary to
         take into account the  matters  set  out  in  Regulation  21(6)  as
         previously indicated.  In the case of the appellant he is 19  years
         of age and I find the evidence of the appellant and his  mother  as
         to the lack of family ties which he might  have  in  Poland  to  be
         credible.  The appellant's mother did not seek  to  exaggerate  the
         lack of contact between herself and  her  family  in  Poland.   The
         appellant's mother accepted that her mother still resides in Poland
         although on the basis of her evidence there is little contact.  The
         appellant's own evidence as to  his  knowledge  and  experience  of
         Poland is effectively that this is extremely limited.  Although the
         appellant can speak Polish any knowledge and  experience  which  he
         had of Poland was gained before he came to the United  Kingdom  and
         he therefore has little  or  no  adult  knowledge  of  Poland,  his
         country of origin.  I therefore find, having taken into account the
         matters referred to in Regulation 21(6)  of  the  2006  Regulations
         that it would not be proportionate to remove the appellant from the
         United Kingdom and return him to Poland, his country of origin.   I
         find on the basis of the evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant
         would have considerable difficulties  in  readjusting  to  life  in
         Poland and it would not therefore be proportionate  to  expect  the
         appellant to return  there.   In  the  circumstances  I  allow  the
         appellant's appeal."

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had made an error of law in concluding  that  the  claimant's
    personal conduct does not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    The judge should have considered the guidance in  Bualale  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 806 in assessing the seriousness of the offence.  It was clear that
    a balance must be struck between  the  seriousness  of  offending  that
    involved violence and the risk of it being  repeated.   Even  a  slight
    risk of  him  reoffending  could  constitute  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat.  Given that all  the  offences  have  been
    committed within a  relatively  short  period  of  time  there  was  an
    indication for a  propensity  to  reoffend  which  confirmed  that  the
    claimant represents a genuine and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    fundamental rights of UK  citizens.   Failure  by  the  judge  to  give
    adequate reasons to rebut this is an error of law.

10. Second, the judge had failed to  give  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    claimant was well-integrated.  His convictions demonstrate that he  has
    failed  to  respect  the  values  of  society  and  as  such  has   not
    demonstrated that he has integrated.

11. Third, the judge failed to engage with the margin of appreciation  that
    is to be afforded to member states in the context of establishing their
    own public policy thresholds.

12. Finally, the judge had failed to give reasons as to why a fit,  healthy
    young man who could speak the language  and  has  relatives  in  Poland
    could not readjust to life there.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused  by  Judge  Nightingale  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 8th September 2017.

The Hearing

14. Mr Diwncyz accepted that there were real difficulties with his grounds.
     The first three address the issue of whether the claimant represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  community.
    However the judge accepted that he did represent such  a  threat.   The
    appeal was not allowed on that basis.

15. No application was made to amend the grounds.

16. Mr Diwncyz said that the decision was very lenient.  That  is  correct.
    The claimant was extremely fortunate to find a judge who, having  found
    that the claimant's conduct did  represent  a  threat  to  the  public,
    nevertheless allowed the appeal on the ground  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate for him to be deported.

17. The judge heard oral evidence from the claimant, his girlfriend and his
    mother.  He accepted that the evidence was credible  and  there  is  no
    challenge in the grounds to his  assessment.   On  that  evidence,  the
    family in the UK are estranged  from  the  Polish  family  because  the
    claimant's mother had  her  sons  out  of  wedlock.   His  girlfriend's
    evidence that he was closely involved in the childcare for her daughter
    was also accepted.

18. As Mr Diwncyz acknowledged, the decision was  within  the  spectrum  of
    ones  which could be made by  a  judge.  He  acknowledged  that  merely
    seeking to reargue that it would not be disproportionate to deport  the
    claimant is some way from establishing that the judge erred in law.

19. The claimant has been extremely fortunate.  His appeal was  allowed  in
    circumstances where many Immigration Judges would  have  dismissed  it.
    The Secretary of State then challenged the decision  on  grounds  which
    were largely irrelevant to the decision, did not seek to amend them and
    then made submissions which were a clear attempt to reargue  the  case.
    No attempt has been made to identify an error of law.

20. Clearly if the claimant offends again he will have great difficulty  in
    resisting a further deportation order.

Notice of Decision

21. The original judge did not err  in  law.   The  decision  stands.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 20 November 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor






