
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00490/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 7 May 2021                      |On : 19 May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SYLWESTER MAZUR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Walker, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams. A face to  face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Mazur's  appeal  against
a decision to deport him from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  regulation
23(6)(b) and regulation 27  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State  as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Mazur  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 30 December 1979. He  came  to
the United Kingdom in March 2009 and first came to the attention of  the  UK
authorities on 25 December 2018  when  he  was  arrested  for  the  relevant
offence. On 12 and 13 June 2019 he was convicted at Taunton Crown  Court  of
two counts of wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm  without  intent  and
having a blade/article which was sharply pointed in a public place.  He  was
sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

On 20 June 2019 the appellant was served with a  liability  for  deportation
notice. He responded on 22 June 2019, claiming that  he  had  no  family  in
Poland as his parents had passed away, that he had always worked in  the  UK
and had paid taxes and contributed to society and that he married  his  wife
in the UK in December 2011 and had two daughters, born on 19 July  2010  and
18 February 2013. He provided an explanation for  the  incident  leading  to
his conviction, claiming that he had been in an argument  with  some  Polish
men, all of whom had  been  drinking  including  himself,  and  had  reacted
violently when they were verbally abusing him. He claimed that that was  the
only time he had been  arrested  in  the  UK  and  it  was  totally  out  of
character.

On 12 September 2019 the respondent made a decision to  make  a  deportation
order against the appellant. In that decision, the respondent accepted  that
the evidence produced by the appellant was sufficient  to  demonstrate  that
he had acquired the right to permanent residence under the EEA  Regulations.
However,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
continuously resident in the UK for 10 years  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
Regulations, as his continuous residence  was  broken  by  his  imprisonment
before 10 years was completed. The respondent, having considered the  nature
of the appellant's offending, the serious  injuries  sustained  by  the  two
victims from knife wounds and the OASys report assessing him as a high  risk
of harm to known adults, concluded that his  deportation  was  justified  on
serious  grounds  of  public  policy.  The  respondent  noted  the  lack  of
documentary evidence showing that the appellant  had  addressed  his  issues
with alcohol and considered that he therefore continued to pose  a  risk  of
harm to the public. The respondent considered that  the  appellant  posed  a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the interests of  public
policy and that  the  decision  to  deport  him  was  proportionate  and  in
accordance with the EEA Regulations 2016. The respondent considered  further
that the appellant's deportation would  not  breach  his  Article  8  rights
under the ECHR. Whilst the respondent accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with his two daughters and his  partner,
none of whom had been shown to be British  citizens,  it  was  not  accepted
that it would be unduly harsh for them to live in Poland or to be  separated
from him upon his deportation. The exceptions to deportation  were  not  met
on family or private life  grounds  under  paragraphs  399(a)  and  (b)  and
paragraph 399A and there were no very compelling  circumstances  outweighing
the public interest in deportation.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 22 October  2020  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Loke. The appellant and his wife both gave evidence  before  the  judge,  by
way of video-link, from which it was recorded that  their  relationship  had
broken down in June 2018 and they had separated and the appellant  had  gone
to live with his niece next door, but Mrs Mazur would  like  them  to  be  a
family again. The judge noted that the appellant had been  resident  in  the
UK for ten years  prior  to  the  deportation  decision,  but  he  had  been
remanded into custody after being resident for nine years and  nine  months.
The judge found that the appellant had  been  sufficiently  integrated  into
the UK that the period of custody had not broken his integrative links.  The
judge  accordingly  found  that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  enhanced
protection under the EEA Regulations and  that  there  were  not  imperative
grounds  to  indicate  that  he  was  a  threat  to  public  security.   She
accordingly allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds  that  the  judge  had  erred  by  finding  that   the   appellant's
integrative links had not been broken simply on the basis of his  length  of
residence in the UK and by failing to have regard to Schedule  1(2)  of  the
EEA Regulations 2016, that she had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
finding that the appellant was integrated into life in  the  UK  when  there
was no finding of wider cultural integration beyond his own family and  that
she had failed to give adequate regard to the appellant's level  of  threat.
It was asserted that the judge had erred by finding that the  appellant  had
acquired enhanced protection against deportation.

Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision
dated 24 November 2020, on the following basis:

    "It  is  arguable  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    integrative links was flawed if, as is arguable,  the  only  basis  for
    making the eventual finding was based without more upon the Appellant's
    length of time in the United Kingdom."

A Rule 24 response was filed on behalf of Mr Mazur  opposing  the  Secretary
of State's grounds and the matter then came before me for a hearing.

Both parties made submissions. Mr Kotas relied upon  the  grounds  which  he
submitted raised a reasons challenge, namely the  judge's  failure  to  give
sufficient reasons as to why the appellant was integrated into  the  UK.  Ms
Walker submitted that sufficient reasons were  given  and  she  referred  to
[24] and [25] of the judge's decision. With regard to the second  ground  of
appeal,  she  submitted  that  the  judge  had  carefully   considered   the
appellant's threat level and had considered all relevant factors.  Mr  Kotas
did not seek to respond further.


Discussion and findings

As I advised the parties at the hearing, I did not consider that Judge  Loke
had erred in law and I upheld her decision. My reasons for so doing  are  as
follows.

The grant of permission, which was made on the ground of arguable  flaws  in
the judge's assessment of the appellant's integrative  links,  was  premised
on the basis that the judge's conclusion in that regard relied only  on  the
appellant's length of residence in the UK.  That reflected the Secretary  of
State's first ground of appeal. However, it is clearly  not  the  case  that
the judge relied only on the appellant's length of residence in the  UK  and
neither is it the  case  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  integration
outside his own nationality and family, as the grounds suggest at [2].

Ms Walker properly relied on [24] and [25] of  the  decision  in  which  the
judge considered, in  addition  to  the  appellant's  significant  level  of
contact with his children and his co-parenting role, his employment  in  the
UK prior to his imprisonment, the offer of employment upon his  release  and
the number of educational courses undertaken in prison which she  considered
indicated a positive step to maintaining and strengthening  his  social  and
cultural  integration  into  the  UK.  With  respect  to   the   appellant's
employment, it is relevant  to  note  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  of
continuous employment since arriving in the UK, as referred to at page 8  of
appeal bundle and the following pages of payslips and  P60s.  There  was  no
suggestion from that evidence that the  appellant's  employment  was  solely
within the Polish community - on the contrary it is  clear  that  he  worked
for English companies. The judge also had before her the independent  social
worker's report which, as she found at [25(c)],  referred  to  an  offer  of
employment upon release from prison in a cheese factory (paragraph 22.2,  at
S13 of the supplementary appeal bundle).  Further,  I  note  that  the  same
report refers at paragraphs 10.4 and 24.1 to the  family  mixing  with  both
English and Polish  people.  Accordingly  there  was  considerable  evidence
before the judge  to  show  that  the  appellant  was  integrated  into  the
community and on the basis of that evidence she was  perfectly  entitled  to
conclude as she did.

Mr Kotas, in his submissions, posed the question  how  a  person  in  prison
could be considered to be integrated into  life  in  the  UK.  However,  the
caselaw properly referred to by the judge at [19] to [21] envisaged  such  a
situation and it is clear that the judge gave the  matter  full  and  proper
consideration in line with those cases. Indeed there has been  no  challenge
to the judge's directions in law and to her application of the  law  to  the
appellant's circumstances.

As for the judge's assessment of risk,  there  is  again  no  merit  in  the
challenge made in the grounds of appeal.  As  Ms  Walker  pointed  out,  the
grant of permission did not refer  to  that  ground,  albeit  there  was  no
indication  of  it  being  excluded.  The   judge   plainly   gave   careful
consideration to the severity of the appellant's offence and  to  the  level
of threat he posed to the public, as demonstrated at [26],  [27]  and  [37].
The judge had full regard to the assessment of risk in the OASys report  and
accorded  the  assessment   appropriate   weight.   She   applied   relevant
authorities and reached a conclusion that was fully  and  properly  open  to
her on the evidence.

Accordingly I agree with Ms Walker that the judge  considered  all  relevant
factors and provided full and cogent reasons for concluding as  she  did.  I
agree further that the Secretary of State's grounds are  essentially  little
more than a disagreement with the judge's decision.  Accordingly  the  judge
was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant  qualified  for  the  enhanced
level of protection.  Mr  Kotas  helpfully  agreed  that  if  that  was  the
Tribunal's conclusion then it was accepted that  the  appellant's  offending
did not justify expulsion.

For all of these reasons I find no errors of law  in  the  judge's  decision
requiring it to be set aside and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
allow the appeal stands and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.




 Signed: S Kebede
 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                              Dated: 7 May 2021
