
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00054/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th February 2016                        |On 31st March 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                            orlanzo lennox daley
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Owens Stevens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 15th December 1994.   His
    appeal against  deportation  was  dismissed  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Peart and First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson [the panel] in a
    decision dated 18th November 2015.
2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2nd  October  1999.   He
    came with his mother as a visitor with a visa valid until  20th  August
    2000. He overstayed and remained in the United  Kingdom  illegally  and
    then in 2006 made an application for indefinite leave to  remain  which
    was granted on 24th November 2009.  His mother became a British citizen
    on 12th October 2012. The Appellant  appeals  against  the  deportation
    order  made  on  5th  February  2015  under  Section  3(5)(a)  of   the
    Immigration Act 1971 as being conducive to the public good.

3.   In summary, the panel found that the Appellant was a  foreign  criminal
    in that he had been involved in offences causing serious harm.  He  was
    a persistent offender and he had a particular disregard  for  the  law.
    The panel found that paragraph 399 was not applicable and  went  on  to
    consider 399A and Article 8. They found that the Appellant had not been
    resident in the UK for  most  of  his  life.  His  offending  behaviour
    suggested that he was not socially and culturally integrated and  there
    were no very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Jamaica.
    Therefore, paragraph 399A did not apply.

4.   In considering whether there were very  compelling  circumstances  over
    and above those in paragraph 398 the judge found that the Appellant had
    established family life in the United Kingdom with his mother, his half-
    brother, his half-brother's partner  and  their  children  and  he  was
    closely involved with his father and half-sister. He  was  not  however
    the main carer of his mother as he claimed, although he was involved in
    assisting his brother's partner  with  childcare.  In  conclusion,  the
    Appellant was a foreign criminal as defined in Section 117D (2) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Paragraph  399A  did  not
    apply and given that the offences had  caused  serious  harm  and  were
    persistent in nature the  public  interest  outweighed  his  Article  8
    rights.

5.   Permission to appeal was sought on six grounds.  Ground  1:  The  panel
    had erred in law in their approach to the  evidence.  It  was  for  the
    Respondent  to  prove  that  the  Appellant  was  a  foreign  criminal.
    Although, the Appellant  accepted  the  history  given  by  the  police
    officer he had only three convictions. The matters referred to in  D  C
    Landy's statement did not  result  in  convictions.  In  one  case  the
    Appellant was acquitted, in several others no further action was  taken
    or the matter was discontinued and on one occasion the Appellant was in
    fact the victim rather than the perpetrator of a crime. The Appellant's
    credibility and that of his witnesses was rejected  without  sufficient
    reasons and the panel's assessment of the  evidence  was  fundamentally
    flawed.

6.    Ground  2:  The  panel  did  not  specifically  consider  whether  the
    Appellant was a foreign criminal as  defined  in  Section  117D  before
    turning to apply paragraph 398.  This was contrary to the case of Chege
    (Section 117D - Article 8 approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC).


7.   Ground 3:  For the Appellant to be a foreign criminal, an  offence  not
    offending in general  has  to  have  caused  serious  harm.  The  panel
    therefore erred in law by concluding that the Appellant's  conduct  and
    offending behaviour in general had caused harm. This  was  contrary  to
    Section 117D which requires an  offence  to  have  caused  sufficiently
    serious harm. Further, the panel had failed to take  into  account  the
    sentence imposed, namely nine months' imprisonment  suspended  for  two
    years.   Accordingly,  the  panel's  assessment  of  serious  harm  was
    fundamentally flawed.

8.   Ground 4:  The panel erred in law in taking  into  account  the  entire
    course of conduct alleged against the Appellant in assessing whether he
    was a persistent offender. This finding was not sustainable given  that
    he only had three actual convictions. Only offences demonstrated  by  a
    conviction were relevant in determining whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    persistent offender.   Alternatively, the requirement under the test of
    persistent offender was  that  he  should  currently  be  a  persistent
    offender. Conduct which commenced in the past must  continue  into  the
    present or be reasonably  approximate  to  it.   The  Appellant's  last
    conviction was in 2013 and the last two recent arrests  by  the  police
    were in situations where he was in fact the victim.  In  addition,  the
    panel failed to have regard to the fact that the Appellant was a  minor
    when he committed the three offences and he has not been  convicted  of
    any offence since he became an adult.  Conduct which did not lead to  a
    conviction should not have been taken into account in deciding  whether
    the Appellant was a persistent offender.  Under  Section  3(5)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 a person can only be liable to deportation  and  a
    court can only recommend deportation where the person has attained  the
    age of 17 at the time of conviction and the person was sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment. The  panel's  approach  was  inconsistent  with
    those provisions in that they relied on conduct against  the  Appellant
    from the age of 14 onwards.

9.   Ground 5:  The panel erred in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal and in their consideration of whether  he  can  engage
    one of the exceptions  contained  in  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The panel found that the Appellant's  offending  had
    caused serious harm or that  he  was  a  persistent  offender  who  had
    particular disregard for the law. In  coming  to  this  conclusion  the
    panel took into account irrelevant considerations and  failed  to  take
    into account the sentence imposed by the trial judge.

10.  Ground 6: Contrary to the panel's conclusion the circumstances  of  the
    Appellant were otherwise very  compelling.   The  Appellant  relied  on
    Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546.  The Appellant was a  minor  when  he
    committed the offences, which was relevant to  the  assessment  of  the
    nature and seriousness of the offences. The conduct  before  the  panel
    related to offences or alleged offences when the Appellant was a minor.
    The Appellant had spent 16 out of 20 years of his life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He had attended school and obtained GCSEs  and  he  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain in November 2009. These amounted  to
    very compelling circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public  interest
    under paragraph 398.

11.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker on the grounds that it was arguable the panel erred in its
    approach to  resolving  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  a
    persistent offender.

12.  In submissions, Mr Haywood for the Appellant relied  on  the  cases  of
    Chege, Maslov, Bah (EO (Turkey) -  liability  to  deport)  [2012]  UKUT
    00196 and Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct)  [2013]  UKUT  00146
    (IAC).  He submitted that the Appellant came to the United Kingdom when
    he was four years old and had been here for 16 years.  He  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in 2009 and was integrated into the UK.  The
    Appellant was convicted of his first offence at the age of  17  and  he
    had not been imprisoned. The panel's approach to the facts was  flawed.
    The panel looked at the Appellant's offending behaviour rather than  at
    whether there was an offence which caused serious harm.

13.  In essence, the panel started with paragraph 398(c) of the  Immigration
    Rules rather than assessing whether the Appellant was in fact a foreign
    criminal. In assessing whether the Appellant was a persistent  offender
    the test is  in  the  present  tense.  The  Appellant's  offences  were
    committed whilst he was a minor. He had not committed any  offences  as
    an adult.  Further, persistent offender meant conviction of a number of
    offences  when  the  Appellant  had  only  committed  three   offences.
    Further, he had not infringed his suspended sentence. In order to be  a
    persistent offender the Respondent had to show that the  offences  were
    current and that the Appellant had a history of  persistent  offending.
    The panel had conflated the two issues  and  therefore  their  detailed
    consideration of the point was in fact irrelevant  to  the  test  under
    Section 117D.

14.  There was also support from the case of Maslov where it was  considered
    that offending as a minor was  different  to  offending  as  an  adult.
    Further, there were also exceptions to automatic  deportation  where  a
    person was convicted at the age of 17.  A person under the  age  of  17
    could not be recommended for deportation in  any  event.   Accordingly,
    the panel wrongly relied on offending behaviour which was not  relevant
    to the assessment of persistent offender. To state that  the  Appellant
    accepted the factual summary in the police officer's witness  statement
    did not deal adequately with the relevance of the  Appellant's  alleged
    criminal behaviour. The analysis of the facts commenced at paragraph 73
    of the decision under the heading '398(c)'. From this it is clear  that
    the panel did not address whether the Appellant was in fact  a  foreign
    criminal but went straight into the exceptions to deportation.

15.  Mr  Haywood  submitted  that  the  panel  erred  in  referring  to  the
    Appellant's offending in its totality and did not consider  whether  an
    offence of robbery caused serious harm.   They  did  not  consider  the
    sentence in assessing seriousness. This  was  relevant  given  that  an
    immediate custodial penalty was  not  imposed.  The  panel  dealt  with
    overall offending in  considering  the  exception  but  this  were  not
    relevant in assessing whether the  Appellant  was  a  foreign  criminal
    because the test was in fact different.

16.  The panel based their finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a  persistent
    offender  on  the  entire  conduct  set  out  in  the  police   witness
    statements. This was wrong in law.  At  paragraph  80  the  panel  were
    incorrect to state that the Appellant  had  committed  twelve  offences
    because in relation to one of them he was a victim and in  relation  to
    another he was found not guilty.  The way that the panel  had  set  out
    their findings showed that their approach was wrong in law.

17.  In assessing the nature and  seriousness  of  the  offences  the  panel
    should have taken into account whether the offences were  committed  as
    an adult. That was not so in this case and the Appellant had received a
    suspended sentence which had not been activated.  This  was  consistent
    with the statutory scheme and  the  exceptions  to  deportation.  These
    errors were  fatal  because  the  panel  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appropriate test in relation to whether the  Appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal.

18.  Accordingly, the exceptions did not come into play  here  but  if  they
    did they were compelling circumstances in the  Appellant's  case  which
    outweighed the public interest in deportation. The panel were bound  by
    Chege and had not applied it.  They had to decide if the Appellant  was
    a foreign criminal before  looking  to  the  exceptions  and  from  the
    decision it was clear they had adopted the wrong approach.

19.  Mr Walker submitted that the Appellant's representative at the  hearing
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the  Appellant   had
    committed serious offences. The panel  cannot  be  criticised  for  the
    representative's submissions.  At paragraph 79 the panel looked at  the
    Appellant's offending history which was set out in the police officer's
    witness statement.   At  paragraph  99  they  considered  the  relevant
    provisions of Section 117D and found that the Appellant was  a  foreign
    criminal.  There was no material error of law, although there may be an
    error in the structure of the decision.

20.  The panel had made a finding that the Appellant was a foreign  criminal
    and applied the correct test. This finding was open to the panel on the
    facts as was the finding that the Appellant was a persistent  offender.
    There was no arguable material error of law. The panel  considered  the
    judge's sentencing remarks that the Appellant  had  now  shown  insight
    into his offending and this was relevant to the current  assessment  of
    whether he was a persistent offender.  Their finding that he  was,  was
    open to the panel on the evidence.

21.  In response, Mr  Haywood  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence and his convictions as a minor  following  Maslov  were  very
    compelling circumstances sufficient to outweigh  the  public  interest.
    Mr Haywood submitted that he was not bound by  the  way  the  case  was
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal. As a matter of law the panel had
    to be satisfied that the Respondent  had  shown  the  Appellant  was  a
    foreign criminal.  Serious harm was not made out on the facts  of  this
    case and the Appellant's convictions did not support  such  a  finding.
    The Appellant did not receive an immediate  custodial  sentence  so  it
    cannot be said that an offence  caused  serious  harm  given  that  the
    offences were committed when the Appellant was a minor.
22.  The panel wrongly looked at the pattern of offending  and  applied  the
    exceptions to paragraph 398(c). They had failed to  apply  the  correct
    test and failed to consider whether there was an offence  which  caused
    serious harm.  The level of harm must be greater  than  a  crime  which
    warranted a suspended sentence given that  a  twelve  months'  sentence
    caused the automatic provisions to be triggered. A persistent  offender
    must be convicted of imprisonment. The Appellant had  not  received  an
    immediate custodial sentence and therefore he did not pass the  serious
    harm threshold.


Relevant Law


23.  In Chege the Tribunal held that:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:


         (i)  is the Appellant a foreign criminal as defined  by  s117D  (2)
             (a), (b) or (c);


         (ii) if so, does he fall  within  paragraph  399  or  399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;


         (iii)    if not are there very compelling  circumstances  over  and
             beyond those falling within 399 and  399A  relied  upon,  such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             s117B.


24.  The task of the judge is to  assess  the  competing  interests  and  to
    determine whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
    private and family life is justified under Article 8(2) or whether  the
    public interest arguments should prevail notwithstanding the engagement
    of Article 8. It follows from this that if an appeal does  not  succeed
    on human rights grounds paragraph 397 provides the  Respondent  with  a
    residual  discretion  to  grant  leave   to   remain   in   exceptional
    circumstances where an Appellant  cannot  succeed  by  invoking  rights
    protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

25.  Section 117C states:

         "117C:  Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

26.  Section 117D (2) states:


         "In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -
          a) who is not a British citizen,
          b) who has been convicted in the UK of an offence, and
          c) who
                 i) has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at
                    least twelve months,
                ii) has been  convicted  of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                    serious harm, or
               iii) is a persistent offender."


27.  Section 117D (4) states:


         "In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of a certain length of time -


         (a)  do not include a person who has received a suspended  sentence
             unless a court subsequently orders that the  sentence  or  any
             part of it of whatever length is to take effect;


         (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period  of
             imprisonment of that length of time only by  virtue  of  being
             sentenced to a consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to
             that length of time;


         (c)  include a person who is sentenced to detention or  ordered  or
             likely to be detained in an institution other than  in  prison
             including in particular a hospital or an institution for young
             offenders for that length of time; and


         (d)  include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention
             or ordered or directed to be  detained  for  an  indeterminate
             period provided that it may last for at least that  length  of
             time."


28.  Paragraph 398 states:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least  12
             months; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because, in the view of
             the Secretary of State, their  offending  has  caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law.

         The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in 399 and 399A."


29.  Paragraph 399 was not applicable in this case because it relates  to  a
    person who has a general and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child.

30.  Paragraph 399A states:

         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

          a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life; and

          b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."




31.  In Farquharson, the Tribunal held:

         "(1) Where the Respondent  relies  on  allegations  of  conduct  in
         proceedings for removal, the same principles apply as to  proof  of
         conduct and the assessment of risk to the public, as in deportation
         cases: Bah was applicable.
         (2) A criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction is  not
         a criminal record; but the acts that  led  to  the  charge  may  be
         established as conduct.
         (3) If the Respondent seeks to establish the conduct  by  reference
         to the contents of police  CRIS  reports,  the  relevant  documents
         should be produced, rather than a bare witness statement  referring
         to them.
         (4) The material relied on must be supplied  to  the  Appellant  in
         good time to prepare for the appeal.
         (5) The judge has a duty to ensure a fair hearing  is  obtained  by
         affording the Appellant sufficient time to study the documents  and
         respond.
         (6) Where the  Appellant  is  in  detention  and  faces  a  serious
         allegation of conduct, it is in the interests of justice that legal
         aid is made available."

32.  In Bah, the Tribunal held:

         "In a deportation appeal not falling with  section  32  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007, the sequence of decision making  set  out  in  EO
         (deportation appeals: scope and process)  Turkey  [2007]  UKAIT  62
         still applies but the first step is expanded as follows:


         i)   Consider whether the person is liable to be  deported  on  the
             grounds set out by the Secretary of State. This will  normally
             involve the judge examining:


             a. Whether the material facts  alleged  by  the  Secretary  of
             State are accepted and if not whether they are made out to the
             civil standard flexibly applied;


             b. Whether on the facts established  viewed  as  a  whole  the
             conduct character  or  associations  reach  such  a  level  of
             seriousness as to justify a decision to deport;


             c. In considering b) the judge  will  take  into  account  any
             lawful policy of  the  Secretary  of  State  relevant  to  the
             exercise  of  the  discretion  to  deport  and   whether   the
             discretion has been exercised in accordance with that policy;


        ii)  If the person is liable to deportation, then the next question
             to consider is whether a  human  rights  or  protection  claim
             precludes deportation. In cases of private  and  family  life,
             this will require an assessment of the proportionality of  the
             measures against the family or private lie  in  question,  and
             weighing of all relevant factors.


        iii) If the two previous steps are decided against  the  appellant,
             then the question whether the discretion to  deport  has  been
             exercised in accordance with the Immigration Rules  applicable
             is the third step in the process. The present wording  of  the
             rules assumes that a person who is liable to  deportation  and
             whose deportation would not be contrary  to  the  law  and  in
             breach of human rights  should  normally  be  deported  absent
             exceptional circumstances to be assessed in the light  of  all
             relevant information placed before the Tribunal."



Discussion and Conclusion

33.  In her reasons for deportation dated 3rd October 2014,  the  Respondent
    considered paragraph 396 of the Immigration  Rules  which  states  that
    where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall  be  that
    the public interest requires deportation. The Respondent did not accept
    the Appellant's human rights claim and  decided  that  the  Appellant's
    deportation was conducive  to  the  public  good.  In  coming  to  this
    conclusion the Respondent took into account  his  criminal  convictions
    and his behaviour as a whole taking into account evidence  gathered  by
    the police in operation Nexus [Nexus evidence].

34.  At paragraph 31 of the reasons for deportation  letter  the  Respondent
    states: "Your client's deportation is conducive to the public good  and
    in the public interest because your client has been  convicted  of  two
    offences one of which has been deemed serious enough for conviction  in
    a Crown Court rather than a Magistrates and the fact that the Secretary
    of State considers your client  to  be  a  persistent  offender  it  is
    therefore, in accordance with paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules,
    the public interest requires your deportation unless  an  exception  to
    deportation applies. The exceptions are set out in paragraphs  399  and
    399A of the Immigration Rules."

35.  The Respondent concluded that the exceptions did not  apply  and  there
    were no 'very compelling circumstances' such that the Appellant  should
    not be deported. She found that  the  public  interest  outweighed  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights. The Respondent did not  expressly  state,
    in her refusal letter, that the Appellant was a foreign criminal within
    the definition of Section 117D (2).

36.  On appeal the panel fell into error in failing to  adopt  the  approach
    set out  in  Chege.  The  Tribunal  started  their  consideration  with
    paragraph 398 (c) of the Immigration Rules instead of Section 117D  (2)
    of the 2002 Act.

37.  The Appellant was convicted of two robberies which took place  on  28th
    August 2012. The Appellant and another male asked to use  the  victims'
    mobile phone and then refused to return it. As  the  victims  tried  to
    recover the phones the other male revealed a handgun and a knife in his
    waistband and the victims ran off. The Appellant  denied  the  offences
    and was convicted and sentenced to nine months  imprisonment  suspended
    for two years.

38.  On 24th December 2012 the Appellant,  on  being  arrested  outside  his
    home for breach of a curfew, dropped a  kitchen  knife  and  kicked  it
    under a parked car. He was found guilty of possession of  an  offensive
    weapon and sentenced to a community order.

39.  On these facts the Appellant did not satisfy the definition of  foreign
    criminal under Section 117D (2). He had not been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of at least 12 months. Neither of the robbery  offences
    could be said to have caused serious harm and this was reflected in the
    suspended sentence given by the judge after the  trial.  The  Appellant
    was not a persistent offender because he only had three convictions for
    offences committed in August 2012  and  December  2012.  The  suspended
    sentence  had  not  been  activated.  The  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    representative  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  committed  serious
    offences was insufficient to satisfy the  definition  in  Section  117D
    (2).

40.  Since the Appellant was not a foreign criminal  within  the  definition
    in Section 117D (2), Section 117C did not apply. However, it  is  worth
    noting that under Section 117C (7), only convictions can be taken  into
    account.

41.  There is no  definition  of  foreign  criminal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, but the wording of paragraph 398(c) is similar. I accept that it
    refers to offending rather than  an  offence,  but  I  find  that  both
    phrases should be construed as meaning an offence or offences of  which
    a person has been convicted. This is consistent with Section  117C  (7)
    and 117D (2) which expressly refers to 'has been convicted'.

42.  I am of the view that it would be illogical to construe the wording  of
    paragraph 398(c) in a manner inconsistent with  Section  117D  (2)  and
    117C. The explanatory  notes  to  the  2014  Act  supports  this  view.
    Therefore, in assessing serious harm or persistent offending, the  same
    considerations apply. Accordingly, I find that the  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in taking into account the Nexus evidence which did not  result  in
    convictions in  assessing  serious  harm  and  persistent  offender  at
    paragraphs 75 to 85.

43.  I accept Mr Haywood's submission  that  the  panel  did  not  initially
    apply Section 117D but looked at paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules
    and in looking at  the  Immigration  Rules  they  fell  into  error  by
    considering conduct and a pattern of offending which was  not  relevant
    to the test of whether the Appellant was a foreign criminal.

44.  Accordingly, I find that  paragraph  398(c)  does  not  apply  and  the
    Appellant did not have to show that he came within  the  exceptions  in
    paragraphs 399 or 399A or that there were very compelling circumstances
    outside those considered under the Immigration Rules.







45.   In  Chege  at  [23],  the  Tribunal   found   that   the   exceptional
    circumstances referred to in paragraph 397 were not the  same  as  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    399 and 399A capable of outweighing the public interest in  deportation
    referred to in paragraph 398. In the  present  rules  the  question  of
    whether there are exceptional circumstances is a question to  be  asked
    only when it has already been decided that removal would not result  in
    a breach of the UK's obligations under Article 8.

46.  I find that the  panel  erred  in  law  in  their  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Section 117D and 117C. The approach which  should
    have been adopted in this case was that set out in Bah. I set aside the
    decision and remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-
    hearing.

47.  The Nexus evidence was accepted by the Appellant and  therefore  it  is
    not necessary for the police officers to attend and give evidence.  The
    issue is to determine whether on these facts, taken  as  a  whole,  the
    Appellant's conduct and character or associations reach such a level of
    seriousness as to justify a decision to deport  under  3(5)(a)  of  the
    1971 Act.

48.  If the First-tier  Tribunal  find  that  the  Appellant  is  liable  to
    deportation, then the next issue will be whether his deportation  would
    breach Article 8. This will require an  assessment  of  proportionality
    taking into account all relevant factors. The Appellant was a  juvenile
    when he committed the robbery offences and had just turned 18  when  he
    was arrested outside his home in possession of an offensive weapon. The
    basic principles  concerning  the  issue  of  the  public  interest  in
    deportation are set out in Masih (deportation -public interest -  basic
    principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).

49.  If the Appellant's deportation would not  breach  Article  8  then  the
    issue will be whether the discretion to deport has  been  exercised  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 396 and 397 state that
    there is a presumption in favour of deportation and it will only be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest  in  deportation  is
    outweighed.


Conclusion

50.  I find that there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I have decided in accordance with paragraph 7.2 of
    the Practice Statements of 25th September 2012 that the decision  dated
    18th November 2015 should be set aside and the appeal remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.










Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The decision is set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 14th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Peart or First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson.

(ii) I direct that the Appellants serve on the Respondent and  the  Tribunal
    not less than 7 days before the hearing a fully paginated  and  indexed
    bundle of documents on which they intend to rely.

(iii)    The Appellant and Respondent to file and serve  skeleton  arguments
    no later than 7 days before the hearing.

(iv) No interpreter is required. Time estimate three hours.




                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 14th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


