
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 June 2015                          |On 14 July 2015                   |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    A L-O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jesuram, instructed by R.O.C.K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 23 April 2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judges Ross and Lobo which refused the  appellant's
    appeal against deportation.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant's minor child.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant, born on 29 January
    1994, came to the UK in 2000 at the age of 6. His case is that  he  was
    trafficked here by a man posing as his father who was  later  convicted
    of immigration offences and deported. The appellant was taken into care
    by Social Services and granted settlement  with  their  support  on  24
    August 2010.

 4.  The  appellant  has  a  child  from  a  previous   relationship.   The
    relationship broke down, part of the history being that  the  appellant
    assaulted his ex-partner. The child was adopted. Nothing arises  before
    us as regards that relationship or that child.

 5. The appellant has another child, born on 13 September  2013,  from  his
    relationship with JD.  Both the appellant's second  child  and  JD  are
    British citizens. The appellant has never  lived  with  Ms  D  and  had
    limited contact with his daughter as her family initially had  concerns
    about his conduct and because he has been in  criminal  or  immigration
    detention since 22 May 2014, most of the child's life.

 6. The appellant has 7 convictions for 11 different  offences,  the  first
    being in April 2008.  They  include  robbery,  handling  stolen  goods,
    common assault and possession of a Class A drug (MDMA).

 7. The appellant was also involved with the police in a  number  of  other
    matters which did not lead to convictions. We refer  to  these  as  the
    "non-convictions".  A witness statement dated 12 December 2013 from  DC
    Smith listed those matters which included rape and a robbery for  which
    the appellant was tried  but  acquitted  and  possession  of  a  bladed
    article.

 8. On 19 February 2014 as a result of the appellant's convictions and non-
    convictions the respondent decided to deport him as his deportation was
    deemed to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  under  s.  (5)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 9. Following that decision the appellant was convicted on 22 February 2014
    of a further offence of burglary and theft and received a sentence of 2
    years' imprisonment.

Ground 1

10. The written grounds stated that the first  challenge  to  the  decision
    arose from the 4 month delay in  the  promulgation  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and argued that material factual  errors  arose  from
    this delay.

11. We did not find that the determination here showed  that  there  was  a
    nexus between the delay and the safety  of  the  decision;  Arusha  and
    Demushi (deprivation of  citizenship  -  delay)  [2013  UKUT  80  (IAC)
    applied. Nothing that we were taken to went to such a nexus rather than
    merely being challenges as to material errors of fact, in  essence  the
    case that Mr Jesuram took forward on this ground at the hearing.

12. The challenge on error of fact referred to five aspects of the findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal. We did not find any  of  them  amounted  to
    errors on points of law which required the decision to be set aside.

    Ground 1(a)

13. The first factual error referred to at paragraph 14(a) of  the  grounds
    concerns the comment of the Tribunal at [23] that the appellant did not
    "dispute his offences nor his associations with the persons  identified
    in DC Smith's report".

14. Mr Jesurum also pointed out that at [16] the panel stated that  "[n]one
    of the evidence concerning the appellant's offending history, the other
    matters which did not result in convictions  or  his  associations  was
    disputed by him."

15. It was argued for the appellant that both his associates and  the  non-
    convictions were disputed in his witness statement  dated  17  December
    2014 and that the First-tier Tribunal erred in stating otherwise.

16. We accepted that at [7], [8],  [10],  [12]  and  [14]  of  his  witness
    statement  the  appellant  does  not  deny  his  involvement  with  the
    authorities at the times of  the  non-convictions  but  does  deny  any
    misconduct in that regard, hence he was not convicted.  To that  extent
    we accept that the comment of the First-tier Tribunal at [16]  that  he
    did not dispute any of the evidence against him was a misstatement.

17. Reading that passage in context, however, it appeared to us be no  more
    than that and not a material matter. It is contained in a part  of  the
    decision that is overtly stated to be a summary of the appellant's case
    rather than being a  finding  that  the  police  version  of  the  non-
    convictions was correct. When  the  panel  do  make  findings  at  [23]
    onwards,  the  non-convictions  do  not  feature  at  all.  It  is  the
    appellant's convictions, considered at [23], which concerned the  panel
    which stated:

         "We find that the appellant has an  appalling  record  of  criminal
         convictions including robbery, possession of a bladed article in  a
         public place and assaults. These are not "petty offences". We  note
         that the appellant's most recent offence of burglary was  committed
         as recently as February 2013 and was a matter not even  taken  into
         account when the notice of liability to deportation was  served  in
         October 2013. We note that  the  appellant  does  not  dispute  his
         offences nor his associations with the  persons  identified  in  DC
         Smith's report."

18. The final  sentence  refers  to  there  being  no  dispute  as  to  the
    appellant's associates as set out in  the  witness  statement  of  D  C
    Smith. It was not our view that it was accurate to characterise this as
    a misstatement or mistake of fact. At [18] of his witness statement the
    appellant indicated:

         "The Home Office bundle sates (sic) a lot of associates that I  had
         over the last 9 years, I can confirm that most of the people listed
         I have not seen since the rape trail (sic) and the  others  I  have
         not seen since I left Peckham and secondary school."

19. There is no dispute there between the appellant's evidence and that  of
    the police as to his past associates. The Tribunal  does  not  indicate
    anywhere that concern about continuing associations played  a  part  in
    its consideration.




    Ground 1(b)

20. The grounds also refer to the First-tier Tribunal  failing  to  mention
    anywhere in the determination that the appellant had been trafficked to
    the UK. It was submitted that was a matter  not  provided  for  by  the
    Immigration Rules and which was  material  to  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's private life and  "compelling  circumstances"  outside  the
    specific provisions of the Rules.

21. However, the panel did take into account the appellant's evidence as to
    his entry into the UK at [31] where it states that:

         "We do not find the appellant's 14 years length  of  residence  in
         the UK nor the circumstances in which he may have been  brought  to
         the UK as being very  compelling  reasons  why  he  should  not  be
         deported (our emphasis)."

22. The panel therefore found that at its highest his evidence as to  being
    trafficked could not assist him. That was additionally so where, as  at
    [28], little weight attracted  to  the  appellant's  private  life  as,
    following s.117C (5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, it was established whilst his immigration status was  precarious.
    If authority were needed to support the finding at [28], it is  on  all
    fours with paragraph 5 of the head note of AM (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 0260 (IAC) which states:

         "In some circumstances it may also  be  that  even  a  person  with
         indefinite  leave  to  remain,  or  a  person   who   has   enjoyed
         citizenship, enjoys a status that is  "precarious"  either  because
         that status is revocable by the Secretary of State as a  result  of
         their deception, or because of their criminal conduct In such cases
         a person will be well aware that he has imperilled his  status  and
         cannot viably claim  thereafter  that  his  status  is  other  than
         precarious."

23. For the same reasons, where Ground 4 concerns to the panel's finding on
    the appellant's precarious immigration status, it has no merit.

    Ground 1(c)

24. The first ground also objects to the First-tier Tribunal's  finding  at
    [27] that:

         "In relation to the appellant's second daughter  with  his  current
         girlfriend, we find that the appellant does not have  a  subsisting
         parental relationship with her, given that he has never lived  with
         her and has been in custody since she was 8 months  old,  prior  to
         which he only saw her occasionally."

25. As we understood it, Mr Jesuram's objection to that finding was that it
    went behind a concession made  at  [44]  of  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter to the  effect  that  the  appellant  did  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting family life with his daughter. There had been no application
    from the respondent to resile from that concession and  no  reason  for
    going behind it was given by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  An  error  of
    procedural fairness arose, therefore.

26. We did not accept those arguments for a number of reasons. Firstly, the
    refusal letter was prepared in line with the version of the Immigration
    Rules in force prior to 28 July 2014 which  referred  only  to  whether
    someone had a genuine and subsisting relationship with a child. It  was
    common ground that the  next  iteration  of  the  Immigration  Rule  as
    introduced on 28 July 2014 had to be applied by the First-tier Tribunal
    here. The correct wording of paragraph  399(a)  to  be  considered  was
    whether  the  appellant  had  a  "a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" with his daughter. It did  not  appear  to  us  that  the
    respondent could have made a concession in the refusal letter regarding
    a requirement that did not exist at the time that  the  refusal  letter
    was written.

27. It was clearly open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not have a parental relationship for the reasons given at
    [27]. He had never lived with his second child and had  seen  her  only
    occasionally prior to detention from May 2014 onwards.

28. For these reasons, we also saw no merit in the arguments put forward in
    Ground 2 as to the appellant's relationship with his child.

    Ground 1(d)

29. The first ground also objected to the panel  referring  only  in  brief
    terms at [21] to the appellant's evidence of his private life which  he
    had established over a 14 year period from the age of  6  onwards.  The
    submission for the appellant ignores the clear statement in  [21]  that
    all of the appellant's evidence was "carefully considered" and that the
    paragraph goes on to note specifically that he had provided evidence of
    his work, training and rehabilatitive  work  in  prison  including  his
    involvement with Samaritans." The panel was clearly aware of the length
    of residence as a minor, see for example [2] and [20].

30. It did not appear to us that the First-tier Tribunal was required to do
    more by way of indicating that the relevant material  on  private  life
    was taken into account. As above, the appellant's  private  life  claim
    was always going to be very difficult to make out where his immigration
    status was precarious from when  he  began  to  offend  and  given  the
    seriousness of his criminal offences.

    Ground 1(e)

31. The final point made in  the  first  ground  is  that  the  appellant's
    evidence and that of his foster-carer was that he had  heard  that  the
    man who trafficked and  who  was  subsequently  deported  had  died  in
    Nigeria. The panel refer at [31] to  his  alleged  father  having  been
    deported to Nigeria.

32. We could not see anything material arising from  this  misstatement  of
    the evidence. The appellant could not qualify under paragraph  399A  of
    the Immigration Rules where sub-paragraphs (a) on  the  extent  of  his
    lawful residence and (b) on his social and  cultural  integration  were
    correctly found not be met by the panel  at  [29].  It  is  simply  not
    something when considered against the weight against the appellant here
    that could amount to a compelling circumstance  that  was  sufficiently
    "powerful and irresistible", over and above the matters provided for in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A; see the head note of  Chege  (section  117D  -
    Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC).

    Ground 3

33. The only remaining ground argues that the First-tier  Tribunal   failed
    to take into account that "very serious reasons justifying deportation"
    were required given the appellant had spent most of  his  childhood  in
    the UK and had offended whilst a minor. In essence, the submission  was
    that the panel had failed to apply the ratio of Maslov v Austria [2008]
    GC ECHR 1638/03.

34. As  set  out  at  [30]  and  [31]  of  R  (Akpinar)  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2014] EWCA Civ 937 it is not  correct
    to read Maslov as importing a  "very  serious  reasons"  threshold.  It
    cannot be argued here that the panel failed to take  into  account  the
    appellant's age when he came to the UK, his length of residence  whilst
    a minor and his age at the time of his various offences. It was open to
    them to find that those and any  other  matters  could  not  amount  to
    compelling circumstances such that deportation was not justified.

Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should be set aside.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 23 June 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



