
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 6th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     xm
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Rehman of Kings Court Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Designated Judge Shaerf and Mrs Padfield  who  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision made  on  20  December
    2013 to make a deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007. The hearing  took  place  on  24th  July  2014.   The
    decision was promulgated on 24th November 2014.



Background

 2. None of the facts underpinning this decision are in dispute.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  on  22nd  June  1989.   He
    arrived in the UK on 15th December  1996  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor and, on 7th January  1998,  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in line with his mother.

 4. He has a number of convictions for possession of cannabis  dating  from
    2008.  On 30th June 2012 he was convicted for possession with intent to
    supply  cannabis  and  cocaine  and  facilitating  the  acquisition  or
    possession of criminal property for which he was given three years  for
    the cocaine offence and nine months concurrent for each  of  the  other
    two offences.  He had been assessed as at medium risk of  re-offending.
    Since his release on licence the claimant has received support from the
    Methodist  Revival  Church   which   indicated   some   steps   towards
    rehabilitation.

 5. The family lived in London.  The claimant mixed in bad company  and  in
    2006  attempted  to  dissociate  himself  from  his  friends.    As   a
    consequence he was beaten and severely injured, being hospitalised  for
    two months.  The claimant said that he now experienced severe anxieties
    about strangers and the doctors had informed him that he had "lost some
    intelligence".

 6. His mother is aged 56, diabetic and HIV positive.  The judge found that
    he enjoyed family life with her.  He  was  impressed  by  the  way  the
    family had moved away from London when it understood the nature of  the
    activities with which the claimant had involved himself,  moving  first
    to Chesterfield and then to Sheffield.

 7. The claimant himself had only visited Zimbabwe once since  his  arrival
    in the UK, in 2008, when they stayed in a hotel, in order  to  organise
    Zimbabwean  passports  in  connection  with  their   applications   for
    continuing leave in the UK. The judge accepted that  the  claimant  had
    lost his ability to speak Shona

 8. His mother has visited Zimbabwe on a number of  occasions  to  see  his
    stepfather before he joined her in the UK.  His eldest brother had also
    been there some two or three times and his married sister  about  three
    times.  His stepfather had some family in Zimbabwe but his  mother  had
    no family on her late husband's side.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
    claimant had established that he had no ties with Zimbabwe.

 9. With respect to the wider family, the claimant has uncles  in  the  UK,
    including one who was the Secretary General of ZAPU.  Although  it  was
    submitted that the claimant would be identified and linked to  him  the
    judge found, absent other evidence, that it would be  implausible  that
    he would be so linked.

10. The appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules in force at the time
    of the decision and the hearing.

11. The judge wrote as follows:

         "The hearing took place shortly before the  coming  into  force  of
         Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 inserting Sections 17A to  D
         in the 2002 Act.  We also note that changes to  paragraphs  398  to
         399A of the Immigration Rules were effected  on  the  same  day  as
         Section 19 was brought into force, 28 July 2014.  Our view is  that
         the appellant has shown that paragraph 399A(b) of  the  Immigration
         Rules as in force at the date of decision and the  hearing  applies
         to him.  The appellant's  appeal  succeeds  under  the  Immigration
         Rules."

12. The judge then considered "the Article 8 claim outside the  Immigration
    Rules".  He wrote:

         "We do find that the appellant's long  residence  in  the  UK,  his
         education here and his lack of ties  to  Zimbabwe  would  mean  his
         deportation would effectively be a sentence of  exile.   For  these
         reasons together with the particular circumstances  of  his  family
         and their relocation from London to the north because  of  and  for
         the benefit  of  the  appellant  we  consider  his  deportation  to
         Zimbabwe would place the UK in breach of its obligations to respect
         his private and family life, particularly with his mother.  In  all
         the circumstances we concluded it would be disproportionate to  the
         legitimate public objectives identified in Article 8(2) and already
         mentioned.  For these reasons the appeal  also  succeeds  on  human
         rights grounds."

The Grounds of Application

13. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the  judge  had  materially  misdirected  himself  in  law.    He   had
    erroneously considered the Immigration Rules as at the date of decision
    but ought to have considered them as at the date of 28th July 2014.  In
    failing to consider the relevant version of the Immigration  Rules  the
    judge had materially erred in law.  The  claimant  had  demonstrated  a
    flagrant disregard for UK laws.  He had not lost all links to Zimbabwe.
     He was a young, single healthy adult and  failed  to  demonstrate  any
    very significant obstacles to his reintegration there.

14. Second, in purporting to consider  the  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    Immigration Rules the judge had erred since the Immigration Rules are a
    complete code and fully comprehensive of Article 8.

15. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Designated  Judge  French
    but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Keki?  on  7th  April
    2015.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

16. Although Mr Rehman sought to argue that it was open  to  the  judge  to
    apply the Rules as they were as at the date of decision and the hearing
    I am satisfied that the Secretary of State  is  correct.   The  judge's
    decision was not made until it was promulgated, and that was some three
    months after the change in the Rules.  Until that point he was required
    to take into account all relevant matters, which included the changes.

17. In YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 Aitkens LJ stated:

         "So far as the new Part 5A of the 2002  Act  is  concerned  Section
         117A is in force as from  28  July  2014.   There  is  no  guidance
         anywhere as to whether the new provisions  are  to  be  applied  to
         cases in which the SSHD has already made a decision and the  matter
         has been appealed through the Tribunal system.   But  Section  117A
         itself says that the new Part 5A applies 'where a court or Tribunal
         is  required  to  determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the
         Immigration Act' breaches a person's Article 8 right and  would  so
         be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   Either
         this course or the UT would, at the stage  where  the  decision  is
         being remade, have to determine whether a decision to deport YM  is
         a breach of his Article 8 rights, so it would  have  to  apply  the
         statutory provisions applicable to that determination that are then
         in  force.   To  my  mind  that  does  not  involve  any  issue  of
         retrospectivity.  Even if it did it seems to me that  the  relevant
         question to ask is that posed by Lord Mustill (in the context of  a
         new statutory provision) in L'office  Cherifien  des  Phosphates  v
         Yamashita-Shinnohon Steamship Company Limited.   What does fairness
         require?  This test was adopted by the House of Lords in Odelola  v
         SSHD in the context of changes in the Immigration Rules between the
         date of an application  for  leave  to  remain  and  the  time  the
         application was determined by the SSHD.  To my  mind  there  is  no
         unfairness in applying the new statutory provisions to  a  decision
         that has now to be made by  a  Tribunal  or  court.   The  decision
         should reflect the balance that has been  struck,  which  has  some
         benefit and perhaps some drawbacks for the persons concerned.

         So far as the 2014 Rules  are  concerned,  it  is  clear  from  the
         provisions of Rule A362 itself, as  well  as  the  statement  under
         implementation in the Statement of Changes and paragraphs  3.4  and
         4.7 of the Explanatory Memorandum, that the 2014 Rules  are  to  be
         applied in all decisions concerning Article 8 claims that are  made
         after 28 July 2014. As Lord Hoffmann said in the Odelola case,  the
         Immigration Rules are a statement by  the  SSHD  of  how  she  will
         exercise powers of control over immigration. Thus, in  the  absence
         of any statement to the contrary, the most natural reading  of  the
         Rules is that they apply to decisions taken by the SSHD until  such
         time as she promulgates new rules,  after  which  she  will  decide
         according to the new  rules.  The  same  applies  to  decisions  by
         tribunals and the courts: that is why in MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  the
         Court of Appeal held that both the UT and it were obliged to  apply
         the 2012 Rules to MF, despite the fact that the SSHD had taken  her
         original decision in 2010 under the pre-existing rules."

18. Since the decision in this case was made in November 2014, when the new
    Rules were in force, the judge was obliged to take them  into  account.
    The correct course would have been to reconvene the hearing so that the
    claimant had the opportunity of making his arguments in respect of  the
    new Rules.

19. Second, the judge erred in law in considering Article 8 outside the new
    Rules.  MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 found that:

         "In determining whether a case is exceptional, all relevant factors
         in favour of and against deportation are to be considered under the
         new Rules.  On this approach it is  difficult  to  see  what  scope
         there is for any consideration  outside  the  new  Rule  i.e.  they
         provide a complete code.  The  new  Immigration  Rules  set  out  a
         number of exceptions to where the public  interest  in  deportation
         could be outweighed by other factors, including  a  provision  that
         the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs  399  and  399A.    Accordingly
         there is provision within the Rules for a consideration of  whether
         there  are  such  circumstances  not  described  in  them  by   the
         exceptions. "

20. Accordingly, the judge's decision must be set aside.

Remaking the decision

21. I gave Mr Rehman the opportunity to seek instructions so that he  could
    ascertain whether there was any fresh material which he wished to place
    before me in relation to the new Rules.  After doing so he said that he
    had no other evidence to put before the Tribunal  and  wanted  to  rely
    upon the evidence put before the First-tier Judge.

22. Ms Johnstone submitted that, whilst  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    findings of the judge, the appeal had to be dismissed by  reference  to
    the new Rules.  The judge had rejected the claim of a well-founded fear
    in Zimbabwe.  Whilst the claimant had no direct family members there he
    did have connections through his family and, as a single male  with  no
    children who had lived in a number of places in the UK could  not  meet
    the requirements of the new Rules.

23. Mr Rehman reminded me that, whilst the index offence was of course very
    serious, the claimant's  other  convictions  were  for  the  much  less
    serious offence of possession of cannabis and had taken place  when  he
    was an adolescent.

24. He had been here since the age of 7 and had lost the use of his  native
    language.  He spoke only English.   It  was  not  challenged  that  the
    claimant had only visited Zimbabwe once since 2008, and the  fact  that
    the family stayed on that occasion in a hotel  was  indicative  of  the
    severance of ties there.  Although his mother had returned to  Zimbabwe
    she did not use the family name and therefore would not be at  risk  of
    having a connection with the Secretary of State General of  ZAPU.   She
    herself was unwell, being HIV positive  and  suffering  from  diabetes.
    The claimant had always lived with  her  and  the  original  judge  had
    accepted that there was family life in this case.

25. If the claimant were to be deported to Zimbabwe he would be going to  a
    country where he would have no ties and where  he  did  not  speak  the
    native language.  He had given oral evidence  of  the  effects  of  the
    assault in 2006 and still had checkups with the GP.   He  would  suffer
    immense problems on return.

26. Moreover the political situation  in  Zimbabwe  was  unstable  and  the
    economy poor such that a large number of Zimbabweans  were  immigrating
    to South Africa to seek employment there.

27. The claimant had obtained a number of certificates  whilst  in  custody
    and had since attempted to make progress with his education through the
    local church.  He was well motivated to succeed.





Findings and Conclusions

28. The relevant Immigration Rules are set out in paragraphs  398  and  399
    which are as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention, and

              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                   the public good and in the public interest  because  they
                   have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
                   been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  4
                   years;

              (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                   to the public good and in  the  public  interest  because
                   they have been convicted of an  offence  for  which  they
                   have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less
                   than 4 years but at least 12
                   months; or

              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                   the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in
                   the view of the Secretary of State, their  offending  has
                   caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
                   shows a particular disregard for the law,

              the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will  consider
              whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,
              the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
              other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances
              over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  399(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                   of his life; and

              (b) He is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                   integration into the country to which it is  proposed  he
                   is deported."

29. The other provisions of paragraph 399 apply to where the person  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  partner  or  a  qualifying
    child and are not applicable here.

30. Those provisions are mirrored in Section 117C of  the  Immigration  Act
    2014 inserted into Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  117C(iv) sets out the same provisions as  that  set  out  in
    399A of the Immigration Rules.

31. It is not disputed that the claimant has been lawfully resident in  the
    UK for most of his life.

32. The Secretary of State argues that  the  claimant  has  demonstrated  a
    flagrant disregard for UK laws  having  acquired  numerous  convictions
    during his residence in the UK.  His persistent offending  demonstrates
    a lack of social and cultural integration for the purposes of paragraph
    399A(b).

33. The claimant's criminal history is as follows:

      i) 23rd June 2004 - reprimand for causing  destruction  or  damage  of
         property.

     ii) 14th July 2008 - caution for possession of cannabis.

    iii) 8th April 2010 - conviction for possession of cannabis: conditional
         discharge.

     iv)  13th  January  2011  -  conviction  for  possession  of  cannabis:
         community order, costs and activity requirement.

      v) 7th April 2011 - conviction for failing to  surrender  to  custody:
         community order activity requirement 10 days.

     vi) 12th April 2011 - breach of conditional discharge: community  order
         activity requirement 10 days.

    vii) 18th January 2012 - conviction for possession  of  cannabis:  fine,
         victim surcharge and costs.

   viii) 30th January 2012 - conviction for failing to surrender to custody:
         one day's detention.

     ix) 30th June 2012 - conviction for possession with  intent  to  supply
         cannabis and cocaine and facilitating the acquisition or possession
         of criminal property.

34. It is right to say therefore that the claimant's first  conviction  was
    in  2010  and  the  subsequent  offences  of  possession  resulted   in
    conditional discharges and community orders.  He is not someone who has
    been in and out of prison for years.   His  adolescent  behaviour,  and
    indeed behaviour in early adulthood, was poor, but it is not until  the
    conviction of the  index  offence  that  his  offending  behaviour  can
    properly be described as serious.

35. Set against that, he has been in the UK since the age  of  7.   He  was
    educated here.  All his immediate  family  and  much  of  his  extended
    family are here.  The unchallenged finding of  the  original  judge  is
    that he has a lack of ties with any other country.  Accordingly,  I  do
    not  find  that  his  criminal  behaviour  outweighs  the  considerable
    evidence in favour of his establishing social and cultural  integration
    into the UK.

36. Moreover there would obviously be obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Zimbabwe.  He has only visited there once  in  2008  for  a  relatively
    short visit when he stayed in a hotel with his family.  He left when he
    was only 7 years old and will have few if any memories  of  that  time.
    He has lost his ability to speak Shona.  His lack of ties  in  Zimbabwe
    would make it difficult for him to obtain housing.  He has  obtained  a
    number of certificates and Mr Rehman said that he was keen to train  to
    be a social worker but the certificates do not establish a  high  level
    of educational achievement and he will undoubtedly find it difficult to
    obtain employment in a country where many of its citizens already leave
    to obtain work.

37. Furthermore he has the support here of a close-knit family who came  to
    court in large numbers to provide help and assistance to  the  claimant
    and his mother.  She herself has  clearly  been  a  tower  of  strength
    during this entire process.

38. Finally there is the oral evidence, not challenged,  given  before  the
    original judge, that  the  claimant  experiences  severe  anxieties  in
    relation to strangers.

39. On the other hand the Rule is tightly worded and requires the  claimant
    to establish that he would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Zimbabwe.

40. Whilst it is accepted that he no longer speaks  Shona,  he  does  speak
    English clearly and  that  is  one  of  the  three  main  languages  in
    Zimbabwe.

41. Second, although reference has been made to  the  consequences  of  the
    attack on the claimant there is absolutely no  medical  evidence  which
    establishes that he suffers from a condition such as  to  constitute  a
    serious obstacle to integration.  In the absence of  that  evidence,  I
    have to conclude that the  claimant's  problems  are  not  sufficiently
    serious so as to require medical intervention.

42. Finally, whilst he has no direct ties himself, it  is  clear  that  his
    family members have retained some links with Zimbabwe.  They have  been
    wholly supportive of the claimant to date.  I have no doubt  that  they
    would be able to access some assistance  for  him  there,  particularly
    since other members of the family have visited over the years, and  his
    stepfather has left Zimbabwe only relatively recently.

43. Accordingly, whilst I do not seek to minimise the difficulties not only
    for the claimant but for his family by this  decision,  Parliament  has
    set out very clearly its view of the public interest consideration. The
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public  interest.   Although
    the claimant has been in the UK for a very long period of time,  indeed
    since he was a  young  child,  he  simply  is  not  able  to  meet  the
    exceptions set out in the Rules and in paragraph 117C of the 2002  Act.



44. I have also considered whether there are any other factors which  could
    constitute very compelling circumstances in the claimant's favour  but,
    aside from the obvious fact that he has been in the UK since he  was  7
    years old, no evidence of such circumstances has been provided.

45. The Immigration Rules with respect to deportation are a complete  code,
    since they contain a provision for the consideration of  whether  there
    are  compelling  circumstances  outside  the  exceptions  outlined   in
    Paragraph 399A.  Accordingly there is no scope for allowing this appeal
    outside them.





Notice of Decision

46. The original judge erred in law.   His  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    claimant's appeal against the decision to make a deportation  order  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

