
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: DA/00463/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 1 February 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Raheel KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Trent Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Raheel Khan, was born on 14 January 1992 and is  a  male
    citizen of France.  The appellant has a significant history of criminal
    offending whilst in the United Kingdom.  On 3 March 2016, a deportation
    order was signed in  respect  of  the  appellant.   The  appellant  was
    removed from the United Kingdom to France on 15 April 2016 but returned
    in breach of the deportation order via Belfast and was  detained  on  1
    December 2016.  The appellant was returned  to  custody  to  serve  the
    remainder of his custodial sentence and he  was  released  on  23  June
    2017.  On 8 March 2017, the appellant applied for the deportation order
    (against which he had not appealed) to be revoked.  By a decision dated
    4 August 2017, the Secretary of State refused to revoke the deportation
    order.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Moran) which, in a decision promulgated  on  6  October
    2017, allowed the appellant's  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the Secretary of State  argues
    that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  entertain  the  appeal.   The
    appeal was brought under the provisions of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 Regulation 37 provides:

         (1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  a  person  may  not  appeal  under
         regulation 36 whilst in the United Kingdom against an EEA decision-

         (a) to refuse to admit that person to the United Kingdom;

         (b) to revoke that person's admission to the United Kingdom;

         (c) to make an exclusion order against that person;

         (d) to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  or  exclusion  order  made
         against the person;

         (e) to refuse to issue the person with an EEA family permit;

         (f) to revoke, or to refuse to issue or renew  any  document  under
         these Regulations where that decision is taken at a time  when  the
         person is outside the United Kingdom; or

         (g) to remove the person from the United Kingdom following entry to
         the United Kingdom in breach of a deportation or  exclusion  order,
         or in circumstances where  that  person  was  not  entitled  to  be
         admitted pursuant to regulation 23(1), (2), (3) or (4).

         (2) Sub-paragraphs (a) to (c) of paragraph (1) do not  apply  where
         the person is in the United Kingdom and-

         (a) the person  holds  a  valid  EEA  family  permit,  registration
         certificate, residence card, derivative  residence  card,  document
         certifying  permanent  residence,  permanent  residence   card   or
         qualifying EEA State  residence  card  on  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom or the person  can  otherwise  prove  that  the  person  is
         resident in the United Kingdom; or

         (b) the person is deemed not to have been admitted  to  the  United
         Kingdom under regulation 29(3) but at the date on which  notice  of
         the decision to refuse admission is given the person  has  been  in
         the United Kingdom for at least 3 months.

 3. The grounds [5], state that, "it is  respectfully  submitted  that  the
    respondent did not concede the point and as  the  judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to hear the matter, the appeal could not be allowed".  The
    grounds [3] refers to the decision letter of the Secretary of State  as
    follows:  "The letter states: (90) you have a right of  appeal  against
    this decision under Regulation 36 and 37 of the 2016 EEA Regulations."

 4. Secondly, and in the alternative, the Secretary of State challenges the
    judge's decision to conclude that the appellant  was  entitled  to  the
    "imperative" protection afforded by Regulation 27(4):

         A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative  grounds
         of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in  the
         best interests of the person concerned,  as  provided  for  in  the
         Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

 5. The Secretary  of  State  relies  on  MG  (Portugal)  (C-400/12).   The
    Secretary of State acknowledges that the appellant had been  living  in
    the United Kingdom for at least ten years prior to his imprisonment; he
    came to the United Kingdom when he was 3 years  old  in  1995.  He  was
    convicted of the offence of attempted robbery on 28 February  2014  and
    sentenced to a total of five years and nine months'  imprisonment.   He
    had not been imprisoned for  any  offence  prior  to  that  date.   The
    appellant had, therefore, completed more than ten  years  of  residence
    prior to his imprisonment.  However, the Secretary of State argues that
    the seriousness of the appellant's offending constituted a  significant
    breach in the integration of the appellant in the United  Kingdom.   In
    addition, at [14] the grounds of appeal challenge the  judge's  finding
    under Regulation 34:

         34.-(1) An exclusion order remains in force unless it is revoked by
         the Secretary of State under this regulation.

         (2) A deportation order remains in force-

         (a) until the order is revoked under this regulation; or

         (b) for the period specified in the order.

         (3) A person who is subject to a deportation or exclusion order may
         only apply to the Secretary of State to  have  it  revoked  on  the
         basis that there has been a material change  in  the  circumstances
         that justified the making of the order.

         (4) An application under paragraph (3) must set  out  the  material
         change in circumstances relied upon by the applicant and  may  only
         be made whilst the applicant is outside the United Kingdom.




         (5) On receipt of an application under paragraph (3), the Secretary
         of State must revoke the order if the Secretary of State  considers
         that the criteria for making such an order are no longer satisfied.

         (6) The Secretary of State must take a decision on  an  application
         under paragraph (2) no later than six  months  after  the  date  on
         which the application is received.




 6. The respondent considers that the death of the appellant's  mother  did
    not constitute a "material change in circumstances"  of  a  kind  which
    would entitle the appellant to apply to revoke the  deportation  order.
    We note in this regard that the grounds [16] make no reference  to  the
    fact that the application to revoke  the  deportation  order  was  made
    whilst the appellant was in the United Kingdom (see Regulation  34(4)).



Jurisdiction

 7. The majority of  the  submissions  from  the  representatives  of  both
    parties concerned the matter of the Tribunal's  jurisdiction.   At  the
    hearing, Mr Hussain, who appeared for the appellant, sought to rely  on
    the authority of Anwar [2010] EWCA Civ 1275.  Since  no  reference  had
    previously been made in the appeal to this authority, we adjourned  the
    hearing briefly so that Miss Everett, who appeared for the  respondent,
    might have the opportunity to read the case and make submissions on it.
     Having  heard  the  submissions  of  both  parties,  we  reserved  our
    decision.

 8. As we recorded  above,  this  appellant  did  not  appeal  against  the
    decision to make a deportation order against him but did appeal against
    the refusal of the Secretary of State to revoke the deportation  order.
    This appeal  falls  within  one  of  the  categories  provided  for  in
    Regulation 37 (see above).   In  consequence,  the  appellant  may  not
    appeal against the decision whilst in the United Kingdom.

 9. We have quoted above from the grounds of appeal which, in turn, purport
    to quote from the decision notice.   That  notice  (which  is  dated  4
    August 2017) does indeed contain the words  which  are  quoted  in  the
    grounds of appeal but the quotation is incomplete.  Paragraph  [90]  of
    the refusal letter reads, "information on how to appeal  and  the  time
    limits for appealing are contained in the attached notice".  The notice
    under the heading "RIGHT OF APPEAL" reads:

         You are entitled to appeal this  decision  while  you  are  in  the
         United Kingdom by virtue of Regulations 36 and  37.   A  notice  of
         appeal is enclosed which explains what to  do  and  an  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal leaflet which explains how to get  help.   The
         appeal must be made on at least one of the following grounds ...

10. The treatment of the appellant's rights of  appeal  in  the  notice  of
    decision is plainly incorrect.  Regulation 37 provides that the  appeal
    could only be made from outside  the  United  Kingdom.   Moreover,  the
    Tribunal addressed the issue, albeit briefly, at [5]:

         Whilst Regulation 34(4) requires the application for revocation  to
         be made from outside the UK at the hearing the respondent  conceded
         that they had given RK a right of appeal in the UK by the notice of
         decision dated 4 August 2017.

11. This paragraph comes close to  conflating  two  different  issues:  the
    requirement that the appellant must make the application for revocation
    from outside the United Kingdom  and,  additionally,  can  only  appeal
    against a refusal to revoke from outside the United Kingdom.   However,
    we find that the paragraph will only make sense if it is understood  to
    mean that the respondent conceded not only that the appellant had  been
    "given" a right of appeal in the United Kingdom but also that no  point
    was being taken in respect of his failure to make the  application  (in
    the first instance) from abroad.   Moreover,  there  appears  to  be  a
    dispute of fact as to what occurred at the  hearing.   The  grounds  of
    appeal  assert  that  the  respondent  had  not  "conceded  the  point"
    regarding jurisdiction.  We have had the  benefit  of  considering  the
    judge's Record of Proceedings under  the  heading  "HOPO  [Home  Office
    Presenting Officer] submissions" the judge has written:

         Reg 34(3) - has to show material change in circumstance

         (4)  not taking point in being outside the UK because  given  right
             of appeal - RL1.

12. It is clear to us that, notwithstanding what is asserted in the grounds
    of appeal,  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    expressly informed the judge that he intended to  refrain  from  taking
    any point as regards Regulation 34 or Regulation 37.  It seems that the
    Presenting Officer believed that he was not in  a  position  to  resile
    from the in-country right of appeal which the notice  of  decision  had
    purported to give the appellant in country.

13. Sedley LJ in Anwar considered jurisdiction point at [19-23]:

   1. Was the AIT right in Ms Pengeyo's and Mr Anwar's cases  to  hold  that
      the respective immigration judges had acted without  jurisdiction?  In
      my  judgment  they  had  jurisdiction  to  embark   on   the   hearing
      notwithstanding that neither appellant had left  the  United  Kingdom,
      but once the point was taken by the Home Office (and assuming it to be
      factually correct, since they might have been absent from the hearing)
      it operated in bar of the proceedings. Had the point not been taken in
      either case, the immigration judge would have been  bound  to  proceed
      with the appeal.

   1. The reason  for  this  ostensibly  subtle  distinction  is  one  which
      matters. It is the distinction between constitutive  and  adjudicative
      jurisdiction which I sought to draw in a dissenting judgment in Carter
      v Ahsan [2005] EWCA Civ 990, ICR 1817, �16-27, which secured approval
      on appeal [2007] UKHL 51, 1 AC 696. The constitutive jurisdiction of a
      tribunal is the power to embark upon trying specified kinds of  issue.
      Whether a foreign national has obtained leave to enter  or  remain  by
      deception is, by common  consent,  such  an  issue.  Its  adjudicative
      jurisdiction may then depend on a number of factors, such  as  whether
      the appeal has been brought within time or - as  here  -  whether  the
      appellant has left the United Kingdom.

   1. This in turn may depend on several other things. First it must  depend
      on whether the out-of-country rule applies at all, which is likely  to
      be a mixed question of fact and law. IJ Callender-Smith  concluded  in
      Mr Anwar's case that it did not  apply.  Secondly  it  may  depend  on
      whether the appellant has in fact left the country: he or she  may  be
      absent from the hearing but not, or allegedly  not,  from  the  United
      Kingdom. This will then be a triable issue.  Until  such  issues  have
      been decided it is impossible to say that the tribunal cannot hear the
      appeal.

   1. One must not, of course, lose sight of the words  of  s.92(1)  of  the
      2002 Act: "A person may not appeal ...  while  he  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this section  applies"
      - and the section does not apply to  an  appeal  against  a  deception
      decision under s.10(b): see s. 82(2)(g). But  it  is  not  every  such
      formula which bars the door to justice. To take  only  the  best-known
      example, the Limitation Act 1980, s. 2, provides: "An  action  founded
      in tort shall not be brought after the expiration of  six  years  from
      the date on which the cause of action accrued." It is trite  law  that
      unless the point is taken,  this  provision  constitutes  no  bar.  In
      consequence it can be waived by agreement or by  unilateral  decision.
      Another example can be  found  in  requirements  for  leave  to  bring
      proceedings: see Adorian v Metropolitan  Police  Commissioner [2009]
      EWCA Civ 18.

   1. Any apparently absolute bar to justice  has  to  be  scrutinised  very
      carefully. The one contained in the 2002 Act is not of the kind  which
      operates independently of the will of either party so as to  bind  the
      tribunal regardless. It offers a point which can be but  need  not  be
      taken. In the present two cases, it was taken.




14. Sedley LJ states unequivocally [23] that the bar to  justice  contained
    in the 2002 Act "is not of a kind which operates independently  of  the
    will of either party so as to bind the Tribunal regardless".   We  find
    that,  for  the  purposes  of  deciding  the  instant  appeal,  we  can
    substitute the words "2016 EEA Regulations"  for  "2002  Act"  in  that
    sentence.  We note, in passing, that it  is  perhaps  unlikely  that  a
    provision contained in secondary  legislation  (the  2016  Regulations)
    should operate as an absolute bar when a statutory provision (the  2012
    Act) does not.  The bar contained in Regulation 37,  therefore,  is  an
    example of a point "which can but need not be taken".   Given  what  we
    have said above regarding what  occurred  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, in particular the remarks of the Presenting Officer (see  [11]
    above), we find that, although the jurisdiction point was  raised,  the
    point  was  not  taken  by  the  respondent.   Moreover,  it  was,  not
    surprisingly in the light of the Presenting Officer's  comments,  taken
    by the judge.

15. The Court of Appeal in Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ 1436 made it  clear  that
    exists a conditional rather than the absolute bar to proceedings  being
    brought whilst in the United Kingdom [31]:

         If the Home Office does not think it fair  or  right  to  take  the
         point [appealing from abroad] it can always say so (and in the case
         of Anwar it may have a public duty to say so) and the Tribunal  can
         then proceed.

16. The Court of Appeal went on at [32] to say:

         Mr Ockelton also thought (para  47(c))  it  wrong  to  say  that  a
         failure to consider the issue of jurisdiction can give a tribunal a
         jurisdiction it would not otherwise have. Anwar does  not  so  say.
         What it does say is that the Secretary of State can choose  not  to
         take any jurisdictional  objection  if  she  wishes  to  take  that
         course, just as a defendant can  waive  his  entitlement  to  plead
         limitation or, more  likely,  choose  not  to  plead  a  limitation
         defence. If a tribunal gives a decision without anybody considering
         the jurisdictional position, the decision may be precarious but  as
         Mr Ockelton himself points out in para 53 the decision stands until
         set aside. It  will  become  less  precarious  once  the  time  for
         applying for permission to appeal has expired

17. In the light of Nirula, it is apparent that the Secretary of  State  is
    wrong to submit in the instant case that the decision  of  Judge  Moran
    was void ab initio for want of jurisdiction; the decision  shall  stand
    unless we decide to set it aside.  Moreover, given that the  issue  was
    raised and determined following the  Presenting  Officer's  concession,
    the decision is not "precarious" which would have been the case had the
    Tribunal proceeded  "without  anybody  considering  the  jurisdictional
    position".

18. We are clear, therefore, following the authority of  Nirula,  that  (a)
    jurisdictional issue raised by Regulation 37 is not "absolute"  (b)  if
    issue had been taken by the Presenting Officer as regards jurisdiction,
    then, notwithstanding what had been said in the notice of decision, the
    judge would have been bound to have found that he had  no  jurisdiction
    to hear the  appeal   (c)  once  the  Presenting  Officer  had  clearly
    indicated to the judge that the Secretary of State did  not  rely  upon
    the jurisdictional bar of Regulation 37, it was open to the Tribunal to
    proceed  (d) the Tribunal did not err in law  by  proceeding  with  the
    hearing and reaching a decision (e) the Secretary of State  cannot  now
    rely upon the jurisdictional point in order to argue  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law such that  its  decision  falls  to  be  set
    aside.

The Judge's Decision on "Imperative Protection"

19.  First,  we  shall  deal  with  the  question  of  material  change  in
    circumstances (Regulation  34(3)).   The  judge  addressed  this  issue
    directly at [36]:

         36.  Is there a material change in  circumstances  as  required  by
             Regulation 34?  The deportation order  was  made  on  3  March
             2016.   I  accept  there  has  been  a  material   change   in
             circumstances, namely his mother's early death at the  age  of
             45 and the consequent change in his  attitude  and  intentions
             for the future.  Whilst he remains a high risk and is  lacking
             in remorse  for  the  attempted  robberies  the  OASys  Report
             supports the evidence from his family that there  has  been  a
             significant change in his outlook since  his  mother's  death.
             He is said to now be very motivated to address  his  offending
             and that this is a change.  I accept this assessment.  I  also
             accept his evidence as  the  oldest  sibling  he  has  genuine
             aspirations of leading a more productive life for the  benefit
             of  his  family.   This  is  not  a  finding  that  he   would
             necessarily do so, whether he would will depend on whether  he
             maintains this resolve if allowed to return to his family.

20. The Secretary of State submits [16]  that,  "the  respondent  does  not
    consider A has provided a valid argument since his mother  had  nothing
    to do with the justification  for  making  the  deportation  order  and
    neither did the reasons given at [36].  It is noted that shortly before
    being released from prison A was made guardian to his siblings  but  no
    explanation was given why his father who is well enough to  work  would
    ordinarily hold such a position is not doing so in this  instance.   It
    also appears that some of his siblings are adults themselves".

21. With respect to the Secretary of State, we consider that this challenge
    amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with  findings  which  were
    available to the judge on the evidence.  The Secretary of  State  (and,
    indeed, another judge) might take a different view, but that is not the
    point.  Judge Moran has made a finding which is not perverse but  which
    is supported by cogent reasons drawn from  the  evidence.   We  see  no
    reason to interfere with this finding.

22. The judge was alert to  the  argument  that  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending may  have  interfered  with  his  integration  within  United
    Kingdom society.  The judge was  aware  [40]  to  the  question  as  to
    whether a period of imprisonment can "cancel out the previous period of
    residence in some way" had been referred by the Supreme  Court  to  the
    European Court.  In the absence of any definitive guidance,  the  judge
    concluded that he would "accept that in RK's [the appellant's] case  he
    has the necessary ten years' continuous period prior  to  the  relevant
    decision and this is not nullified by him serving some of his custodial
    sentence before the deportation order was made".  The judge  considered
    this was the only way that he could give "practical effect to the clear
    intention to give enhanced protection to EU citizens that have  resided
    in the UK for ten  continuous  years  but  then  committed  an  offence
    punished with imprisonment".  We find that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    grounds  of  appeal  which  should  lead  us  to  interfere  with  that
    conclusion.  We find that it was open to the judge on the  evidence  to
    conclude that the appellant was entitled to "imperative" protection and
    that, notwithstanding his serious criminal offending, the Secretary  of
    State should not have refused to revoke the deportation order.  In  the
    circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

23. This appeal is dismissed.

24. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 17 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


