
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00008/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|London                               |                                     |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 11 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 ADAM NOWAK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

    1. By a decision promulgated on 9 October  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Plimmer found an error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Landes, itself promulgated on  17  June  2019.   Judge  Plimmer
       therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Her error of
       law decision is annexed to this decision for ease of reference.

  FACTUAL BACKGROUND

    2. The Appellant is a national of Poland.  He was born on 10 April 1976.
        He came to the UK on 26 July 2007, then aged thirty-one years.

    3. On 27 March 2013, the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  thirty  months'
       imprisonment for possession of methylamphetamine,  a  Class  A  drug,
       with intent to supply.  As a result, the Respondent sought to  deport
       him.  His appeal was however allowed in a decision promulgated on  19
       May 2015, the First-tier Tribunal  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
       acquired a permanent right of residence and that his conduct did  not
       now  present  a  genuine,  present  or  sufficiently  serious  threat
       affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  Although  the
       First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's  social  and  cultural
       integration in the UK was  strong,  the  Judge  also  found  that  he
       retained strong links with Poland, and that removal to  Poland  would
       not hinder his rehabilitation.  However, since the Appellant did  not
       pose a sufficient risk, the Tribunal  concluded  that  removal  would
       also be disproportionate.

    4. On 22 February 2018, the Appellant was sentenced to a total of twenty-
       eight months' imprisonment.  The offences were five of possessing  an
       indecent  image  of  a  child,  two  of  intentionally   encouraging/
       assisting the commission of an offence  namely  the  distribution  of
       indecent images of children (the Appellant was present in a  chatroom
       where indecent images of children were being shown) and two  offences
       of possession of extreme pornographic images of  sexual  images  with
       animals as well as a separate offence  of  possession  of  MDMA.   In
       addition to the sentence of imprisonment,  the  Appellant's  computer
       was forfeit, he was made the subject  of  a  sexual  harm  prevention
       order for five years and placed on the sex  offenders'  register  for
       ten years.  The Appellant's appeal against his criminal sentence  was
       dismissed on 24 April 2018.

    5. The Appellant was also later sentenced  on  12  June  2018  for  four
       offences of drug possession (two of possessing methylamphetamine  and
       two of  possessing  cannabis)  relating  to  offences  prior  to  his
       sentencing for the sexual offences.  He was sentenced to four  weeks'
       imprisonment concurrent in relation to  one  of  the  Class  A  drugs
       offences and one week concurrent in relation to the remainder.

    6. The Respondent again notified  the  Appellant  of  his  liability  to
       deportation on 7 March 2018.  The Appellant made  representations  on
       22 March 2018 based on his length of residence in the UK  and  social
       and  cultural  integration  here.   The  Respondent   refused   those
       representations by letter dated 13 December 2018  against  which  the
       Appellant now appeals.

  LEGAL FRAMEWORK

    7. It is accepted that the Appellant has  acquired  permanent  residence
       which has not been lost.  For that reason, it is common  ground  that
       the Respondent needs to show  that  there  are  serious  grounds  for
       deporting the Appellant.   The  Appellant  accepts  that  he  is  not
       entitled to the highest level of protection.  Although he  has  lived
       in the UK for over ten years, he has been in and out of prison  since
       March 2013.  His periods of imprisonment do  not  count  in  the  ten
       years which he would have to show  in  order  to  benefit  from  that
       highest level.

    8. The  Respondent's  decision  is  made  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016  ("the  EEA  Regulations").
       The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations are as follows:

           "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


           23.    ...

                (6)    Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8),  an  EEA  national
                who has entered the United Kingdom or the family  member  of
                such a national who has entered the United  Kingdom  may  be
                removed if -

                    ...

                    (b)    the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that  the
                    person's removal  is  justified  on  grounds  of  public
                    policy, public security or public health  in  accordance
                    with regulation 27; or

                    ..."




           "Decisions taken on grounds of public  policy,  public  security
           and public health


           27.-   (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means  an
                EEA decision taken on the grounds of public  policy,  public
                security or public health.

                ...

                (3)    A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a
                person with a right of permanent residence under  regulation
                15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy  and  public
                security.

                ...

                (5)    The public policy and public security requirements of
                the United  Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise
                conferred by these  Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the
                fundamental interests  of  society,  and  where  a  relevant
                decision is taken on grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security it must  also  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                following principles-

                    (a)    the decision must comply with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;

                    (b)    the decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;

                    (c)    the personal conduct of the person must represent
                    a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society,
                    taking into account past conduct of the person and  that
                    the threat does not need to be imminent;

                    (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case
                    or which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                    do not justify the decision;

                    (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not
                    in themselves justify the decision;

                    (f)     the  decision  may  be  taken  on   preventative
                    grounds, even in the  absence  of  a  previous  criminal
                    conviction, provided the grounds  are  specific  to  the
                    person.

                (6)    Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of
                public policy and public security in relation  to  a  person
                ("P") who is resident in the United  Kingdom,  the  decision
                maker must take account of considerations such as  the  age,
                state of health, family and economic  situation  of  P,  P's
                length of residence in the United Kingdom,  P's  social  and
                cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
                of P's links with P's country of origin.

                ...

                (8)     A  court  or  tribunal   considering   whether   the
                requirements of this regulation are met must (in particular)
                have regard to the considerations contained  in  Schedule  1
                (considerations of public policy, public  security  and  the
                fundamental interests of society etc.).




           Schedule 1

             1. The EU Treaties do not impose  a  uniform  scale  of  public
                policy  or  public  security  values:  member  States  enjoy
                considerable discretion, acting within the parameters set by
                the  EU  Treaties,  applied  where  relevant  by   the   EEA
                agreement, to define their own standards  of  public  policy
                and  public  security,  for  purposes  tailored   to   their
                individual contexts, from time to time.

             2. An EEA national or the family  member  of  an  EEA  national
                having extensive familial and societal links with persons of
                the  same  nationality  or  language  does  not  amount   to
                integration in the United Kingdom; a significant  degree  of
                wider cultural and  societal  integration  must  be  present
                before a person may be regarded as integrated in the  United
                Kingdom.

             3. Where an EEA  national  or  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
                national  has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is   a
                persistent offender, the longer the sentence,  or  the  more
                numerous the convictions, the greater  the  likelihood  that
                the individual's continued presence in  the  United  Kingdom
                represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

             4. Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
                national or the family member of an EEA national within  the
                United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were  formed
                at or around the same time as-

                (a)    the commission of a criminal offence;

                (b)    an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests
                of society;

                (c)    the EEA national or family member of an EEA  national
                was in custody.

           5. The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the
                family member of an EEA national  who  is  able  to  provide
                substantive evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
                example, through demonstrating that the EEA national or  the
                family member of an EEA national has  successfully  reformed
                or rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

           ...

           7. For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
                interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

                ...

                (c)    preventing social harm;

                ...

                (g)    tackling offences likely to  cause  harm  to  society
                    where an immediate or direct victim may be difficult  to
                    identify but where there is wider societal harm (such as
                    offences related to the misuse of drugs or crime with  a
                    cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1)  of
                    the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

                ...

                (i)     protecting  the  rights  and  freedoms  of   others,
                    particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

                (j)    protecting the public;

                (k)    acting in the best interests of  a  child  (including
                    where doing so entails refusing a child admission to the
                    United Kingdom, or  otherwise  taking  an  EEA  decision
                    against a child);

                ..."

    9. The central issue for me to consider therefore is whether  there  are
       serious grounds for  believing  that  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious threat to public policy or security.
        That must be based on the  individual  threat  which  the  Appellant
       poses and does not incorporate considerations such as deterrence.

   10. I must also consider principles such as the  proportionality  of  the
       decision to deport in accordance with what is said in regulation  27.
       In so doing, I need to consider whether  a  decision  to  deport  may
       prejudice the prospects of rehabilitation from  offending  and  weigh
       that in the balance when considering proportionality (R (oao Essa)  v
       Upper Tribunal (IAC) and another [2012] EWCA Civ 1718  in  the  event
       that this becomes relevant.

   11. The point made by Judge Plimmer when finding an error  of  law  finds
       resonance in the Court of Appeal's judgment in Kamki v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1715 as follows:

           "35.   ... In the context of  analysing  the  OASys  report  the
           meaning of the FTT is clear: the offender manager's view as  set
           out in the report was in line with that  of  the  judge,  namely
           that the probability of the appellant reoffending is  low  ('the
           appellant is at low risk of reoffending'), but was also that the
           overall risk in relation to the commission of  similar  offences
           against vulnerable young females was high ('the risk in relation
           to committing similar offences [etc]'), in the sense  of  taking
           the probability of reoffending in combination with  the  serious
           harmful effects if it occurred.  The FTT  judge  uses  different
           language to reflect the two different senses of  'risk';  it  is
           not plausible to read the decision in an incoherent  way  rather
           than so that it makes coherent sense; and reading it in this way
           corresponds with what the OASys report itself said, as  the  FTT
           judge had himself set out at [16] and [56] of his decision.   As
           noted above, Mr Knafler accepts that such a combined approach to
           evaluation of risk under regulation 21 is legitimate".

   12. The Appellant says that  this  case  is  of  no  application  as  the
       appellant's offence there was  more  serious  as  was  therefore  the
       sentence.  However, that misses the point.  The  case  concerned  the
       differential assessment of risk of reoffending generally and the risk
       to particular sections  of  society  of  the  commission  of  certain
       offences and the different levels of harm which would  be  caused  if
       one or other of those risks eventuate  (see  in  particular  [13]  of
       Judge Plimmer's decision).

  THE EVIDENCE AND SUBMISSIONS

   13. I have before  me  the  Respondent's  bundle  to  which  I  refer  as
       necessary below as [RB/xx].   I  also  have  the  full  PNC  printout
       relating to the Appellant.  The Appellant has  written  a  number  of
       letters setting out his  case  to  which  I  have  regard.   He  also
       eloquently set out his case orally at the hearing  before  me  and  I
       have taken into account what he said.   The  Appellant  has  produced
       some documents and he also produced  a  small  number  of  additional
       documents at the hearing which were adduced without objection  by  Mr
       Kotas and to which I refer below as relevant.

   14. Before I turn to the evidence before me, I begin by noting the  basis
       on which errors of law were found as appears at [11], [16]  and  [17]
       of Judge Plimmer's decision.  Judge Plimmer found that  Judge  Landes
       had failed adequately to reason her finding that the Appellant had no
       desire to have sexual contact with children (and/or that there is  no
       risk that he would have such desire in the  future)  and  that  Judge
       Landes failed to carry out a combined risk assessment, taking account
       not only of the likelihood of further risk  occurring  but  also  the
       nature and seriousness of the  risk  should  that  eventuate  (having
       particular regard to the nature of the most recent offences).   Judge
       Plimmer did not preserve any findings made by Judge Landes.

  The Appellant's Oral Evidence/Submissions

   15. The Appellant represented himself and  I  have  therefore  taken  his
       submissions both as such and also as his evidence.  He was not cross-
       examined. Although as Mr Kotas pointed out, when an appellant  is  in
       person it is difficult to ascertain what is submission  and  what  is
       evidence, he confirmed that he  had  no  need  to  cross-examine  the
       Appellant.  Although the Appellant said that he was disadvantaged  by
       the lack of representation, he spoke eloquently (in English)  and  at
       some length in submissions.  I have regard to everything he said.  He
       began by noting that the Respondent had abandoned some of the reasons
       given in the decision under appeal for deporting him.  The focus  now
       is on risk of return and  rehabilitation.   Those  were  the  matters
       which he addressed.

   16. The Appellant said that his portrayal as a dangerous  individual  did
       not tell the whole story.  He accepted that he had been involved with
       drugs.  He said though that being involved  with  drugs  did  not  of
       itself mean that a person was of bad character.  He  had  not  become
       addicted to drugs because he was bad but because of  his  social  and
       health background.

   17. In that regard, the Appellant said that he suffered from anxiety.  He
       struggled with his self-confidence  and  had  considered  himself  an
       unworthy individual.  He came to this country drug-free but "was  not
       right emotionally" and had turned to drugs to get  him  through.   He
       went downhill and became addicted to crystal meths.  Support for drug
       addicts had been closed due to austerity measures  and  he  therefore
       "disconnected from society".  There is no medical report relating  to
       the  Appellant's  mental  health.   There  is  confirmation  in   the
       Respondent's bundle that the Appellant is HIV+ for which he  receives
       treatment and that he has also been diagnosed with hepatitis C.

   18. The Appellant accepted that he had made "wrong judgements" which  led
       to his offending.  The Appellant also accepted  that,  following  his
       last release, he had relapsed.  However, he said that curing  oneself
       of drug  addiction  does  not  "happen  overnight"  or  without  some
       relapses.  Support was needed to cure  the  addiction.   He  had  not
       intended to use drugs when he was last released.   However,  that  he
       had turned back to drugs was a "learning opportunity" and a "test run
       for the future". He had "not been able to face life" at that time but
       that was due to his drug addiction.

   19. What had changed on this occasion was that he had support  whilst  in
       prison and he now had the  "tools  to  avoid"  re-addiction.   He  is
       subject to mandatory drugs tests which have all  been  negative.   He
       said that drugs  are  freely  available  in  prison  and  immigration
       detention and he would have found them if he  wanted  them.   He  had
       however been drug-free for 23 months.  He pointed out that he had not
       had the opportunity to show that he had changed.  He could  not  test
       himself as to his ability to remain  drug-free  because  he  remained
       detained and had been kept in detention for nine  months  beyond  the
       custodial part of his sentence.

   20. During his current sentence, the Appellant said that he  had  engaged
       with substance misuse courses and could now identify  triggers  which
       would lead to a relapse.  He had learnt coping strategies.

   21. The Appellant also said that he had now identified  possible  reasons
       why he had become addicted.  These  were  signposted  to  his  mental
       health issues, in particular his anxiety.  As  an  example,  he  said
       that two years ago he would not have been able to  speak  as  he  was
       doing in court.  He was still anxious but was much  better.   He  had
       undergone one to one sessions and cognitive behavioural therapy.

   22. The  Appellant  denied  that  he  had  not  addressed  his  offending
       behaviour.  He directed my attention to the OASys  report  where  the
       supervisor had praised his enthusiastic approach and  willingness  to
       take courses.  He had a meeting with his probation officer  at  which
       he had agreed that there were two  things  he  needed  to  address  -
       mental health issues and drug use.  After release, the Appellant said
       that he intended to undertake a victim awareness  course.   None  was
       available in prison.

   23. The Appellant referred to the Respondent's reasons for deporting  him
       and to the matters in Schedule 1 to the  EEA  Regulations  which  she
       said were relevant to his case.   He  pointed  out  that  Schedule  1
       indicated that it was less  likely  to  be  proportionate  to  deport
       someone who could show that they had reformed or  rehabilitated.   He
       "had no interest in offending; he never had."

   24. The Appellant also pointed out that he had  behaved  well  whilst  in
       prison.  He was respectful of the rules  and  had  no  warnings.   He
       worked with and had gained the trust of prison officers.  He was  now
       allowed to work unsupervised and between wings.

   25. As to the sexual nature of his most recent  offences,  the  Appellant
       said that this was not in his nature.   He  said  that  he  had  seen
       prisoners sexually harassing female  officers  and  grooming  younger
       offenders and had reported such  incidents.   He  referred  me  to  a
       leaflet which he handed in during the hearing which referred  to  him
       having done so.  The Appellant accepted that he had made an error  of
       judgement, but he would not harm anyone  and  the  thought  of  doing
       anything like that "made him sick".

   26. The Appellant said that the Crown Court Judge had accepted that there
       were 250 different cameras on the internet  platform  and  there  was
       only one showing inappropriate content and no way of  knowing  if  he
       was watching it.  He said that the  other  recordings  did  not  show
       inappropriate material.  I did not fully understand this  submission.
       The sentencing remarks as appear at [RB/E1-6] are  obviously  limited
       to a discussion of sentence as the Appellant pleaded  guilty  to  the
       offences.  However, the sentencing Judge did note that he took  "full
       account of the fact that there are a relatively small number of items
       unlike many cases, but the pictures themselves show a great  deal  of
       penetrative sex amongst young children.  Some of these  children  are
       very young." I also note the  sentencing  Judge's  remarks  accepting
       that "there was no positive attempt or desire to persuade others  not
       interested in videos such as these to view them".  However,  he  went
       on to point out that "group activity like this  does  encourage  this
       practice and causes more children to suffer".

   27. The Appellant pointed out that the Criminal Court Judge had  assessed
       the seriousness of the offence and sentenced him to 28  months.   The
       Appellant said this was "two months less than usual".  The sentencing
       remarks show that the starting point  was  42  months  but  that  the
       Appellant was given full credit for his guilty plea, leading  to  the
       sentence.  He also pointed out that he was categorised as a  Category
       C prisoner and that his probation officer thought that basic  licence
       conditions were enough.  The Appellant is categorised as MAPPA  level
       1 because of the nature of his offence and  he  cannot  therefore  be
       housed in approved premises.  He says that  he  would  not  have  any
       interaction with children. He also said  that  because  he  would  be
       subject to a harm prevention order and would have  to  sign  the  sex
       offenders  register,  those   measures   would   provide   sufficient
       prevention and safeguarding to reduce the risk of reoffending and the
       possibility of harm.

   28. As to the risk of reoffending, the Appellant pointed  out  that  this
       was said to be 11% over two years.  He has asked for  a  reassessment
       (confirmed by his documents as sought on 21 October 2019).   He  said
       that it was evident from his presentation in the appeal that  he  was
       able to be employed and had turned his life  around.   He  would  get
       help with employment and establishing himself in  the  community  and
       would engage with society.  He wanted to find a partner.

   29. The Appellant said that he is culturally integrated in  the  UK.   He
       treats the UK as his home.  He supports UK football  teams.   He  has
       adapted to British food.  He likes British comedy.  He said in  short
       that  he  was  not  "one  of  those  from  abroad  who  struggles  to
       communicate and integrate".  He communicated "99%  of  the  time"  in
       English.  He has been in the UK for twelve years.

   30. In conclusion, the Appellant said that he was not a reoffending risk.
        He had rehabilitated.  It would be disproportionate to  deport  him.



  The Respondent's Submissions

   31. In reply, Mr Kotas clarified the issues. The Respondent accepts  that
       the Appellant is permanently  resident  and  that  therefore  serious
       grounds are required to be established.  She also  accepts  that  the
       reasons for deportation  are  confined  to  risk.   That  has  to  be
       assessed  on  a  cumulative  basis,  taking  together  the  risk   of
       reoffending and the harm which would be caused if the  commission  of
       further offences did occur.

   32. Mr Kotas pointed out that the Appellant had reoffended after his last
       allowed appeal.  Although the Appellant had eloquently addressed  the
       reasons for this, Mr Kotas submitted that I should be concerned about
       the following factors:

        a) The Appellant had said that he was "not ready to face  life"  on
           the last occasion.

        b) The Appellant showed  no  understanding  of  the  cause  of  his
           offending.  He said that  he  had  engaged  with  mental  health
           treatment in relation to possible causes and he  says  that  the
           cause was his anxiety.  That  was  however  undermined  to  some
           extent by the OASys report.  There  was  no  medical  report  in
           relation to the Appellant's mental health.

        c) The most recent offences were not only  drug  related  but  also
           child related. The attempt  to  downplay  the  reason  for  such
           material being on his computer was not borne out  by  the  OASys
           report which assessed the reason for  having  the  material  was
           sexual gratification.  There was a medium risk  to  children  in
           the community and a 22% risk of reoffending in that regard.

        d) It was not appropriate to assess the risk on  the  basis  of  it
           being reduced by the harm prevention order and  the  signing  of
           the sex offenders register.  The whole point  of  such  measures
           was to control the risk.  Without that risk, such measures would
           not be necessary.

   33. If I accept  that  the  Appellant  remains  a  genuine,  present  and
       sufficiently serious risk, then Mr  Kotas  said  that  the  issue  of
       proportionality does not arise.   He submitted that the Appellant  is
       a risk and the risk is one of serious harm.  The factors at  (c)  and
       (g) of Schedule 1 are of particular relevance.  The best interest  of
       children is also relevant as is the protection of the public.

   34. If proportionality were to be in issue, Mr Kotas pointed out that the
       Appellant has no partner or other  family  members  in  the  UK.   He
       submitted that there was little prospect of employment.

  Documentary Evidence

   35. I have set out the Appellant's convictions at [3] to [6] above and  I
       do not need to repeat those.  They are confirmed by the PNC printout.



   36. The OASys report in this case dates back to 15  November  2018  ("the
       OASys Report").  That appears at [RB/J1-51]. The  Appellant  said  he
       has asked for an updated assessment but that has not  been  produced.
       As the Appellant points out, because he has not been  released  since
       the last report, the outcome of a further report  might  not  be  any
       different.  However,  a  further  report  would  allow  the  relevant
       authorities to consider the extent to which the risk  has  diminished
       based  on  the  Appellant's  behaviour  in  prison  and  whether  his
       motivation to change is genuine and sustainable.  It is not for me to
       speculate on what the maker of a further report  might  say.   I  can
       consider the case only on the evidence before me.

   37. The circumstances of the child  and  pornographic  offences  and  the
       reasons behind them are set out in considerable detail at  section  2
       of the OASys Report.  Those took place over a  period  from  December
       2015 to April  2017.   In  summary,  the  convictions  were  for  the
       possession of images, in one case an "Extreme Pornographic Image"  of
       a sexual act with a dog, and a  number  of  indecent  photographs  of
       children.  In relation to the  latter,  the  Appellant  had  compiled
       videos and still images of the photographs.  He had also been present
       in a chat room "which was capable of  encouraging  or  assisting  the
       distribution" of indecent images of children.

   38. The Appellant's explanation for the downloading and  storage  of  the
       images was that he intended to report the incidents  to  the  police.
       However, the OASys Report notes that he had not reported them  during
       a period of two years.  He sought to explain this by  the  fact  that
       others in the chat room were aware of his drug use  and  he  did  not
       wish to implicate himself.  That of course does not  explain  why  he
       continued to view the images if, on his own explanation, he would not
       be able to fulfil what he said was his  purpose  in  so  doing.   The
       maker of the OASys Report did  not  accept  his  explanation;  it  is
       described  as  "spurious".   The  offences  were  considered  to   be
       motivated by sexual gratification.  The writer also  noted  that  the
       Appellant said that when he visited the chat room, he was  under  the
       influence of drugs "which he feels acted as a disinhibitor".

   39. Although the maker of the OASys Report accepted that the offences did
       not involve contact, and it is accepted that his  behaviour  was  not
       "manipulative or predatory",  it  is  noted  that  the  children  and
       animals used to make the photographs and videos "would have sustained
       both  physical  and  psychological  trauma  at  the  hands  of  adult
       offenders".  The Appellant  is  said  to  have  demonstrated  "victim
       empathy and remorse".  He also said that he would volunteer  to  help
       children who were survivors of sexual abuse if  that  were  possible.
       Due to the nature of his offence, that option is unlikely to be  open
       to him.

   40. As to the Appellant's circumstances at the time of the  offences,  he
       is described as unemployed, supported financially by his  mother  and
       "over reliant on friends".

   41. Due to the link between the  Appellant's  drug  use  and  the  sexual
       offences, it is also necessary to say something about the Appellant's
       earlier  conviction  even  though,  following  that  conviction,  his
       deportation appeal was allowed.   The  risk  of  further  drug  abuse
       clearly remains relevant.  The  Appellant  was  arrested  in  January
       2013.   A  search  of  his  home   revealed   a   large   amount   of
       methamphetamine, "other  paraphernalia"  and  �9,000  in  cash.   The
       Appellant claimed that some of the money had been brought back from a
       visit to Poland in November 2012.  The Appellant  pleaded  guilty  to
       the charge of possession with intent to supply.  He  had  been  using
       the money to feed his addiction.   As  his  drug  habit  became  more
       expensive, he bought the drugs in larger quantities which "worked out
       cheaper for his friends and himself".  It is noted that the Appellant
       was aware that, by taking  and  supplying  drugs,  he  was  not  only
       killing himself but that "he was  inadvertently  helping  to  destroy
       [his customers] and the wider community".

   42. The OASys Report records  that,  at  that  time,  his  offending  was
       triggered by his lifestyle and accommodation.  He was living in  what
       is described by the Appellant as a "drug den" and was unemployed.

   43. As to employment, the OASys Report records  that  the  Appellant  was
       previously employed in graphic design which would be unsuitable as it
       is computer related.  He  had  also  been  employed  as  a  stockroom
       manager, a chef and a doorman.  He is said not to possess any  formal
       qualifications.  The maker of the OASys Report notes the  Appellant's
       positive attitude towards gaining employment after  release.   It  is
       said that the Appellant  was  "very  keen"  to  undertake  vocational
       courses whilst in prison although I was not shown any  evidence  that
       he has done so or obtained  any  qualifications.   The  OASys  Report
       records the need for the Appellant to be kept busy to avoid a relapse
       into drug addiction.

   44. The OASys Report also sets out  details  of  the  Appellant's  family
       relationships.  He is said to  have  a  good  relationship  with  his
       mother who sends money to him.  That is confirmed in evidence by  her
       in a letter where she says that she "was supporting him  financially"
       between 2014 and 2018 to prevent  him  resorting  to  crime  to  find
       money.  The Appellant's mother  lives  in  Warsaw.   The  Appellant's
       father is dead.  The Appellant attributes his addictions  and  mental
       health problems to some extent on the behaviour of his father who  is
       said  to  have  been  an  alcoholic  and  physically  abusive.    The
       Appellant reports that he has not had a meaningful relationship  with
       a partner for about ten years.  Before he came to the UK, he was in a
       relationship with another man for five years  but  reports  that  the
       relationship was "toxic". All of the  Appellant's  associates  before
       going to prison are said to be drug users.

   45. The OASys Report assesses that the Appellant poses "a medium risk  of
       serious harm to children in the community" but  a  low  risk  in  all
       other areas.  The assessed probability of proven reoffending is 6% in
       the first year and 11% in the second year based on an equivalent risk
       of proven violent-type offending and 13%/22%  probability  of  proven
       non-violent reoffending.  A medium risk is assessed where  there  are
       "identifiable indicators of risk of serious harm.  The  offender  has
       the potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely to do  so  unless
       there is a change in circumstances,  for  example,  failure  to  take
       medication, loss of accommodation, relationship  breakdown,  drug  or
       alcohol misuse".  In this  case,  the  obvious  potential  change  in
       circumstance is further drug misuse.

   46. The summary of the risk appears at section 10 of the OASys Report  as
       follows:

           "Who is at risk?

           Mr Nowak currently poses a low risk as he  is  in  custody.   Mr
           Nowak's future risk is to children and animals that are  victims
           of sexual abuse shared on line in the community.  Mr Nowak is  a
           risk to himself and his peer group should he partake in the  use
           of or dealing in narcotics once released into the community.

           What is the nature of the risk?

           Mr Nowak poses a low risk as he is currently  in  custody.   The
           nature of the risk in the community is serious as  Mr  Nowak  is
           supplying the demand for sexual abuse images on line.  The  long
           term effects of sexual abuse are  damaging  to  the  victims  on
           emotional, physical and psychological level.  Mr Nowak  has  not
           committed a contact offence if he were to continue his  interest
           in child abuse this may escalate  to  a  contact  offence.   The
           nature of the risk in the community is serious again as Mr Nowak
           was a daily drugs user prior to custody who  supplied  drugs  to
           his friends causing damage to the local community.

           When is the risk likely to be greatest?

           Mr Nowak is currently in custody so poses a low risk.   However,
           there is a chance that Mr Nowak could have access to child abuse
           images as he is currently located in a sex offender prison.   Mr
           Nowak's risk is likely to be greatest if he begins to  associate
           with his former peer group, or is unemployed and as a result  is
           bored so turns to narcotics.

           What circumstances are likely to increase risk?

           Mr Nowak poses a low risk as he is  currently  in  custody.   Mr
           Nowak's risk of  serious  harm  is  likely  to  increase  if  he
           participates in  drug  use.   Mr  Nowak  is  keen  to  cure  his
           addiction and is working to combat his addiction in custody.  Mr
           Nowak is aware that his peer group in the community was a  major
           contributor to his drug use,  as  well  as  lack  of  purposeful
           employment.  If he lacks getting  purposeful  employment  or  he
           begins to use drugs, associate with other  drug  users  and  has
           unmonitored use of the internet.

           What factors are likely to reduce the risk?...

           Completion  of  offending  behaviour  interventions  whilst   in
           custody to address the risk  of  sexual  offending.   Compliance
           with sexual offending notification requirements to  ensure  full
           police monitoring of community residency  and  its  suitability.
           MAPPA level 1 management of potential risk factors on  a  single
           agency basis  to  ensure  effective  risk  management  currently
           assessed as medium risk to children in  the  community.   Robust
           risk management plan on release and licence conditions that seek
           to minimise risk factors.  Full  engagement  with  professionals
           whilst in custody  and  on  release  to  ensure  meaningful  and
           effective   sentence   management,   to   understand   offending
           behaviour, triggers and warning signs.  Accepting responsibility
           for offending  behaviour  and  developing  victim  awareness  to
           prevent  further  offending.    Challenging   distorted   sexual
           thinking and behaviour."

   47. The Appellant produced at the  hearing  a  small  bundle  of  updated
       evidence which I permitted to be adduced in fairness to the Appellant
       (as he is detained and in person).  That  consists  in  the  main  of
       character  references.   Prison  Officer   Stradling   commends   the
       Appellant's as a considerate and positive individual  always  willing
       to help others.  Other inmates also speak of the help  he  has  given
       them and of the respect he has shown to officers and  inmates  alike.
       The  Appellant   has   offered   his   services   as   a   healthcare
       representative.  His  "kind,  caring,  non-judgemental  approach"  is
       commented upon.

   48. I also have within that bundle evidence from Ms  Steiger,  a  Drug  &
       Alcohol Recovery Case Manager employed by Phoenix Futures  Integrated
       Substance Misuse Team.  She confirms  that  the  Appellant  has  been
       meeting with  her  periodically  since  April  2018.   She  says  the
       following:

            "... We have discussed his previous drug use and his  aims  for
           the future.   He  informs  me  that  his  intent  is  to  remain
           abstinent and we have been working on ways to achieve this.   He
           also informed me that he had been in contact with community drug
           services before his sentencing as he had decided to make changes
           in his life.  Mr Nowak has been completing work on his substance
           misuse, awareness, ways to deal  with  cravings,  managing  high
           risk situations and motivation to change.  He has also looked at
           emotional management and ways  to  address  his  anxieties.   Mr
           Nowak has presented as highly motivated to make changes and  has
           been setting goals for his future.  He has been  engaging  well,
           both with ISMT and with the prison regime.  He  currently  works
           as  the  Healthcare  trainer  and  this   is   a   position   of
           responsibility."

   49. In similar vein, an undated letter from  the  Mental  Health  Inreach
       Team at the prison confirms that that Appellant has been  undertaking
       1-1 work with that team in order to  address  his  difficulties  with
       anxiety and low mood.  There is also a letter dated 11  October  2018
       indicating that, following a triage assessment, he has been placed on
       a waiting list for the  Anxiety  Management  Group.   However,  those
       letters say nothing about what progress has been  made.   Nor,  as  I
       have already noted, is there any medical report providing any  formal
       diagnosis of  the  Appellant's  mental  health  condition  and,  more
       importantly for my purposes, the  impact  of  that  on  his  risk  of
       reoffending and the risk of resumed or continuing addiction to  drugs
       which forms a large part of the basis for the risk of reoffending.

   50. In terms of the Appellant's risk following release, the Appellant has
       provided a letter from his Probation Services  Officer,  Ms  Naraine.
       She indicates that her manager has informed her  that  the  Appellant
       cannot be housed by the Probation Service as he  is  not  allowed  to
       access public funds and cannot be housed in Approved Premises because
       his risk level does not meet the criteria.  The Home Office  is  also
       unable to accommodate him because of the type of offence and  because
       the Appellant is a MAPPA case based on the type of offence.

   51. Finally, the Appellant has produced a newsletter entitled "One Voice"
       produced within the prison as part of a survey in  August-  September
       2018.  It appears from the content that the purpose of the newsletter
       is to  identify  and  respond  to  LGBTQ+  issues.   The  Appellant's
       contribution appears at page [15] as follows:

           "We have had a lot of positive feedback about the events we held
           for Pride month.  However, one of  our  reps,  Adam  Nowak,  has
           raised concerns about 'Call Me By Your Name', which we felt were
           worth opening up to debate.

           Essentially, his concern surrounds the suitability of showing  a
           film, which depicts a relationship between an adult male  and  a
           teenager.  His concerns were twofold: Is it  appropriate,  in  a
           sex offenders' prison, to show  intimate  relations  between  an
           adult and a teenager, given some of the offences people are here
           for?  (With  a  possibility,   he   suggests,   of   stimulating
           inappropriate fantasies).  Secondly, is this the message we want
           to be using to promote Pride to non-LGBTQ+ residents who come to
           our events?

           He argues that there are more  suitable  films  to  show,  which
           demonstrate the struggles and determination shown by the  LGBTQ+
           community over the years, to get us to where we are  in  today's
           society.  He also has serious concerns about how our film choice
           may not be helpful in the rehabilitation of certain  people  and
           could actually be damaging in some instances.  He says that  the
           work of promoting understanding and acceptance of LGBTQ+  people
           is already made more difficult in prison by  virtue  of  factors
           such as poor education levels, high  numbers  of  mental  health
           issues and longstanding  stereotypes.   For  these  reasons,  he
           feels strongly that extra attention must be paid  to  the  films
           shown so that we do not perpetuate misconceptions and don't miss
           a great opportunity to further our cause."

       I note for completeness from what follows that the characters in  the
       film are said to be seventeen and twenty-four and that "[t]here is no
       suggestion  of  coercion,  grooming  or  illegality  at  any   time".
       However, the Appellant evidently relies on this as  showing  that  he
       would not have committed the offences he did for  sexual  reasons  as
       the  OASys  report  suggests  and  that  this   represents   and   is
       corroborative of his view of such activity.

   52. As I have already noted,  the  Appellant's  previous  appeal  against
       deportation was allowed by the Tribunal.  The Tribunal's decision was
       promulgated on 19 May 2015 and appears at [RB/C1-12].  At that  time,
       the likelihood of reconviction was similarly assessed as low and  the
       Appellant was also said to be a medium risk of serious harm (although
       his Probation Service Officer had since reassessed him as at low risk
       of serious harm).  Then as now, the Appellant recognised the negative
       impact of his drug addiction and confirmed that "he had  now  changed
       for the better".   He had not used drugs since  his  arrest  and  was
       said to have the support of the  Probation  Service;  "there  was  no
       reason for  things  to  go  wrong  again".   Doubtless  the  Tribunal
       accepted the Appellant's evidence in that regard as the  Judge  found
       that the Appellant did not pose a sufficient risk.

  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

  Serious Grounds; Genuine, Present and Sufficiently Serious Threat

   53. In light of the Appellant's permanent residence, the  Respondent  has
       to show that there are serious grounds for deporting the Appellant to
       Poland.  My assessment of that issue requires me  first  to  consider
       whether there are serious grounds for believing  that  the  Appellant
       remains a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.   The
       assessment of the threat must be based on  the  Appellant's  personal
       conduct and does not include factors such as deterrence.   Obviously,
       whilst what I have to assess is whether the threat is a present  one,
       the Appellant's past actions are or may be  highly  material  to  his
       propensity to reoffend.

   54. I begin with the Appellant's first offence.  As I have noted  before,
       based on  the  Tribunal's  decision,  then,  as  now,  the  Appellant
       professed to have stopped using drugs and as having no  intention  to
       resume his drug use.  However, within months of  that  decision,  the
       offences of which the Appellant was later convicted began.   Although
       it is not clear from the PNC printout when he  started  taking  drugs
       again, since his first internet offence  was  in  December  2015  and
       those offences were said to  be  committed  under  the  influence  of
       drugs, it is reasonable to infer  that  the  Appellant  had  by  then
       resumed his drug abuse.  That was notwithstanding the  evidence  from
       his mother that between 2014 and 2018  she  was  providing  him  with
       financial support to ensure that he did not turn to drugs.  There  is
       no evidence that the Appellant was able to find employment again  and
       he returned to his previous associates.

   55. Turning then to the index offences, the sexual offences are  said  to
       have occurred because of the Appellant's drug abuse which enabled the
       loss of his inhibitions.  The first question therefore is whether the
       Appellant is likely to remain abstinent from drugs on  this  occasion
       following release when he did not do so previously.

   56. The Appellant says that the difference this time is that he has  been
       supported whilst in prison and will be supported  following  release.
       However, the previous  Tribunal  decision  also  indicates  that  the
       Appellant was receiving support  at  that  time  from  the  Probation
       Service but that did not prevent him becoming readdicted.  I am  also
       very concerned by the Appellant's  own  evidence  that,  as  he  said
       himself, rehabilitation from drug abuse does not occur overnight  and
       not without some relapses.

   57. I accept that the Appellant is genuinely motivated  to  abstain  from
       drugs and has undertaken some courses, but the  question  is  whether
       the position on release will be any different  to  that  which  arose
       when he was released on the last occasion.  He is on his own evidence
       a drug addict who has been unable to remain abstinent on release into
       the community.

   58. Whilst I accept that the Appellant has sought help with his addiction
       and the causes of it, I am unpersuaded  on  that  evidence  that  the
       Appellant will not return to drugs.  As the OASys Report makes clear,
       the early causes of his drug addiction may have been his  upbringing,
       but he tends to turn to drugs if he is not  "purposefully  employed".
       In that regard, although the Appellant said that he wished to undergo
       vocational courses whilst in prison, I have no evidence that  he  has
       done so or, more importantly, that he will be able to find employment
       following his release. I of course appreciate that the Appellant  can
       only undergo such courses as are made available to him and  there  is
       evidence that he has  participated  fully  in  activities  whilst  in
       prison which may give him some skills which he can utilise  following
       release.  However, although  he  may  have  some  qualifications  and
       experience which would serve to obtain employment,  there  is  little
       evidence that he is likely to  find  a  job  on  release.    That  is
       particularly concerning given the link in the  OASys  Report  between
       lack of employment and drug abuse.

   59. The assessment of the  medium  risk  which  the  Appellant  poses  to
       children is based  on  the  potential  for  the  Appellant  to  cause
       "serious harm" if he returns to his activities.   That  potential  is
       unlikely to occur without a change in circumstances but one of  those
       changes is drug misuse.  That is the more so in this case  given  the
       evident link between the sexual offences and drug misuse.

   60. Whilst I accept that the Appellant expressed empathy  for  the  child
       victims involved in the offences, and a  commitment  to  help  if  he
       could, I heard very little from  the  Appellant  during  the  hearing
       about these offences.  He  still  says  that  such  offences  against
       children make him feel sick which suggests that  he  still  does  not
       accept his guilt for these offences.  That is concerning.  The writer
       of the  OASys  Report  reaches  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
       committed the offences for "sexual gratification".

   61. If he returns to drugs, therefore, the Appellant has  the  very  real
       potential to return to these sorts of offences.  I give little weight
       to the material on which the Appellant relied as  intending  to  show
       that he has no interest in children in this way.  The film  to  which
       he  objected  did  not  involve  young  children  (according  to  the
       newsletter).  Further, it is the Appellant's continuing denial of his
       guilt in the commission of the previous offences which  I  find  most
       concerning.  If anything, his  submissions  reinforce  that  lack  of
       acceptance which in turn is relevant to future risk.

   62. Whilst I accept that the offences  were  not  ones  involving  direct
       contact with the child victims, the OASys Report notes the  potential
       for this to occur  were  the  Appellant's  interest  in  children  to
       escalate.  Even if further offences were limited to indirect  contact
       of the nature of the previous offences, those still  involve  serious
       harm to children who are abused in order to provide the images  which
       the Appellant downloaded and reproduced.

   63. I do not accept the Appellant's  submission  that,  in  weighing  the
       risk, I should  take  into  account  the  fact  of  the  sexual  harm
       prevention order and the placing of  him  on  the  sexual  offenders'
       register.  Those measures are intended to safeguard  against  further
       risk but, if anything, reinforce the fact that such risk continues.

   64. I accept that, on the evidence of the OASys Report, the Appellant  is
       of low risk of reoffending, based on the general  risk.   The  proven
       risk of non-violent reoffending is itself  higher  than  the  overall
       risk and nearly one in four over a period of two years.  I accept the
       Respondent's submission that  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  past
       offending indicates that, if he were to offend again, particularly in
       the commission of similar sexual offences, the consequences  of  harm
       could be very serious indeed.

   65. In light of  my  conclusions  about  the  very  real  risk  that  the
       Appellant will again turn to drugs on release and  the  link  between
       his drug abuse and the sexual offences, I am satisfied that there are
       serious grounds for believing that the  Appellant  poses  a  genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious risk to the fundamental interests of
       society.  That risk is the more acute because of the vulnerability of
       the particular sector  of  society  impacted  by  that  risk,  namely
       children who are abused for the  purposes  of  providing  the  images
       which the Appellant downloaded.

   66. I do not consider that the Appellant's  prospects  of  rehabilitation
       will be any less if returned to Poland.  His mother still lives there
       and still supports him, as evidenced by the  financial  contributions
       which she has sent him  whilst  he  has  been  in  the  UK.   On  the
       Appellant's own evidence, his drugs problems did not start  until  he
       came to the UK. I received no evidence to suggest that he is any more
       or less likely to resort to drugs in Poland but on  the  other  hand,
       his past history  would  indicate  that  he  may  be  able  to  avoid
       returning to his  addiction  there.    He  would  be  free  from  his
       previous associates in the UK and would have family  support  to  aid
       rehabilitation.

   67. Given my conclusions as to risk, I do not  need  to  say  much  about
       proportionality.  For completeness, however, I do so briefly.   There
       is evidence that the  Appellant  has  adopted  the  English  culture.
       However, on his  own  evidence,  he  has  become  "disconnected  from
       society" in certain periods due to his drug addiction.  Although  the
       Appellant has been in the UK for over twelve  years,  at  least  four
       years of that time has been spent in detention.   Although  I  accept
       that  the  Appellant  has  integrated  in  the  UK  to  some  extent,
       particularly at times when  he  has  been  drug  free,  there  is  no
       evidence that he has any partner or other family connections  in  the
       UK. There is no evidence from friends who he  has  made  outside  the
       prison environment.  His previous associates are noted  to  be  other
       drug users.  Conversely, he has family in the form of his  mother  in
       Poland.  Although the  Appellant  has  health  issues,  there  is  no
       evidence that those could not be treated in Poland in the same way as
       they are here.   For  those  reasons,  the  decision  to  deport  the
       Appellant is not disproportionate.

  CONCLUSION

   68. For the foregoing reasons, the Appellant's appeal  fails.  There  are
       serious grounds justifying the Appellant's deportation.  He  poses  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to public policy and
       public security.

  DECISION

    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.




    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
    Dated: 7 February 2020

                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00008/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     | 9 October 2019                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ADAM NOWAK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Landes, sent on 17 June  2019,  in  which
       she allowed the appeal  of  the  respondent,  a  Polish  citizen  and
       therefore EEA citizen, against a decision dated 13 December  2019  to
       deport him pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regulations').



Background

    2. On  27  March  2013,  the  respondent  was  sentenced  to  30  months
       imprisonment for possession of class A drugs with intent  to  supply.
       At that time the respondent had a serious addiction to Class A  drugs
       and was involved in their supply in order to  fund  his  drug  habit.
       The respondent completed his sentence of imprisonment in  June  2014.
       In a decision dated 19 May 2015, FTT Judge Boardman  considered  that
       the respondent was 'drug-free'  and  allowed  his  appeal  against  a
       decision to deport him, on the basis that  the  SSHD  was  unable  to
       displace the 'serious  grounds'  test.   By  the  end  of  2015,  the
       respondent had once again become a regular user of Class A drugs.  On
       22 February 2018 and 12 June 2018, he  was  sentenced  to  28  months
       imprisonment and four weeks imprisonment respectively, having pleaded
       guilty to a series of offences which took place between  15  December
       2015 and 4 November 2017.  These  included:  possession  of  indecent
       images  of  children;  intentionally  encouraging  /  assisting   the
       distribution of indecent images of children;  possession  of  extreme
       pornographic images of sexual activity with  animals;  possession  of
       Class A drugs.

FTT's decision

    3. Judge Landes concluded that although there was a  meaningful  (albeit
       low) risk of the respondent reoffending such as to pose a  threat  to
       the fundamental interests of society, he did not pose a 'sufficiently
       serious' threat in order to meet  the  'serious  grounds'  of  public
       policy threshold.  It was not in dispute that the respondent acquired
       permanent residence but had not been resident for  the  requisite  10
       years, in order for the 'imperative grounds' test to apply.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

    4. In wide-ranging grounds of appeal,  the  SSHD  appealed  against  the
       Judge Landes' decision.  The FTT  refused  permission  to  appeal  in
       robust terms but this was granted by the UT.

    5. At the hearing before me, Mr Lindsay acknowledged that when the FTT's
       decision is read as a whole, it is carefully  drafted,  comprehensive
       and detailed.  He nonetheless maintained that the FTT erred in law in
       three material respects and identified three grounds from the written
       grounds of appeal.

    6. The respondent relied upon a clearly drafted rule 24 notice, in which
       he invited me to uphold the FTT's decision.  As he was unrepresented,
       I summarised each of the three grounds  of  appeal  that  Mr  Lindsay
       relied upon and gave the respondent a  full  opportunity  to  address
       each.  The respondent was able to articulate his position in relation
       to each carefully and  clearly.   He  maintained  he  had  no  sexual
       interest in children and that the FTT  had  taken  into  account  all
       relevant matters before reaching its decision.

    7. After hearing submissions from both parties, I reserved my  decision.
       Both parties agreed that in the event that I found there was an error
       of law, the decision should be remade  by  the  UT  at  an  adjourned
       hearing, in order to provide the respondent with  an  opportunity  to
       provide updated evidence from the probation service on  his  risk  to
       the public.

Error of law discussion

    8. Mr Lindsay accepted that some of the SSHD's written grounds of appeal
       do no  more  than  disagree  with  the  FTT's  factual  findings  and
       assessment  of  risk,  and  for  this  reason  deliberately  withdrew
       reliance upon certain paragraphs in the written grounds of appeal and
       recast the remaining paragraphs in order to support three grounds  of
       appeal.  I am satisfied that each of these grounds  is  to  be  found
       (albeit not as clearly as articulated by Mr Lindsay) in  the  written
       grounds of appeal and deal with each of these below.

    9. Mr Lindsay also correctly  conceded  that  the  submission  that  the
       respondent has not demonstrated acceptance of responsibility for  his
       offending by appealing the length of sentence awarded to the Court of
       Appeal is without any merit.  As the respondent pointed  out  in  his
       rule 24 notice, an appeal against  the  length  of  sentence  is  not
       inconsistent  with  fully  accepting  guilt  and  responsibility  for
       offending.

  Ground 1

   10. Mr Lindsay submitted that the  FTT's  acceptance  at  [55]  that  the
       respondent has "no desire to have sexual contact  with  children"  is
       inconsistent with the FTT's  earlier  acceptance  at  [48]  that  his
       explanation for having indecent images of children on his computer is
       spurious.  The FTT accepted the probation officer's assessment in the
       pre-sentence report dated 22  February  2018  that  the  respondent's
       motivation was sexual gratification.  Mr Lindsay invited me  to  find
       that the former finding is inadequately reasoned and at odds with the
       latter finding.

   11. The FTT also accepted at [48], the evidence of the probation  officer
       that the respondent's behaviour was not manipulative or predatory and
       there were no contact offences.  This is of  course  based  upon  the
       respondent's past behaviour  and  his  own  self-disclosure.   As  Mr
       Lindsay pointed out, the respondent's self-disclosure on  this  issue
       is not necessarily reliable, because the FTT  acknowledged  that  his
       denial of sexual gratification motivation was spurious.  It does  not
       necessarily follow that past proven behaviour  of  non-contact  means
       that there is no future risk  of  contact.   As  the  author  of  the
       Offender Assessment  System  report  dated  15  November  2018  ('the
       OASYS'), states at R10.2: "Mr  Nowak  has  not  committed  a  contact
       offence.  If he were to continue his interest in child abuse this may
       escalate to a contact offence." In these circumstances, the  FTT  was
       obliged to explain why it accepted at [55] that the respondent has no
       desire  to  have  sexual  contact  with  children  or  the   implicit
       acceptance  that  there  is  no  risk  of  this.    The   intervening
       paragraphs, particularly [50-54] address  the  respondent's  risk  of
       returning to using illegal drugs and  do  not  address  his  risk  of
       accessing indecent images of children or having sexual  contact  with
       children.  The FTT has noted the evidence of  the  probation  officer
       that the respondent only looked at child pornography whilst under the
       influence of drugs but has not addressed the possibility of the  risk
       of escalation.  I therefore accept  the  submission  that  the  FTT's
       finding that this respondent has no desire  to  have  sexual  contact
       with children is inadequately reasoned.

  Ground 2

   12. Mr Lindsay submitted that the FTT did not take into account the  full
       extent of the manner in which the respondent posed a  threat  to  the
       fundamental interests of society.  He pointed out that this is a case
       in which the respondent's personal conduct and risk is such  that  it
       will affect more than one of the fundamental interests of society for
       the purposes of Schedule 1(7) of the 2016 Regulations.   At [55]  the
       FTT made it clear that the respondent's  behaviour  "is  certainly  a
       threat to the fundamental interests of  society"  and  made  specific
       reference to [24] of the SSHD's decision letter.  This sets out  five
       aspects of Schedule 1, paragraph 7.  The FTT appears to have accepted
       the SSHD's position that  the  respondent's  personal  conduct  is  a
       threat to many aspects of the matters identified by the SSHD as being
       fundamental interests of society.   I  am  satisfied  that  when  the
       decision is read as a whole the FTT did not leave out of account  the
       fact that the respondent posed a threat to many  of  the  fundamental
       interests of British society.

  Ground 3

   13. Mr Lindsay submitted that the FTT failed to  take  into  account  the
       overall risk in  relation  to  the  commission  of  similar  offences
       against children and the wider public, in the  sense  of  taking  the
       probability of re-offending in combination  with  the  likelihood  of
       serious harmful effects if it occurred - see [35]  of  Kamki  v  SSHD
       [2017] EWCA Civ 1715. I  accept  that  when  assessing  risk  in  the
       context of determining whether there are 'serious grounds' of  public
       policy for the purposes of regulation 27(3) of the  2016  Regulations
       or whether the  accepted  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of
       society is a 'sufficiently serious'  one  for  the  purposes  of  the
       regulation 27(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations, the FTT was  obliged  to
       consider risk in the round.  In other words, the FTT was required  to
       balance the risk of re-offending with the nature and  extent  of  the
       harm that would be caused as a result of the  commission  of  further
       offences.  That follows logically.  A low risk of  re-offending  that
       will cause relatively minor harm to one victim can  be  distinguished
       from a low risk of reoffending that will cause very serious harm to a
       wide group of potential victims.

   14. As the respondent pointed out to me, the FTT  gave  detailed  reasons
       for  accepting  the  conclusions  reached  in  the  OASYS  that   the
       respondent's risk of re-offending can be categorised as  'low'  (22%)
       notwithstanding his previous offending at [42-54].  In reaching  that
       conclusion, the FTT accepted the OGP score and overall assessment  in
       the OASYS to be reliable.  The FTT also accepted that notwithstanding
       the respondent's  failure  to  remain  'drug-free'  after  his  first
       release from prison, there were now better prospects of him remaining
       drug-free.  The FTT was entirely aware that the  respondent  had  not
       proven himself outside of prison where he remained, but accepted that
       there would be adequate safeguards and  positive  features  upon  his
       release such as to justify the 22%  risk  of  re-offending.   Pausing
       there, that assessment is based upon the FTT's inadequately  reasoned
       finding that the respondent has no desire to have sexual contact with
       children and the implicit acceptance that there is  no  risk  of  re-
       offending involving contact with children -  see  the  discussion  in
       relation to ground one above.  Even assuming that I  am  wrong  about
       this, I am satisfied that the  FTT's  decision  contains  a  discrete
       error of law in that there  has  a  been  a  failure  to  assess  the
       composite risk in the light of the risk of re-offending together with
       the seriousness of the likely harm.  The  FTT  makes  clear  findings
       regarding the  risk  of  re-offending  at  [42-54]  and  [56-58]  and
       outlines the nature of the threat, if the respondent offends again at
       [55] and [57], but the  FTT  has  not  undertaken  a  composite  risk
       assessment that draws all these matters together.

   15. I have considered whether a composite  risk  assessment  is  implicit
       when the decision is read as a whole.  However, the  FTT  appears  to
       have focussed upon two discrete assessments: first, the risk  of  re-
       offending and second, the harm  that  will  be  caused  if  there  is
       further offending without marrying the  two  together  and  assessing
       composite risk.  Indeed, the FTT emphasised at [56] that it  is  only
       if the respondent re-offends that he  will  be  a  threat.   This  is
       reflected at [62] wherein the FTT highlights that  the  risk  of  re-
       offending  and  "therefore"  or  "thereby"  causing   harm   is   not
       "significant enough" or not  "so  great"  that  it  is  justified  by
       reference to the 'serious grounds' test.  The FTT has not gone on  to
       assess risk by reference to a third and necessary step: combining the
       risk of re-offending with the level of likely harm.  In other  words,
       the FTT has not directed itself to whether or not the low risk of re-
       offending when combined with the risk of serious harm to children and
       the wider public as a consequence of  the  two  separate  but  inter-
       linked types of propensity to re-offend (use and supply  of  Class  A
       drugs  /  possession  of  indecent   images   motivated   by   sexual
       gratification) is capable of giving  rise  to  'serious  grounds'  of
       public policy or a 'sufficiently serious' threat.

   16. In summary, the particular features of this case  are  such  that  it
       demanded a combined risk assessment:

        a) Although the FTT was prepared to  categorise  the  risk  of  re-
           offending as 'low' at 22% [57], this was at the  higher  end  of
           the 'low' risk banding in the OASYS  report  -  the  'low'  risk
           extending to 33% [49].  As  the  FTT  observed  the  risk  is  a
           'meaningful' one [62] and the chances of reoffending are between
           1 in 4 and 1 in 5 [58].  After all, the FTT  accepted  that  the
           respondent was genuine in his intentions about remaining  'drug-
           free' in the past, yet returned to drugs in the absence of full-
           time employment and anxiety issues [44, 51].  The  FTT  accepted
           that the respondent now has better prospects of remaining  drug-
           free [52] but acknowledged there remain stressors [54].

        b) The OASYS identified the risk of serious  harm  to  children  as
           'medium'.  This is  defined  as  appertaining  to  circumstances
           where 'the offender has the potential to cause serious harm  but
           is unlikely to do so unless there is a change in  circumstances,
           for example...drug or alcohol abuse.'  Relapsing to  drug  abuse
           is a meaningful risk in this case, as recognised by the  FTT  at
           [57].

        c) In addition to there being a risk of serious harm  to  children,
           there is a risk of serious harm  to  adults  by  reason  of  the
           respondent's drugs misuse over an extended period  in  the  past
           (which on his own admission led to him supplying Class  A  drugs
           and possessing indecent images of children) and  the  fact  that
           his  recent  drug-free  period  has  not  been  tested  in   the
           community.  The FTT has not quantified  the  degree  of  serious
           harm vis a vis the respondent's drug habit, but given  its  past
           link to serious harm to others, it is difficult to see  how  the
           potential serious harm is  not  medium  given  the  chance  that
           circumstances may change.

        d) Although the risk of re-offending has been categorised as  'low'
           generally, this risk and the risk  of  serious  harm  is  double
           layered given the dual nature of the respondent's offending.

   17. It follows that in failing to draw these matters together in order to
       assess risk on a composite basis, when determining whether there  are
       'serious grounds' of public policy or a sufficiently  serious  threat
       to the fundamental interests of society, the FTT erred in law.

Conclusion

   18. Although the FTT's decision is carefully drafted and reasoned in many
       respects, I am satisfied that it contains two material errors of  law
       as identified in the discussion above.

Disposal

   19. I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the factual  findings
       required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided,  with  the
       agreement of the parties, that this is  an  appropriate  case  to  be
       remade in the UT, at an adjourned hearing.

Decision

   20. The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.

   21. The decision shall be remade in the UT.

Directions

    1) The SSHD shall file and serve an updated  PNC  sheet  and  any  other
       updated evidence before 4 November 2019.

    2) The respondent shall file and serve all updated  evidence  (including
       as much evidence assessing his risk) before 16 December 2019.

    3) The SSHD shall file and serve a position statement three weeks before
       the hearing.

    4) The respondent shall file and serve an updated position statement one
       week before the hearing.

    5) The hearing shall be listed before any UT judge  on  the  first  date
       after 2 January 2020.  If the respondent remains in detention he must
       be produced at the hearing.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
9 October 2019

