
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00764/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLROYDE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               shahou kharazy
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
The Respondent appeared in person.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 22 April 2014 the Secretary of State for the Home Department made  a
    decision in respect of Mr Kharazy that section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 applies following his  conviction  of  criminal  offences.  Mr
    Kharazy appealed against that decision.  In a decision  promulgated  on
    29 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Colvin  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection  of
    Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).  The Secretary  of  State
    now appeals against that decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Permission for the appeal was granted by a Judge of the Upper  Tribunal
    on 27 March 2015.  This is the judgment of the Tribunal on the  hearing
    of the appeal.

 2. We record that Mr Kharazy has acted in person today.   He  informed  us
    that he would not be able to afford to pay privately for representation
    and he accepted that it would be difficult for him to obtain legal aid.
    He informed us that he wished to  proceed  with  the  hearing.  He  has
    represented himself effectively and has made his submissions with great
    clarity and considerable courtesy.  The appellant  Secretary  of  State
    has been represented by Miss Everett.  We are grateful to both for  the
    assistance they have given us in this case.

 3. Mr Kharazy is now 33 years old. He is a citizen of Iran. He came to the
    United Kingdom illegally on 6 October 2004 and made a claim for asylum.
    At initial screening he said that he was of Kurdish ethnicity. He  said
    that he had been a member of  the  Kurdish  Democratic  Party  of  Iran
    ("KDPI") and had for that reason become a man  wanted  by  the  Iranian
    police.  He asserted that his life would be at risk if he  were  to  be
    returned to Iran.

 4. His asylum claim was refused on the basis that key parts of his account
    were not believed and his claimed fear of persecution was rejected.  Mr
    Kharazy was given leave to appeal against that decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal but on 25 May 2005  that  appeal  was  dismissed.   The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge hearing that appeal found that Mr Kharazy did  not  face
    any real risk of ill-treatment if returned to  Iran.  The  judge  found
    that Mr Kharazy had simply put forward a false story in order to try to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. On 3 June 2005, Mr Kharazy's appeal rights were exhausted and he had no
    entitlement to remain in the United Kingdom.

 6. On 2 December 2010 Mr Kharazy made further representations  in  support
    of his asylum and human rights claim.  He said that he  was  now  in  a
    relationship with Miss Bahar Cayan whom he said he  had  met  in  March
    2009.  He said they had cohabited since August 2010.   Miss  Cayan  for
    her part wrote a letter on 30 November 2010 in which she too said  that
    she had been in a serious relationship with Mr Kharazy for about a year
    and a half and that they planned to marry and to start a family.

 7. On 1 September 2013 Mr Kharazy committed two criminal offences to which
    he pleaded guilty in the Crown Court at Woolwich and for which  he  was
    sentenced on 19 November 2013 to twelve months' imprisonment.   In  his
    sentencing remarks the sentencing judge summarised the offences,  which
    were offences of causing criminal damage (by damaging the front door of
    a public house) and having a bladed article in  a  public  place.   The
    judge indicated that on the night of the offences Mr Kharazy  had  been
    excluded from the public house in question and by his own admission was
    drunk.  He had returned to the  premises  carrying  a  machete  with  a
    sixteen inch blade and was seen brandishing it.  The judge accepted for
    sentencing purposes that  Mr  Kharazy  had  not  intended  directly  to
    threaten  anyone,  but  found  that  those  who  had  seen  Mr  Kharazy
    brandishing the machete would inevitably have felt in  fear.  He  found
    the offence was aggravated by Mr  Kharazy  having  gone  to  fetch  the
    machete before returning to the public  house.   The  judge's  starting
    point for sentence was a term of eighteen months' imprisonment which he
    properly reduced by one-third to  reflect  Mr  Kharazy's  early  guilty
    pleas.

 8. That unfortunately was not the  first  offence  which  Mr  Kharazy  had
    committed in this country.  Between 15 December 2007  and  19  November
    2013, he was convicted on seven occasions of a total of  ten  offences.
    We do, however, acknowledge that none of the offences prior to the  one
    for which he was sentenced on  19  November  2013  were  of  particular
    seriousness and we note Mr Kharazy's  emphatic  assertion  to  us  this
    morning that he has not committed any offence since  his  release  from
    the twelve month sentence of imprisonment.

 9. Having been sentenced to that term of imprisonment  Mr  Kharazy  became
    liable to deportation.   On  22  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State
    notified him of her decision that he would  be  deported.   Mr  Kharazy
    promptly gave notice of appeal.

10. Before Judge Colvin in the First-tier Tribunal,  both  Mr  Kharazy  and
    Miss Cayan gave evidence.  The judge found that they  had  been  living
    together for some four years.  Mr Kharazy's evidence was that they  had
    met in May 2010 and cohabited since the end of that  year.  Miss  Cayan
    similarly gave evidence that the relationship began in  mid-2010.   She
    was therefore, unsurprisingly, cross-examined about her  letter  of  30
    November 2010 to which we have referred.   In  that  regard  the  judge
    noted that Miss Cayan said that she thought the letter had been written
    wrongly and was not an attempt to bolster the claim.

11. A number of documents  were  produced  by  Mr  Kharazy,  including  two
    letters from the KDPI purporting  to  confirm  that  Mr  Kharazy  is  a
    supporter of that  organisation  and  would  risk  persecution  by  the
    Iranian police if he returned to Iran.  The Secretary of  State's  case
    was that those letters were of no value. One was not  even  signed  and
    neither gave any reason as to why Mr Kharazy should be at  risk  if  he
    returned to Iran.

12. Judge Colvin noted that the incident involving the brandishing  of  the
    machete was a serious offence and that the pre-sentence  report  before
    the  court  had  assessed  Mr  Kharazy  as  posing  a  medium  risk  of
    reoffending.  The judge did however take account of a  letter  from  Mr
    Kharazy's offender manager which provided strong  evidence  of  remorse
    and a change in attitudes on Mr Kharazy's part.

13. The judge considered  the  appeal  on  two  principal  grounds:  asylum
    considered in conjunction with Article 3, and private and  family  life
    considered in conjunction with Article 8.  As to  the  first  of  those
    broad aspects of the claim, the judge felt that he could not place  any
    reliance on the letters from the KDPI.  He rejected that first  ground,
    saying "In all these circumstances I do not  find  even  to  the  lower
    standard of proof in an asylum claim that the appellant is at  risk  on
    return to Iran for having been a failed asylum seeker." At the  hearing
    before us, Mr Kharazy said that he was in fear of persecution and  that
    he would be killed if he is returned to  Iran.  However,  Judge  Colvin
    considered his asylum claim and rejected it.

14. As to the Article 8 claim, the judge did not accept the  claim  insofar
    as it was based on Mr Kharazy's private life.  He did however find that
    the claim based on family  life  was  well-founded,  even  taking  into
    account the discrepancy between Miss  Cayan's  oral  evidence  and  her
    earlier letter.  The judge concluded  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship which had continued for  some  four  years.  He
    went on to say "It is accepted that this relationship was formed  at  a
    time when the appellant  had  no  immigration  status  in  the  UK  and
    therefore his position was precarious".

15. The judge went on to consider other aspects of the Rules  to  which  we
    will return and he set out at paragraphs 39 to 41 of his  judgment  the
    factors which he found to be material. We think it necessary  to  quote
    those paragraphs in full:

         "39. I have little doubt that the  difference  between  Miss  Cayan
             living all her life in the UK and then being required to  live
             in Iran would entail very serious hardship for her in many, if
             not most, aspects of her  life.  Apart  from  the  significant
             cultural differences and  the  repressive  measures  aimed  at
             women, Miss Cayan does not speak the language and is likely to
             have little opportunity of being economically  active  in  her
             own right.  The other circumstances that I would  describe  as
             compelling are that she would be leaving behind her mother, in
             particular, who is not well. Whilst  there may have been  some
             exaggeration of the needs of her mother  which  might  explain
             the above inconsistencies in the evidence of the appellant and
             Miss Cayan as mentioned above, I am satisfied that Miss  Cayan
             feels responsible for providing a significant level of support
             for  her  mother  both  physically  and  emotionally.   To  be
             separated from her mother and be unable to provide the support
             to her is likely to cause significant extra hardship to her.

         40.  Miss Cayan might well make the decision not to  accompany  the
             appellant to Iran. This would inevitably  mean  that  their  4
             year relationship would be terminated.  This  is  because,  as
             [the Secretary  of  State's  representative]  confirmed,  that
             there is little or no chance of a person such as the appellant
             successfully seeking the revocation of the  deportation  order
             at a point in the future and, even then, he would  have  great
             difficulty in surmounting the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  to
             join his partner in the UK. So it  is,  in  effect,  a  simple
             question. Would the termination  of  this  relationship  cause
             undue hardship to Miss Cayan? On the evidence that this  is  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship that has sustained  for  4
             years and that there are plans to marry and have children, the
             answer is that it is likely that it will cause  such  hardship
             for at least a period in the foreseeable future.

         41.  I have therefore come to the conclusion  that  both  paragraph
             399(b) of the Immigration Rules and Exception 2 in Section 117
             apply to the appellant in respect of his Article  8  claim  on
             grounds of family life."

16. The judge was therefore satisfied that it would be disproportionate  to
    deport Mr Kharazy and allowed his appeal.

17. The Secretary of  State  advances  the  following  grounds  of  appeal.
    First, it is submitted that the judge misdirected himself  at  to  Rule
    399(b). Secondly, it is submitted that the judge's  assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claim based on family life was wrong in law because the judge
    misapplied Exception 2.

18. We therefore turn to the relevant provisions of statutes and Rules.  By
    Section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration Act 1971 a  person  who  is  not  a
    British citizen is liable to deportation from the United Kingdom if the
    Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to the  public
    good. Having been convicted and sentenced to a term of  twelve  months'
    imprisonment Mr Kharazy  comes  within  the  definition  of  a  foreign
    criminal under Section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Section 32(4)
    of that Act provides that for the purpose of  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive
    to the public good. Section 32(5) provides that the Secretary of  State
    must make a deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal, subject
    to Section 33.

19. Thus in the circumstances of this  case  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    required to order deportation unless one of the Exceptions  in  Section
    33 of the 2007 Act  applies.  Exception  1,  for  which  Section  33(2)
    provides, is where "Removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance of the
    deportation order would breach (a) a person's Convention rights, or (b)
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention."

20. The judge having rejected the asylum claim and the Article 3 claim, the
    relevant Convention right which here falls  for  consideration  is  the
    claim based on family life under Article 8.

21. Consideration of an Article 8 claim in such  circumstances  necessarily
    involves assessment of the impact of deportation on the family life  of
    the deportee,  and  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
    control and the prevention and deterrence of crime.

22. In this regard Section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 directs that a Tribunal considering whether interference  with
    an Article 8 right is justified under Article 8(2) must have regard  to
    the considerations in Sections 117B and 117C.  So far  as  is  material
    for present purposes those sections provide as follows:

         'Section 117B

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         ...

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         Section 117C

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         ...

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.'

23. In the circumstances of this case, Judge Colvin was  required  to  have
    consideration to all those statutory provisions.  The judge relied upon
    Section 117C(5) and found that Exception 2 applied to the circumstances
    of this case.  We must therefore look at the provisions in Part  13  of
    the Immigration Rules which amplify the statutory provisions by setting
    out the criteria which must be considered in these circumstances.

24. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules reads:

         '398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (b)   The deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months;

                  ...

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.'

25.  Paragraph  399  deals  in  part  with  the  situation  of  a  parental
    relationship and we need not read that part of it, but paragraph 399(b)
    is relevant.  It applies to a person who has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,
    or settled in the UK, and (our emphasis):

         '(i) the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious, and

         (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person  is  to  be  deported  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM and,

         (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
             UK without the person who is to be deported.'

26. Those being the relevant statutory provisions, we turn to consider  the
    grounds of appeal.

27. We have already quoted that part of Judge Colvin's decision in which he
    accepted that the relationship between Mr Kharazy and his  partner  was
    formed when Mr Kharazy had no immigration status in the United  Kingdom
    and his position in this country was therefore  precarious.   It  would
    appear however that the judge nonetheless went on to consider paragraph
    399(b)(ii) and (iii).

28. With respect to the judge, that was an error of law.  Paragraph  399(b)
    is conjunctive in its terms.  In order to come within that paragraph  a
    foreign criminal must meet all three criteria.  Mr Kharazy plainly  did
    not.  He fell at the first hurdle, namely that set  out  in  399(b)(i).
    The judge's finding that paragraph 399(b) applied to Mr Kharazy's  case
    was therefore wrong in law.

29. The judge's decision insofar as it  relates  to  the  Article  8  claim
    therefore cannot stand.  It was wrong in law and we  must  and  do  set
    aside his decision on Mr Kharazy's Article 8 claim.   His  decision  to
    dismiss Mr Kharazy's appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  in  relation  to
    Article 3 of the ECHR stands.

30. We must in those  circumstances  go  on  to  re-make  the  decision  in
    relation to Mr Kharazy's  Article  8  claim  applying  the  Immigration
    Rules.

31. We are bound to say that we entertain substantial doubts as to  whether
    in the circumstances of this case the judge could properly find that to
    deport Mr Kharazy from the United Kingdom would have  an  unduly  harsh
    effect upon him and his partner.  Even if that finding were  to  stand,
    however, we are bound by the words which we have  already  quoted  from
    paragraph 398 which directs that the  public  interest  in  deportation
    will only be outweighed by other factors  "...  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A."

32. In the course of the hearing we asked Mr Kharazy whether there were any
    matters upon which he wished to rely over and above those mentioned  by
    the judge in his judgment in the paragraphs to which  we  have  already
    referred.  Mr Kharazy, entirely  understandably,  emphasised  the  love
    between  himself  and  his  partner  and  the  consequences  which   he
    anticipates for both of them and indeed for Miss Cayan's mother if  the
    couple have to separate. Those were the only matters he  wished  us  to
    consider in addition to those which had been  mentioned  by  the  judge
    below.

33. We have considered those  matters.  We  are  very  conscious  that  the
    personal situation of Mr Kharazy and his partner is a sad one.   It  is
    however not an unusual one in cases of deportation.  If Mr  Kharazy  is
    deported, Miss Cayan will face a difficult and distressing  choice:  to
    go with him to Iran or to remain in this country without him.   Neither
    choice of course would necessarily be permanent.   We  sympathise  with
    her personal position and with the personal position of Mr Kharazy.  We
    are however quite unable to find that the personal circumstances of the
    couple amount to "very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
    described in  paragraphs  399  and  399A"  of  the  Immigration  Rules"
    notwithstanding the difficulties faced by women in  Iran.  This  is  so
    even taking into account the impact on Miss Cayan's mother whether as a
    consequence of losing the company and support of Mr Kharazy  alone  or,
    if Miss Cayan chooses to relocate to  Iran,  both  Miss  Cayan  and  Mr
    Kharazy. Any assistance or support that she needs can  be  provided  by
    the state if she is eligible, although we accept  of  course  that  she
    will miss receiving assistance and support from Mr Kharazy and, if  she
    relocates, Miss Cayan. Mr Kharazy has never had leave to be in the  UK.
    The relationship  was  therefore  entered  into  when  he  was  present
    unlawfully.

34. The circumstances of this case taken  cumulatively  do  not  amount  to
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A" of the Immigration Rules.

35. We are satisfied accordingly that however the position  of  Mr  Kharazy
    and his partner is analysed, and even taking the most  favourable  view
    of the findings below, his appeal against deportation cannot succeed.

36. As we have stated and for the reasons given,  we  have  set  aside  the
    decision of the Judge of First-tier Tribunal in relation to  Article  8
    by reason of the error of law into which he fell.  We have re-made  the
    decision on Mr Kharazy's Article 8 claim.  Mr Kharazy's appeal  against
    the deportation order under Article 8 must in our judgment fail.

Summary of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss Mr Kharazy's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision on asylum grounds stands.

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss Mr Kharazy's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision under Article 3 of  the  ECHR
    stands.

3.   The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  to
    the extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on Mr Kharazy's
    appeal under Article 8 is set aside.

4.   The Upper Tribunal has re-made the decision in relation to  Article  8.
    Mr Kharazy's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order. No application  was
made to the Upper Tribunal for an anonymity order.


Signed   Date
Mr Justice Holroyde
