
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00309/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre                        Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 21st May 2019                                                        On
22nd May 2019


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           ABDINASIR AHMED MOHAMED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    -

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent Mr Mohamed is a national of the Netherlands born on  the
    8th April 1991.  On the  23rd  October  2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Alis) allowed  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport him from the  United  Kingdom.    The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals against that decision, contending that in reaching it
    Judge Alis erred in law.  Permission was granted on the  13th  November
    2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker.


 2. The only ground  of  appeal  is  that  there  was  not  the  evidential
    foundation before the First-tier Tribunal to justify a finding that  Mr
    Mohamed had accrued a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Regulation 15.

 3. Mr Mohamed states that he came to the live in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2002, when he was approximately 11 years old.  He went to school  here,
    and then college.   At its paragraphs 32-37 the  Tribunal  acknowledged
    that there were gaps in the evidence, but  found  on  balance  that  it
    could be satisfied that Mr Mohamed has lived here, as claimed, since he
    was a child.    The Secretary of State does not take  issue  with  that
    finding. The ground submit that the key question was however whether he
    had done so "in accordance with the Regulations":

         "There is no evidence that his mother was exercising treaty  rights
         as a worker or otherwise, such that the Appellant  qualified  as  a
         family member. Neither is there any evidence that the Appellant had
         comprehensive medical insurance in order  to  qualify  in  his  own
         right as a student"

 4. I am not prepared to find this error is made out for the simple  reason
    that these were not matters  placed  in  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. As the determination makes plain, the case for the  Secretary
    of State (argued before the First-tier  Tribunal  by  HOPO  Mr  Ogbewe)
    turned solely on whether Mr Mohamed had been living here since 2002  as
    claimed:


         "32. I am asked to find that he has  acquired  permanent  residence
         after 2002. Mr Ogbewe did not submit the appellant had not met  the
         requirements of Regulation 15 but argued  that  he  had  failed  to
         demonstrate that he had been here continuously for a  period  of  5
         years. He argued that he could have left the country  and  returned
         as there were no immigration controls for Dutch nationals"


    And more explicitly at paragraph 37: "Mr Ogbewe did not raise any other
    challenge to compliance with the Regulations".


 5. This is an adversarial process. Judges cannot fairly be criticised  for
    failing to make findings on matters that are not placed in issue. It is
    clear from the determination (and indeed the file note) that the issues
    were narrowed at the outset  of  the  hearing.    Neither  the  refusal
    letter, nor the HOPO's cross examination, nor closing submissions  make
    any reference to health insurance or whether the Appellant's mother was
    exercising treaty rights during the period  in  question.    These  are
    wholly new issues being raised for the first time  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Where a Home Office Presenting Officer expressly  narrows  the
    issues the First-tier Tribunal is entitled to proceed on the  basis  of
    that position.  In this case that position was that the only issue  was
    whether there had been continuous residence for a period of five years.


 6. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety pointed out that there  did  appear
    to be some confusion about what level of protection  the  Tribunal  had
    actually been considering. I accept that the determination (and  indeed
    the Secretary of State's grounds) make reference to both five  and  ten
    year periods of residence. I am however satisfied that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had properly directed itself to consider whether the Appellant
    had accrued permanent residence (after a five year period) and in light
    of Mr Ogbewe's concession (at paragraph 8) it was entitled to allow the
    appeal on the grounds that it did.



    Decisions


 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    the determination is upheld.


 8. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                 21st May 2019








