

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00835/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2014                               |On 01 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SYDONIA ALEXANDER WILLIS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr Christopher Jacobs (of Counsel), instructed by J McCarthy
                  Solicitors

Respondent:       Mr  John Parkinson , Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of  State  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
      challenging the determination of the First-tier Tribunal   promulgated
      on the 25 March 2014.  By its determination the Tribunal  allowed  the
      Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal to  revoke
      a deportation order.  As my exchanges with  the  representatives  have
      probably made clear, it seems to me that there are two basic questions
      for this Tribunal. I preface this with  appropriate  emphasis  on  the
      role of this Tribunal, which is not to conduct an appeal on the merits
      but to decide whether, within the compass of the grant  of  permission
      to appeal, a material error of law has been demonstrated.

   2. Against that background, the  first  question  for  this  Tribunal  is
      whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by  failing  to  identify
      the correct  test.   I  am  satisfied  that  a  consideration  of  the
      determination as a whole and, in particular, the passages  which  have
      featured in the submissions on behalf the Appellant  leads  inexorably
      to the conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal committed no  error  of
      law in its formulation of the test to be applied.

   3. Secondly, as part of the first question, I am satisfied that the First-
      tier Tribunal did not err in law by failing to  specifically  identify
      deterrence as a  legitimate  aim  or  public  interest  in  play.   It
      sufficed to acknowledge the statutory  framework  which  contains  and
      expresses the relevant public interest and, secondly, to recognise how
      weighty that is.  This is particularly clear from paragraph 51 of  the
      determination where the Tribunal refers  to  significant  and  weighty
      countervailing factors.

   4.  The second question for  this  Tribunal  is  whether  the  First-tier
      Tribunal having, as I have found, identified the correct test erred in
      law in its application of the test to the facts found by it.  There is
      no complaint about the Tribunal's approach in law to the  question  of
      the best interests of the children. Rather the  Secretary  of  State's
      disagreement is  with  the  choice  which  the  Tribunal  made  having
      identified the correct test.  In my  judgment,  the  barometer  to  be
      applied to this part of the  determination  is  that  of  rationality,
      giving effect to the well established Wednesbury principle and a  long
      line of authority beginning with the decision of the House of Lords in
      Edwards v Bairstow.  In other words, the question for this Tribunal is
      whether the choice which the First-tier Tribunal made  in  the  second
      stage of its exercise, which was to allow the appeal for  the  reasons
      given, lay within the range of options reasonably available to  it  in
      the particular factual matrix.  In answering that question it  is  not
      for this Tribunal to substitute its opinion for that of the First-tier
      Tribunal.  Equally, it is not for this Tribunal to ask itself what  it
      would have decided having applied the correct test and having made the
      relevant findings of fact and having identified those facts which  did
      not require to be found because they were not controversial.

   5. I conclude that the answer to the second question  also  is  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.   Accordingly, the  appeal  is
      dismissed and I affirm the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

                       Signed:
                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:  26  June 2014
