
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2013                            |On 23 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             Baldev Singh Malien

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Y Akande, instructed by S Z Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by a national of India born 15 January  1975  against
    the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  and  Mr  D  R
    Bremmer JP (the panel) who for reasons  given  in  their  determination
    dated 21 June 2013 dismissed the appeal against the decision to  refuse
    to revoke a deportation order made on 20  April  2009  on  3  September
    2012.

 2. I make an order in respect of the minor children and their mother  (Mrs
    B) in this case, preventing them from  being  identified.   That  order
    includes a prohibition on the disclosure of any information that  might
    identify the address or school of the children, which I consider to  be
    in the interests of the child.  Any breach of this order occasioned  by
    putting the information in the public domain might be punishable  as  a
    contempt of court either by the Upper  Tribunal  exercising  powers  of
    High Court under s.25(2)(c) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
    Act 2007, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction.

 3. The panel's determination sets  out  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant and the events which led  to  the  deportation  decision  and
    circumstances thereafter.  There is no need to repeat them here  except
    for the following key points:

      i) The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 1993 illegally.

     ii) His relationship with Ms B, a British citizen, began in 1996.  This
         relationship broke down in  November  2005  after  an  incident  of
         serious domestic violence leading to the appellant's conviction  of
         assault occasioning actual bodily harm  for  which  he  received  a
         sentence of twelve months' imprisonment suspended for two years.

    iii) In November 2007 the suspended sentence was activated at  Isleworth
         Crown Court when the appellant received an additional  two  months'
         imprisonment and a disqualification from driving  for  three  years
         after having been convicted of  driving  with  excess  alcohol  and
         without a licence.

     iv) His appeal against the decision to make  a  deportation  order  was
         dismissed in March 2008.

      v) In August 2011 the parties married.

     vi) An endeavour by the appellant to appeal to the ECtHR was  dismissed
         in September 2011.

    vii) There are four children to the relationship born 1997,  2001,  2003
         and 2012

 4. The panel found that paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules  did  not
    assist the appellant in the light of the ability of Ms B  to  care  for
    the children, and furthermore their relationship was  not  genuine  and
    subsisting.  It was accepted by Mr Pretzell on behalf of the  appellant
    that he could not derive assistance from paragraph 399A.   The  panel's
    conclusions therefore were solely on Article 8 grounds, in  respect  of
    which they concluded that his and Ms  B's  interests  as  well  as  the
    children were outweighed by the public  interest  in  deportation.   At
    [44] of the determination the panel made these comments on events since
    January 2009:

         "(i) We accept that four and a half years have  elapsed  since  the
             Tribunal assessed the best interests of the children and  that
             in that time s.55  has  been  enacted.   That  lapse  of  time
             appears to have been caused by the appellant's  challenges  to
             the  Tribunal's  decisions.   His  appeal  rights  were   only
             exhausted in September 2011.

         (ii)     The evidence does not show that  the  appellant  has  been
             cohabiting with Ms B since December 2009.  On the contrary, we
             find that it was only from his release on  bail  that  he  has
             been living at Ms B's address.

         (iii)    We accept that the appellant has not reoffended or been in
             breach of bail conditions.

         (iv) The appellant  has  not  successfully  addressed  his  alcohol
             abuse.  In those circumstances there remains a risk  to  Ms  B
             and the children of aggressive behaviour.

         (v)  Another child, K, has been born."

 5. At [45] of their determination the panel identified  the  substance  of
    the case as being:

         "There are two crucial facts which present a continuing risk to the
         children, namely the appellant's alcoholism  and  his  tendency  to
         react aggressively.  The fact that there is now another child whose
         interests must be considered does nothing to  diminish  those  risk
         factors."

 6. The complaint made in the grounds of application refers to Ms B  having
    given clear evidence to the effect that the appellant  having  resorted
    to drinking in the past few weeks had never resorted to  aggressive  or
    threatening behaviour either towards her or the children.  It is argued
    that the finding of the continuing risk to the children is  reached  in
    an evidential vacuum.  It was incumbent of  the  panel  to  base  their
    concerns on some evidential footing and to state why  Ms  B's  evidence
    had not been accepted.  In conclusion it is argued that with an account
    having been rejected, reasons must be given.

 7. The second ground refers to  the  Presenting  Officer  having  conceded
    before the panel that the Secretary of State had not followed  her  own
    policy, "the children and family cases process  instructions".   It  is
    argued that the panel had erred in concluding that that  failure  could
    be vitiated by reference to information obtained  from  the  children's
    social worker.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Holmes produced evidence that despite  what
    was understood by the parties and the panel, there  had  been  detailed
    consideration of the impact of removal of the appellant on the children
    including reference to and comments from a professional advisor to  the
    office of the children's champion.  Also included in this thirteen page
    document are details of further consideration by the Secretary of State
    on receipt of the response  from  the  OCC  and  authorisation  of  the
    decision by the Operations Manager of the Enforcement and Crime  group.



 9. Dealing with the second  ground  first,  Ms  Akande  did  not  seek  to
    withdraw the ground but in the light of what had now been produced  was
    unsure how far it took matters.  The panel had proceeded on  the  basis
    that the children's champion had not been consulted,  but  nevertheless
    having observed that the application to the Secretary of State had been
    made to revoke a deportation order after the interests of the  children
    had been fully considered and then found as a consequence there was  no
    error in the decision making process.  It appears to me that that is  a
    conclusion that was open to the panel.  Even if I  could  be  persuaded
    otherwise on the basis that there was unlawfulness by the Secretary  of
    State in not consulting the Children's Champion, it is now beyond doubt
    that she had done so.  Any error found would not require  the  decision
    to be remade.

10. I return to the first ground.  This is in essence a  reasons  challenge
    and it is not argued that the panel was either perverse  or  irrational
    in its conclusions.  Despite the  forceful  submissions  by  Ms  Akande
    which supplemented a detailed skeleton argument,  I  am  not  persuaded
    that the panel reached its conclusions in an "evidential vacuum" and it
    is clear from a reading of the determination that the evidence  adduced
    in  support  of  the  appellant's  rehabilitation  was  considered  and
    rejected  for  cogent  and  sustainable  reasons.   Over  a  number  of
    paragraphs from [33] to [42], after correctly directing  themselves  in
    accordance with the principles in Devaseelan and  noting  the  findings
    made by the panel of three judges in the Upper Tribunal, the panel went
    on to observe that even if it were  not  for  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made by that tribunal:

         "... the evidence of both the appellant and Ms  B  showed  a  clear
         tendency to minimise the appellant's past behaviour  towards  Ms  B
         and understated the appellant's current alcohol consumption".

11. At [35] the panel concluded that the  appellant  appeared  to  have  no
    understanding whatsoever of the dangers drink posed to him,  Ms  B  and
    his family, and went on to explain why they attached no weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's father who appeared to  know  little  about
    his son's drinking or about the reasons for his  imprisonment.   As  to
    the appellant's relationship with Ms B, at [38] and [39],  reasons  are
    given why there had  not  been  a  genuine  reconciliation.   There  is
    explanation here for what appears to be a confusing reference  in  [44]
    above as the panel observes that the bail conditions for the  appellant
    required him to live at Ms B's address in December 2012 but he was  not
    living there overnight before his detention in September that year.

12. The panel also had before it reports by a social worker Gemma Lee dated
    20 July and 20 September 2012.  She explains that  she  is  the  social
    worker for the appellant's children.  In the  most  recent  report  she
    refers to issues around domestic violence no longer being prevalent  in
    the family and that the appellant's situation had been largely  fuelled
    by his alcohol consumption.  Since completion of a program after  being
    referred to Ealing DIAS, a drug agency, both the appellant and Ms B had
    reported that the appellant's alcohol use was no longer  an  issue  and
    that he only drank occasionally on social occasions.  At  [40]  of  the
    determination, the panel gave detailed reasons why they considered they
    could attach little weight to her observations and conclusions.  It  is
    significant that those reasons are not  subject  to  challenge  in  the
    grounds of application in the renewed application.  It  is  unnecessary
    to spell all the reasons given out and I am readily persuaded that  the
    panel engaged with Ms Lee's reports and gave reasons open  to  them  in
    the context of the evidence as a whole  for  why  it  attracted  little
    weight.

13. On analysis, the challenge in the first ground is a  disagreement  with
    factual findings by the panel which  do  not  disclose  error  of  law.
    Those findings led the panel to a conclusion under Article 8 that  took
    proper account of the best interests of the children and the impact  of
    separation on family life  as  found.   The  conclusions  reached  were
    supported by the  evidence  leading  to  a  permissible  conclusion  on
    Article 8 grounds.

14. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 13 December 2013


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


