


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00169/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 19 February 2014                         |On : 26 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE JAY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               mantas baibokas
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's appeal comes  before  us  following  a  hearing  on  2
      January 2014 at which errors of law were found in the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal  allowing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to deport him from the United Kingdom pursuant to  regulation
      19(3)(b) of he Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
      ("the EEA Regulations").

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania, born on 16 October  1980.  He
      claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 2001. He applied,  on  19
      June 2001, for leave to remain as a  self-employed  businessman  under
      the EC Association Agreement, but his application was  refused  on  29
      October 2001. From 1 May 2004 he was no longer subject to  immigration
      control, as Lithuania joined the EEA. He first  came  to  the  adverse
      attention of the authorities on 21 August 2008 in relation to motoring
      offences.

   3. On 15 February 2012 the appellant was convicted at  Snaresbrook  Crown
      Court of possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply, Class  B,
      Amphetamine.  On  26  March  2012  he  was  sentenced  to  30  months'
      imprisonment. On 29 May 2012 he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
      deportation. A decision was  made  on  17  December  2012  to  make  a
      deportation order by virtue of section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971 and under regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations,  on  the  grounds
      that he posed a genuinely, present and sufficiently serious threat  to
      the interests of public policy.

   4. The respondent, in making that decision, considered that there was  no
      evidence of the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom since 2001
      and did not accept that he had been resident in  accordance  with  the
      regulations for a continuous  period  of  five  years,  and  had  thus
      acquired permanent residence, or that  he  had  been  resident  for  a
      continuous  period  of  ten  years.  The  respondent  considered   the
      circumstances  of  the  offence  for  which  the  appellant  had  been
      convicted, namely  the  possession  of  a  large  amount  of  Class  B
      controlled drugs, which had been found in his jet ski in  his  garage,
      and took account of the remarks of the sentencing judge  and  the  low
      level of risk at which he was assessed in the NOMS 1  assessment.  The
      respondent concluded that the appellant had a propensity to  re-offend
      and that he represented a genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
      threat to the public. Consideration was also given to the  appellant's
      family life with his wife and son, and to his son's medical condition,
      but the respondent concluded that his  deportation  would  not  be  in
      breach of his Article 8 human rights.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 13 September 2013, before a panel consisting of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Mailer and Dr C J Winstanley. The panel heard from
      the appellant, his wife, his father, his sister and his brother-in-law
      and found their evidence to be credible. They found on  the  basis  of
      the oral and documentary evidence before them that the  appellant  had
      been living continuously in the United Kingdom for at least ten  years
      and that, as  such,  the  respondent  had  to  show  that  there  were
      imperative grounds for deporting him. They found that no such  grounds
      had been established and they accordingly allowed the appeal under the
      EEA Regulations, as well as under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   6. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      the following grounds: that the panel had erred by  finding  that  the
      appellant had established ten years of lawful residence in the  United
      Kingdom and that he had acquired a permanent right of residence in the
      United Kingdom and had thus applied the wrong test; and that they  had
      erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would   be
      disproportionate. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  14  November
      2013.

   7. At an error of law hearing on 2 January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination was found to be materially flawed by reason of errors of
      law and was accordingly set aside. The  full  decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in that respect is annexed to this determination at Annex  A,
      but can be summarised as follows.

   8. The Tribunal's conclusion, that the appellant  had  been  continuously
      resident in the United Kingdom for ten years, appeared  to  have  been
      based purely upon his residence with no regard to the status  of  that
      residence and no regard to whether or not  he  was  exercising  Treaty
      rights throughout that period. Whilst giving weight to self-assessment
      tax calculations produced by the appellant, the Tribunal made no clear
      findings on the period in which it was  accepted  that  that  evidence
      reflected the exercise of Treaty rights. No consideration was given to
      the fact that Lithuania was not a member of the European  Union  until
      May 2004  and  to  the  appellant's  status  prior  to  then.  In  the
      circumstances the Tribunal erred in concluding that, on  the  evidence
      before it, the appellant had demonstrated ten years' continuous  legal
      residence in the United Kingdom. Accordingly its conclusion, that  the
      relevant test was that  under  regulation  21(4),  namely  "imperative
      grounds of public security", was an unsustainable  one.  The  Tribunal
      did not make any findings in the alternative in regard to  regulations
      21(3) and (5) and, in the absence of any proper  findings  as  to  the
      period in which the appellant was considered to have  been  exercising
      Treaty rights, those matters remained to be determined.

   9. The appeal came before us for a resumed hearing on 19 February 2014 in
      order for fresh findings  to  be  made  in  regard  to  the  level  of
      protection to be afforded to the appellant under the  EEA  Regulations
      and his ability to meet the requirements  of  those  regulations.  The
      appeal proceeded by way of submissions only.

   3. It was Mr Melvin's case that  there  was  nothing  to  show  that  the
      appellant had been exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
      prior to 2008 and, since he had been convicted on 15 February 2012, he
      was unable to establish five years' residence in accordance  with  the
      EEA Regulations  such  as  to  entitle  him  to  permanent  residence.
      Accordingly he was only entitled to  the  lower  level  of  protection
      under the Regulations. Mr Melvin relied on the principles  in  SSHD  v
      M.G. Case C-400/12, Onuekwere v SSHD Case C-378/12  and  Essa  v  SSHD
      (EEA: rehabilitation/integration)  Netherlands  [2013]  UKUT  316  and
      submitted that the appellant had failed to show that he had integrated
      into the United Kingdom. There was little evidence of  rehabilitation.
      With regard to the risk of re-offending, he relied upon  the  decision
      in Vasconcelos (risk - rehabilitation) Portugal  [2013]  UKUT  378  in
      submitting that the Tribunal was not bound by the risk  assessment  in
      the NOMS (National Offender Management Service) report.  There  was  a
      real risk to the public of the appellant re-offending.

   4. With regard to the period in which the  appellant  had  been  residing
      lawfully in the United Kingdom, Mr Burrett initially  sought  to  rely
      upon the fact that he had  made  an  application  as  a  self-employed
      person in 2001 and had  resided  with  and  been  dependent  upon  his
      parents who were lawfully resident in the United Kingdom.  However  he
      acknowledged that the application had been refused, that there was  no
      evidence of dependency upon his parents and that there was no evidence
      as to how he supported himself whilst living with his wife from  2004.
      He submitted that the appellant had been exercising Treaty rights  for
      five years and, whilst he accepted  that  the  evidence  was  somewhat
      convoluted, he asked us to  note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      accepted backdated tax assessments  as  evidence  of  self-employment.
      With  regard  to  proportionality,  Mr  Burrett  submitted  that   the
      appellant had one child and another due in one month. His son attended
      appointments every three months at  Moorfields  Hospital  for  an  eye
      condition. Although it was not  the  case  that  he  had  no  ties  to
      Lithuania, his real ties were in the United Kingdom since his parents,
      sister, wife and child were all here. His wife was an  accountant  and
      was exercising Treaty rights. The fact that she was  doing  so  was  a
      weighty factor in the balancing exercise.

   5. In response, Mr Melvin submitted that there was little evidence of the
      appellant's wife's job and there was no evidence that she had  applied
      for permanent residence. He could not benefit from being parasitic  on
      his wife's status. The fact that she was exercising Treaty rights here
      with his son did not benefit him and they could choose  to  return  to
      Lithuania with him if they wished.

Consideration and findings

   6. The starting point  in  this  appeal  is  establishing  the  level  of
      protection against expulsion to be afforded  to  the  appellant  under
      regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations. Whilst not  conceding  that  the
      appellant could not meet the ten year period of lawful  residence  for
      the purposes of regulation 21(4), or the  five  year  period  for  the
      purposes of regulation 21(3), Mr Burrett did not pursue  either  claim
      with any real conviction. We consider that he was right not to do  so.
      He acknowledged the absence of any evidence to support  a  claim  that
      the appellant was  lawfully  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
      dependant of his parents prior to moving in with his wife in 2004  and
      he also acknowledged the problems with the evidence as to  the  source
      of his income thereafter.

   7. The appellant claims to have been exercising Treaty rights as a  self-
      employed person since 2003, but the only evidence he had been able  to
      produce before the First-tier  Tribunal  consisted  of  various  self-
      assessment tax  documents  dated  11  January  2008,  which  had  been
      backdated to show tax calculations for the  tax  years  from  2002-03.
      There were also various bank statements produced showing  receipts  of
      cash payments which Mr Burrett informed us indicated evidence of  work
      undertaken. However  he  acknowledged  that  the  self-assessment  tax
      documents indicated zero income until 2008 - we note the  document  at
      page 19 of a bundle "C" before the First-tier Tribunal which shows the
      first indication of taxed income in a self-assessment  document  dated
      20 August 2008 for the tax  year  2007/08.  We  also  noted  from  the
      documents at pages 456 to 459 that  he  did  not  receive  a  national
      insurance number until the end of February  2007.  Mr  Burrett  relied
      upon several fixed penalty payments in the  self-assessment  statement
      at page 423 of the  large  appeal  bundle  as  showing  that  the  tax
      authorities accepted the appellant as being self-employed. However, as
      we indicated to him, the strong  implication  of  the  documents  when
      taken together was that the appellant was working on the black-market,
      receiving cash in hand without paying tax, until the  tax  authorities
      caught up with him and he decided to start paying tax  on  the  income
      received.  Mr  Burrett  accepted  that  such  evidence  could  not  be
      considered as economic activity for the purposes of  the  exercise  of
      Treaty rights under the EEA Regulations. Accordingly, for the purposes
      of the EEA Regulations, the appellant became economically active  only
      in the tax year 2007/2008.  It  is  not  clear  from  the  documentary
      evidence when in the latter part of 2007 or the  early  part  of  2008
      that was.

   8. Neither do we have clear evidence of when the appellant ceased working
      as a result of his criminal offences. The PNC record at  page  276  of
      the appeal bundle indicates that he was remanded on police bail  on  1
      April 2011 following his arrest and was remanded on bail following the
      commencement of his trial on 4 October 2011. It is not clear if he was
      held in custody prior to his conviction, but in any event he  remained
      incarcerated following his conviction  on  15  February  2012.  It  is
      plain, therefore, on any understanding of the evidence, that he  could
      not  have  established  five  years  of  continuous  lawful  residence
      exercising Treaty rights  prior  to  his  incarceration  and  was  not
      entitled to permanent residence.

   9. We proceed, therefore, on the basis that  the  appellant  is  entitled
      only  to  the  lower  level  of  protection  afforded  under  the  EEA
      Regulations. Accordingly, his expulsion can be justified only  on  the
      general grounds of public policy, public security  or  public  health,
      the relevant test for which is to be found  in  regulation  21(5),  as
      follows:

    "21(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
    or public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
    preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with
    the following principles-
    (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
    (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
the person concerned;
    (c) the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society;
    (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which  relate
    to considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;
    (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
justify the decision."

  10. In the case of Essa the Upper Tribunal made the following  observation
      at paragraph 32:
    "... for any deportation of an EEA national or family  member  of  such
    national to be  justified  on  public  good  grounds  (irrespective  of
    whether permanent  residence  has  been  achieved)  the  claimant  must
    represent a present threat to public policy. The  fact  of  a  criminal
    conviction is not enough. It is not  permissible  in  an  EEA  case  to
    deport a claimant on the basis of criminal offending  simply  to  deter
    others.  This tends to mean, in case of criminal conduct short  of  the
    most serious threats  to  the  public  safety  of  the  state,  that  a
    candidate for EEA deportation must represent a present threat by reason
    of a propensity to re-offend  or  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of  re-
    offending. "

  11. In line with that observation, we turn to the question  of  propensity
      to re-offend or risk  of  re-offending.  The  most  relevant  evidence
      addressing that question is the NOMS 1 assessment, which  is  included
      in the respondent's appeal  bundle  at  Annex  H.  The  assessment  is
      unfortunately undated, but would have been  completed  at  some  stage
      during the appellant's  incarceration  and  subsequent  to  the  OASys
      report which, we observe from page H5, was completed on 30 July  2012.
      We note that the appellant's Offender Manager assessed  the  level  of
      risk of serious harm as low and considered the  risk  to  be  only  to
      illicit drugs users. The Offender Manager noted that the appellant had
      one previous conviction for driving with excess alcohol  and  using  a
      vehicle with no test certificate in 2008. He denied  involvement  with
      the index offence in which 7kg of amphetamine sulphate was found in  a
      jet ski in his garage, although his fingerprints  were  found  on  the
      tape wrapped around the concealed package of drugs. The drugs appeared
      to have been purely for financial gain  and  no  issues  of  drugs  or
      alcohol were identified on the appellant's part. The Offender  Manager
      assessed the likelihood of re-conviction as low.

  12. The respondent did not agree  with  the  conclusions  reached  by  the
      Offending Manager and concluded that the appellant had a propensity to
      re-offend. That conclusion was based on the fact  that  the  appellant
      had denied involvement in the offence despite there being evidence  to
      the contrary and on the comments made by the  Crown  Court  judge  who
      sentenced him. The judge's comments are set out in some detail in  the
      reasons for deportation letter and the respondent relies in particular
      upon the judge's conclusion that he played a significant role  in  the
      storing and possession of the drugs and that  his  status  was  higher
      than street level.

  13. We  have  had  regard  to  the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Vasconcelos  (risk-  rehabilitation)  [2013]  UKUT  00378,  that   "In
      assessing whether an EEA  national  represents  a  current  threat  to
      public policy by reason of  a  risk  of  resumption  of  opportunistic
      offending, the Tribunal should consider any statistical assessment  of
      re-offending provided by NOMS but is not bound by  such  data  if  the
      overall  assessment  of  the  evidence  supports  the  conclusion   of
      continued risk". That finding was relied  upon  in  particular  by  Mr
      Melvin who asked us to place limited weight upon  the  conclusions  of
      the Offender Manager. However we find no reason,  in  the  appellant's
      case, to depart  from  those  conclusions  or  to  consider  that  the
      Offender  Manager  was  not  aware  of  the  statements  made  by  the
      sentencing judge. We take note of the positive  efforts  made  by  the
      appellant during his incarceration  to  improve  his  skills  and  his
      career prospects and  the  positive  comments  made  by  the  relevant
      officials in the documents at pages 73 to 115 and 121 to  144  of  the
      appeal bundle. We also take note of the appellant's progress since his
      release from prison in June 2013, as referred to in the summary of his
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs 41 to 43 of  its
      determination, none of which has been challenged by the respondent. We
      find that  these  are  all  relevant  to  the  question  of  risk  and
      demonstrate positive  efforts  made  by  the  appellant  in  terms  of
      rehabilitation, a matter considered by the Upper Tribunal in  Essa  to
      be of particular relevance.

  14. Accordingly, having had careful regard to the nature  and  seriousness
      of the appellant's criminal offence,  as  reflected  by  the  sentence
      imposed, and the comments of the sentencing judge,  we  conclude  that
      the evidence before us, as referred to above, nevertheless leads us to
      conclude that the appellant does not represent a genuine, present  and
      sufficiently serious threat to the interests of society.

  15. We also take account, in assessing proportionality, of the significant
      matter of the appellant's ties to the United Kingdom. Whilst we  note,
      as stated in Essa, that the question of integration arises to a lesser
      extent in cases where permanent residence has not been established, it
      is clear that integration is nevertheless a relevant  factor.  In  the
      appellant's case, he has lived in the United Kingdom for  over  twelve
      years, albeit that only a limited number of those years  involved  the
      exercise of Treaty rights. His parents and sibling live in the  United
      Kingdom and, whilst he retains ties to Lithuania, they are limited  in
      terms of close family. His wife is an EEA national  exercising  Treaty
      rights, having worked and studied here for  periods  of  time  and  is
      currently  employed  as  an  accountant.  The  voluminous  amount   of
      documentary evidence before us contains some evidence to support  that
      claim (pages F59 to F70 and F130 to F142 of  the  respondent's  appeal
      bundle and pages 708 to 722 of the appellant's appeal bundle)  and  we
      note that the First-tier Tribunal accepted the evidence before them in
      that regard. Their  son  is  also  entitled  to  remain  here  as  her
      dependant, as will be their  new  baby.  None  of  these  factors  are
      specifically  challenged  by  the  respondent.   Accordingly,   whilst
      independently exercising Treaty rights and not  being  dependent  upon
      the appellant, his wife and child would not be required to  leave  the
      United Kingdom if he were deported, the maintenance of family  between
      them in the event of  his  deportation  would  necessarily  entail  an
      interference with their ability to exercise those rights.  It  was  Mr
      Melvin's submission that that was not a relevant  or  material  factor
      since the family have the choice whether to be separated or to  remain
      together by all returning to Lithuania. However we do not  agree.  The
      fact that the appellant's wife and son are  EEA  nationals  exercising
      Treaty rights and that his deportation may lead (albeit indirectly) to
      an interference with the exercise of those rights is, in our  view,  a
      weighty factor in the appellant's favour.

  16. In all of  these  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the  appellant's
      deportation would be disproportionate and, having taken account of the
      considerations in regulation 21(6), we conclude that  the  appellant's
      expulsion cannot be justified on the  grounds  of  public  policy  and
      would be in  breach  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  Having  reached  that
      conclusion we consider it  to  be  an  unnecessary  exercise  to  make
      separate findings on Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and the  decision  has  accordingly  been  set
      aside. In re-making the decision, however, we reach the same  decision
      as the First-tier Tribunal (albeit for different reasons) and we allow
      the appeal under the EEA Regulations.





                               Signed                                  Date
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede




                               APPENDIX A


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00169/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 2 January 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mantas baibokas
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nizami, instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Baibokas's  appeal
against a decision to  deport  him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2006 ("the EEA Regulations"). For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall
refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and  Mr  Baibokas  as  the
appellant, reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania, born on 16 October 1980. He  claims
to have entered the United Kingdom in 2001. He applied,  on  19  June  2001,
for leave to remain as a self-employed businessman under the EC  Association
Agreement, but his application was refused on 29 October 2001.  From  1  May
2004 he was no longer subject to immigration control,  as  Lithuania  joined
the EEA. He first came to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  on  21
August 2008.

   3. On 15 February 2012 the appellant was convicted at  Snaresbrook  Crown
      Court of possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply, Class  B,
      Amphetamine.  On  26  March  2012  he  was  sentenced  to  30  months'
      imprisonment. On 29 May 2012 he  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
      deportation. A decision was  made  on  17  December  2012  to  make  a
      deportation order by virtue of section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971 and under regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations,  on  the  grounds
      that he posed a genuinely, present and sufficiently serious threat  to
      the interests of public policy.

   4. The respondent, in making that decision, considered that there was  no
      evidence of the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom since 2001
      and did not accept that he had been resident in  accordance  with  the
      regulations for a continuous  period  of  five  years,  and  had  thus
      acquired permanent residence, or that  he  had  been  resident  for  a
      continuous  period  of  ten  years.  The  respondent  considered   the
      circumstances  of  the  offence  for  which  the  appellant  had  been
      convicted, namely  the  possession  of  a  large  amount  of  Class  B
      controlled drugs, which had been found in his jet ski in  his  garage,
      and took account of the remarks of the sentencing judge  and  the  low
      level of risk at which he was assessed in the NOMS 1  assessment.  The
      respondent concluded that the appellant had a propensity to  re-offend
      and that he represented a genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
      threat to the public. Consideration was also given to the  appellant's
      family life with his wife and son, and to his son's medical condition,
      but the respondent concluded that his  deportation  would  not  be  in
      breach of his Article 8 human rights.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 13 September 2013, before a panel consisting of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Mailer and Dr C J Winstanley. The panel heard from
      the appellant, his wife, his father, his sister and his brother-in-law
      and found their evidence to be credible. They found on  the  basis  of
      the oral and documentary evidence before them that the  appellant  had
      been living continuously in the United Kingdom for at least ten  years
      and that, as  such,  the  respondent  had  to  show  that  there  were
      imperative grounds for deporting him. They found that no such  grounds
      had been established and they accordingly allowed the appeal under the
      EEA Regulations, as well as under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   6.  The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
      the following grounds: that the panel had erred by  finding  that  the
      appellant had established ten years of lawful residence in the  United
      Kingdom and that he had acquired a permanent right of residence in the
      United Kingdom and had thus applied the wrong test; and that they  had
      erred  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would   be
      disproportionate.

   7. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
      granted on 14 November 2013.

   8.  The appeal came before me  on  2  January  2014.  The  appellant  was
      present but matters proceeded on the basis of submissions  as  to  the
      error of law. I heard submissions from Ms Nizami  and  Mr  Melvin  and
      reached the conclusion that the Tribunal had made material  errors  of
      law, for the following reasons.

   9. Ms Nizami, in her skeleton argument,  accepted  that  the  appellant's
      residence in the United  Kingdom  had  to  be  lawful,  both  for  the
      purposes of five years' and ten years' continuous residence. That  was
      indeed the finding of the Court of Appeal in HR (Portugal) v Secretary
      of State for the Home Office [2009]  EWCA  Civ  371,  as  approved  in
      Secretary of State for the Home Department v FV  (Italy)  [2012]  EWCA
      Civ 1199. However, the Tribunal's conclusion, that the  appellant  had
      been continuously resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  ten  years,
      appeared to have been based purely upon his residence with  no  regard
      to the status of that residence and no regard to whether or not he was
      exercising treaty rights throughout that period. Although the Tribunal
      appeared, at paragraphs 158 and 159 of its determination, to give some
      weight  to  the  self-assessment  tax  calculations  produced  by  the
      appellant, it made no clear findings on the period  to  which  it  was
      accepted that he had been exercising treaty rights. In particular,  no
      consideration was given to the fact that Lithuania was not a member of
      the European Union until May 2004 and to the appellant's status  prior
      to then. Ms Nizami submitted that prior to that date he was  a  family
      member of his parents who satisfied the conditions of Article 7(1)  of
      Directive 2004/18 and accordingly his period  of  residence  prior  to
      Lithuania acceding to the European Union could be taken into  account.
      However that was not an argument made before the Tribunal or supported
      by relevant documentary evidence.

  10. In the circumstances the Tribunal plainly erred in concluding that, on
      the evidence before it, the  appellant  had  demonstrated  ten  years'
      continuous legal residence in  the  United  Kingdom.  Accordingly  its
      conclusion, that the relevant test was that  under  regulation  21(4),
      namely "imperative grounds of public security", was  an  unsustainable
      one. Furthermore, in the absence of any proper findings  made  by  the
      Tribunal as to the period in which the  appellant  was  considered  to
      have been exercising treaty rights, it is clear that there is no basis
      upon which its decision can  properly  be  taken  as  being  that  the
      appellant had established a right to permanent residence in the UK for
      the purposes of regulation  21(3).  The  Tribunal  did  not  make  any
      findings in the alternative in that regard. Neither did  it  make  any
      alternative  findings  under  regulation  21(5),  which   would   have
      necessitated  a  consideration  of  proportionality  and  whether  the
      appellant's conduct represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
      serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.
      It seems to me that  such  considerations  cannot  be  read  into  the
      Tribunal's decision on the findings made and, as Mr Melvin  submitted,
      any  findings  that   the   Tribunal   did   make   in   relation   to
      proportionality, in the context of Article 8, have  to  be  viewed  as
      being infected by the error of law  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
      ability to meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations.

  11. Accordingly, I find that errors of law have been established and  that
      the First-tier Tribunal's determination cannot stand and must  be  set
      aside, for fresh findings to be made  in  regard  to  the  appellant's
      ability to meet the requirements of the EEA regulations as well as the
      United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR. It  will  be
      for the appellant to demonstrate the period of time in  which  he  has
      been exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to
      establish which level of protection is available to  him.  As  I  have
      already mentioned above, I do not consider paragraphs 158  to  159  of
      the Tribunal's determination  to  constitute  proper  and  sustainable
      findings on the period during which he was exercising  treaty  rights,
      in particular given the nature of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
      and that is a matter upon which it remains for findings  to  be  made.
      The appellant is put on notice that his claim to have been  exercising
      treaty rights will need to be supported  by  satisfactory  documentary
      evidence. Furthermore, as Mr Melvin submitted, it remains for full and
      proper findings to be made on  the  questions  of  rehabilitation  and
      integration, with reference in particular to the decisions in  Essa  v
      SSHD (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) Netherlands [2013] UKUT 316 and
      Nnamdi Onuekwere v SSHD [2013] EUECJ C-378/12

  12.  I make the following directions for the resumed hearing.

Directions


    (a) No later than fourteen days before the date of the next hearing, any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either  party  is  to  be
    filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.

    (b) Since the First-Tier Tribunal's determination  contains  a  detailed
    summary of the oral evidence of the witnesses it is not considered  that
    further oral evidence will be necessary, other than to  provide  an  up-
    date of the appellant's circumstances where appropriate. In  respect  of
    any witness who is to be  called  to  give  oral  evidence,  however,  a
    witness statement should be drawn  in  sufficient  detail  to  stand  as
    evidence in chief.

    (c) The appellant's representatives are to advise  the  Tribunal  if  an
    interpreter is required, otherwise no interpreter will be booked for the
    hearing.






                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
