
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00193/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 July 2017                         |On 14 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Dominik Szwajkozwski
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to Mr Szwajkozwski hereafter as the appellant as  he  was
    before the judge, and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  as
    she was before the judge.

2.   The appellant is a national of Poland.  He appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 20 April  2016
    to make a deportation order under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

3.   There was no appearance initially by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    before the judge.  However, after a short adjournment  it  was  learned
    that the appellant was detained at Morton Hall IRC and a video link was
    set up and the hearing was resumed later in the day.  According to  the
    judge's decision at paragraph 6, the appellant confirmed that he  spoke
    some English although it was apparent that he sometimes had  difficulty
    in expressing himself in English and was unable to understand  some  of
    the information which the judge gave to him or questions which he  put.
    The judge considered whether it was appropriate to adjourn the  hearing
    so an interpreter could be present bearing in  mind  there  was  little
    realistic prospect of obtaining the services of  an  interpreter  other
    than on another day.  The respondent clearly  intended  to  remove  the
    appellant at the earliest opportunity and it seemed therefore  that  an
    adjournment would serve no useful purpose.  The judge bore in mind  the
    overriding objective and decided that he would do his  best  to  ensure
    that the appellant understood what was  said  and  he  would  adopt  an
    appropriate degree of caution in assessing his evidence because of  the
    possibility of a lack of understanding.  He concluded that in the event
    the appeal did not turn on the appellant's oral evidence.

4.   He heard brief oral evidence from the appellant and in the  absence  of
    an interpreter did not consider that cross-examination  in  any  normal
    sense was appropriate.  He invited the Presenting Officer  to  indicate
    if there were any matters on which he would wish  to  cross-examine  in
    respect of which the judge would have been prepared to put questions to
    the appellant but there were no such issues.  The judge  heard  closing
    submissions from the appellant and the Presenting Officer.

5.    The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  convictions  which   included   a
    conviction for robbery on 16 July 2001 in Poland,  a  conviction  on  3
    September 2002 in Poland for  kidnapping  and  threatening  to  harm  a
    witness or juror with intent to obstruct,  pervert  or  interfere  with
    justice, and a conviction on  6  April  2010  of  an  attempted  sexual
    assault by penetration.  For the first offence he was sentenced to  two
    years' imprisonment, for the second six months and eight months with an
    overall penalty of ten months and for the third offence to  two  years'
    imprisonment suspended for five years.  With regard to that offence  it
    seems that the suspension of the term of imprisonment was revoked on  9
    June 2015, but from the respondent's decision letter  it  appears  that
    that decision itself was revoked on 22 March  2016.   The  judge  noted
    that on 18  June  2013  the  appellant  was  convicted  in  Germany  of
    importing or exporting goods with intent to evade duty on 18 June  2013
    for which he was fined.

6.   On the evidence the judge was not satisfied the  appellant  had  proved
    he had acquired a permanent right of residence in the  United  Kingdom,
    and accordingly, given that the relevant decision was taken on  grounds
    of public policy  or  public  security,  it  had  to  comply  with  the
    principle of proportionality, it was to be  based  exclusively  on  the
    personal conduct of the person concerned,  his  personal  conduct  must
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society, matters isolated from  the
    particulars of the case or which related to considerations  of  general
    prevention did not justify  the  decision  and  his  previous  criminal
    convictions did not in themselves justify the decision.

7.   The judge noted what was said by the respondent that the appellant  had
    been convicted of offences  whose  seriousness  was  reflected  in  the
    sentences imposed and  that  evidence  of  risk  was  provided  by  the
    requirement that he should register on the Sex Offender Register in the
    United Kingdom.  The seriousness of the offence indicated that he posed
    a significant threat for the safety and security of the public  of  the
    United Kingdom and that should he reoffend any offence would  be  of  a
    similar or more serious nature.  He had been assessed as posing a  high
    risk of serious harm and a medium risk of reconviction.  Those  matters
    the judge noted were wholly unsupported by any evidence.  There was  no
    OASys or similar report provided.  The only recent conviction  was  one
    for attempting to evade payment of duty.  It could not be ignored,  but
    it was far from the most serious.  The judge considered that since 2006
    the appellant had not committed any offence on the basis  of  which  he
    might be said to pose any risk to the public  nor  was  there  was  any
    evidence to support the assertion that any future offence would  be  as
    serious as or more serious than those committed in 2000 and  2006.   It
    was not clear what conclusion should be drawn from  the  revocation  of
    the suspension of the 2010 sentence of imprisonment or the reference to
    the revocation of that order subsequently.  The judge was not persuaded
    that  the  appellant's  conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat and accordingly the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the principles set  out  in  Regulation  21(5)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and was in breach
    of his EEA rights.  The appeal was accordingly allowed.

8.   In the grounds of appeal the respondent argued that the fact  that  the
    appellant was required to register on the UK Sex Offender Register  and
    was expected to report regularly to the police was  indicative  of  the
    fact that he was considered to present an ongoing threat to the public.
     The judge had not mentioned why this was not relevant to  the  overall
    assessment under Regulation 21(5) or why it did not carry  any  weight.
    The point was also made that the appellant, when he had returned to the
    United Kingdom illegally, having left voluntarily, had  used  ID  which
    although genuine was obtained by him in a different name,  through  use
    of his grandmother's surname.  This suggested he was aware that he  was
    re-entering the UK illegally and obtained the ID to  avoid  immigration
    controls which displayed a total disregard for the law.  The respondent
    also attached the Presenting Officer's minute from  the  hearing  which
    among other things set out concerns about the procedural feasibility of
    the video link process given that the  appellant  had  not  applied  to
    return for the hearing, was unaware of the hearing date and had not had
    the opportunity to arrange representation or a proper defence and there
    was an interpreter available.   The  Presenting  Officer  said  in  his
    statement that it was clear that the appellant spoke some  English  but
    only a little and was  struggling  to  understand  many  questions  and
    formulate an answer in  English  and  it  was  difficult  to  get  full
    meaningful answers from him.  On the grounds it is said  that  although
    the judge did not consider the decision turned on the appellant's  oral
    evidence that might have been different if the Presenting  Officer  had
    not been disadvantaged but in a position to carry out a confident cross-
    examination knowing the appellant understood what was  being  asked  of
    him.

9.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  appellant  before  me.
    Mr Jarvis' notes showed that  he  had  voluntarily  departed  from  the
    United Kingdom on 7 February 2017.  As regards a question I put  to  Mr
    Jarvis about the fact of  the  appellant  being  on  the  Sex  Offender
    Register, Mr Jarvis understood the register was a  consequence  of  the
    conviction and if the Secretary of State gave her view she had to do so
    concerning the risk of reoffending and harm.  There was no OASyS Report
    but that was not a barrier to the giving of such a view.  The Secretary
    of State would  take  into  account  the  general  material  about  sex
    offenders.  The judge's approach  fettered  the  Secretary  of  State's
    approach to risk.  It was taken with regard to the  overall  assessment
    of the history and there was room in EU and domestic law for a court to
    consider that the offence itself  was  so  serious  that  the  person's
    presence was contrary to public policy.  With regard to deportation the
    Secretary of State's position was to show current risk  and  everything
    went into the assessment and she was looking at  present  day  conduct.
    She had not merely looked at the offence itself but pointed overall  to
    factors to show historically over time recourse to  conduct  justifying
    deportation.  The conduct of the appellant was the test.  The judge had
    erred because he looked at the case from the unlawfully narrow position
    of the offences and what had been shown but it was a  question  of  the
    conduct of the appellant which included the fact that he had re-entered
    using an ID card not in his name.

10.  There were also concerns about the procedure adopted as set out in  the
    grounds.  It would be hard for the Presenting Officer to decide whether
    the appellant's lack of facility in English  was  a  problem.   It  was
    unclear why it was different for the judge rather than  the  Presenting
    Officer to ask questions.  The judge had taken the view as  to  how  to
    proceed and the Presenting Officer was in difficulty.   The  judge  was
    not looking at conduct but the  offences  as  recorded  and  there  was
    procedural  unfairness.   This  could  have  affected   the   appellant
    adversely.  The issue about re-entering into  the  United  Kingdom  and
    with regard to the ID card was not properly considered.

11.  Mr Jarvis was unsure whether this was a matter that had been raised  by
    the Presenting Officer with the judge.  The issue of re-entry  had  not
    been explored.  It seemed that the Presenting Officer  could  not  have
    put it to him and he could not answer it with regard to the  revocation
    of the suspended sentence.   The only information on this was at page 1
    of the refusal letter and the matter could have been dealt with  by  an
    adjournment and the provision of an interpreter.  It was  important  on
    both sides to be clear.  The Presenting Officer needed to  be  able  to
    cross-examine.  The emphasis of the decision moved away from the  issue
    of conduct.  The act of requiring  registration  showed  an  underlying
    policy.

12.  Mr Jarvis undertook to send in submissions with regard  to  the  system
    of registration and the number of years during which a person would  be
    expected to have their name on the register.  If the Tribunal found  an
    error of law then it was asked to remit the matter back to  the  First-
    tier bearing in mind the procedural error that had been perpetrated.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  I have a greater concern about the procedural issues in this case  than
    the substantive ones.  I think that in the absence  of  any  procedural
    unfairness the judge would  have  been  entitled  to  conclude  if  the
    evidence remained  before  him  as  was  considered  by  him  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of proof on her.  I am
    grateful to Mr Jarvis for the Note he  provided  very  soon  after  the
    hearing. This clarifies the appellant's criminal record from Poland and
    gives information as to the legal provisions behind the  issuing  of  a
    Notification Order.  Such an  order  was  granted  in  respect  of  the
    appellant on 26 July 2013, placing him on the register  until  6  April
    2020 (ten years from the date of his conviction).  The purpose is  that
    of protection of  the  public  in  the  UK,  but  the  criteria  relate
    essentially to past conviction rather than  current  risk.   The  judge
    clearly took account of the appellant's  criminal  record,  bearing  in
    mind that the decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
    conduct of the person, and that previous criminal convictions do not in
    themselves justify the decision.  The index conviction was in  2010  in
    relation to an offence committed in 2006.  The only offence  thereafter
    was the offence of exporting goods with intent to evade duty, which the
    judge was entitled to consider to be minor.  There is the point of  re-
    entry to the United Kingdom on legitimate documentation but in a  false
    name, which was of relevance, but it is entirely unclear  whether  that
    point  was in fact put to the judge.  There is no reference  to  it  in
    the decision letter and the first time it appears is in the grounds  of
    appeal.

15.  As regards procedural matters however, I consider that the judge  erred
    in proceeding without an interpreter.  He took the  risk  that  if  the
    decision had been adverse to the appellant  there  would  clearly  have
    been procedural  impropriety  in  dismissing  the  appeal  without  the
    appellant being properly represented.  Clearly one does not  know  what
    might have come out of a proper cross-examination where  the  appellant
    had notice of the hearing, had the opportunity to obtain representation
    and had the benefits  of  an  interpreter.   The  judge's  decision  to
    proceed bearing in mind the overriding  objective  and  the  particular
    circumstances was  understandable.   In  the  circumstances  however  I
    consider that he erred as a matter of law in proceeding as he  did  and
    leaving the Presenting Officer in a situation where  he  was  inhibited
    from cross-examining.  It may well be that  on  a  rehearing  the  same
    result will be reached.  One simply does not know, but I consider  that
    the case needs to be reheard whether or not the appellant  is  able  to
    attend or not, on the  basis  of  the  proper  procedures  having  been
    observed.  Accordingly I allow this appeal to the  extent  that  it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier for a rehearing in light  of  the  fact
    that the error of law is one of procedural error.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen 5 July 2017

