
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00679/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 February 2015                  | On 10 March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     HM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr T Melvin a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        Ms C Hulse of counsel instructed by Virgo
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
       ("the Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Uganda who
       was born on 22 October 1979 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of  State
       was given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Eban ("the  FTTJ")  who  had  allowed  the  claimant's
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 27 March 2014  to
       refuse to revoke a deportation order made against him.


    2. The Secretary of State's appeal came before me and  Lord  Boyd  on  2
       October 2014. We concluded that there was a material error of law  in
       the decision of the FTTJ. We allowed the Secretary of State's appeal,
       set aside the decision and ordered that it  be  re-determined  before
       the Upper Tribunal. The  claimant  was  given  permission  to  adduce
       further evidence. Our Decision and Reasons, prepared by Lord Boyd, is
       set out in the Appendix.


    3. It is in these circumstances that the appeal comes  back  before  me,
       sitting as a single judge. The additional evidence now submitted is a
       confidential  report  from  an  Independent  Social   Worker   (Peter
       Horrocks) and an  Amended  Statement  of  Special  Educational  Needs
       prepared for Croydon Council (with attachments) both of which  relate
       to the claimant's stepson K.


    4. I have a skeleton argument from Ms Hulse and,  from  Mr  Melvin,  the
       skeleton argument submitted by his colleague which was before  us  at
       the last hearing. Mr Melvin submitted LC (China) v Secretary of State
       for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1310.  I   asked   the
       representatives whether they could provide me  with  a  copy  of  the
       sentencing remarks made by the judge when the claimant was  sentenced
       for murder at the Central Criminal Court on 13 March 1998. These were
       not amongst my papers. Mr Melvin was able to provide a copy.


    5. There were no further witness statements and no application  to  call
       oral evidence.


    6. Mr Melvin relied on his skeleton argument which set out the  relevant
       law. The appeal fell to be considered under  the  provisions  of  the
       Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act")  and  the  amended  Immigration
       Rules ("the Rules") which came into  effect  on  28  July  2014.  The
       claimant's sentence excluded him from the provisions of paragraph 399
       and 399A of the Rules. He came within section 117 and  in  particular
       117C of the 2014 Act. It was necessary to  balance  his  private  and
       family life against the public  interest.  The  Rules  constituted  a
       complete code and provided strong emphasis for the weight to be given
       to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign   criminals.   Very
       exceptional  circumstances  were  needed  to  outweigh   the   public
       interest.


    7. LC (China) made it clear that "exceptional circumstances" were a high-
       level test. The claimant started his relationship  with  his  partner
       when he faced deportation. He was served with notice of intention  to
       deport whilst he was in prison. All his private and family  life  was
       gained whilst his status was  precarious.  Little  weight  should  be
       given to a relationship formed at such a time. Mr Melvin said that he
       had considered the Independent Social Worker's  report  and  accepted
       that it would be of benefit to the children if the claimant  remained
       in this country. However, after taking this into account, there  were
       still no exceptional circumstances. Any delay  on  the  part  of  the
       Secretary of State should not be placed in  the  scales  and  weighed
       against her. He said that the claimant's brother had been removed  to
       Uganda last year, although it was  accepted  that  he  did  not  have
       family or children here.  Neither  the  Independent  Social  Worker's
       report  nor  the  Croydon  Council  report  were  challenged  by  the
       Secretary of State.


    8. Ms Hulse submitted that this  was  a  curious  case.  The  claimant's
       conviction was as long ago as February 2008. It was  not  correct  to
       say that the  Secretary  of  State  always  intended  to  deport  the
       claimant. There was no indication in the sentencing  remarks  that  a
       recommendation for deportation had been made. All the facts had to be
       taken into account in  considering  whether  there  were  exceptional
       circumstances.  The  claimant's  stepson  (K)  had  severe   learning
       difficulties. It was clearly in his best interests that the  claimant
       should be allowed to remain  to  help  look  after  him.  This  would
       benefit the family and the public purse.  If  he  had  to  leave  the
       country the family could no longer afford to live  in  their  present
       accommodation and there was a real risk  of  substantially  increased
       costs for educating and  treating  K.  I  was  asked  to  follow  the
       conclusions set out in paragraph 18 of our earlier decision.


    9. Ms Hulse said that  the  claimant's  relationship  with  his  partner
       started before he was told that he was at risk  of  deportation.  She
       relied on her skeleton argument.


   10. In reply Mr Melvin reiterated that the  new  Rules  were  a  complete
       code. The circumstances of this case were not exceptional and did not
       outweigh the public interest.


   11. I reserved my determination.


   12. Paragraphs A362,  390,  390A,  398,  399  and  399A  of  the  current
       Immigration Rules provide that;


           "Where Article 8 is raised in the context of  deportation  under
           Part 13 of these Rules, the claim  under  Article  8  will  only
           succeed where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014
           are met, regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or
           the deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


           390. An application for revocation of a deportation  order  will
           be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances  including
           the following:
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.


           390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  will  be
           outweighed by other factors.

           A398. These rules apply where:
           (a) a foreign criminal liable to  deportation  claims  that  his
           deportation  would  be  contrary   to   the   United   Kingdom's
           obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
           (b) a foreign criminal applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
           against him to be revoked.


           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and
           (a) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
           (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A.


           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case
           (a) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to  live  in  the
           country to which the person is to be deported; and
           (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the  UK
           without the person who is to be deported; or
           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled  in
           the UK, and
           (i) the relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
           (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration  status
           was not precarious; and
           (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  the
           country to which the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
           compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
           paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
           (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported.


           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most  of
           his life; and
           (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and 8
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
           into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


   13. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 set out where  the  public
       interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;


           117A Application of this Part
           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine
           whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family
           life under Article 8, and
           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.
           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must
           (in particular) have regard-
           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section  117B,
           and
           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).


           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases
           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
           public interest.
           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
           established by a person at a time when  the  person  is  in  the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.
           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.


           117C Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
           foreign criminals
           (1) The deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
           interest.
           (2)  The  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation  of
           the criminal.
           (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has  not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4) Exception 1 applies where-
           (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most
           of C's life,
           (b) C is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
           (5) Exception 2 applies where C has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.
           (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to
           a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
           interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2.
           (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the  reason
           for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
           criminal has been convicted.


           117D Interpretation of this Part
           (1) In this Part-
           "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
           Rights;
           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-
           (a) is a British citizen, or
           (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of
           seven years or more;
           "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
           (a) is a British citizen, or
           (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning  of
           the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
           (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an  offence,
           and
           (c) who-
           (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least
           12 months,
           (ii) has been convicted of an offence that  has  caused  serious
           harm, or
           (iii) is a persistent offender.
           (3) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to
           an order under-
           (a) section 5 of the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
           (insanity etc),
           (b) section 57 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
           (insanity etc), or
           (c) Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)  Order
           1986 (insanity etc),
           has not been convicted of an offence.
           (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
           (a) do not  include  a  person  who  has  received  a  suspended
           sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that  the  sentence
           or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
           (b) do not include a person who has been sentenced to  a  period
           of imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue  of  being
           sentenced to consecutive sentences  amounting  in  aggregate  to
           that length of time;
           (c) include a person who is sentenced to detention,  or  ordered
           or directed to be detained,  in  an  institution  other  than  a
           prison (including, in particular, a hospital or  an  institution
           for young offenders) for that length of time; and
           (d) include  a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
           detention, or  ordered  or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
           indeterminate period, provided that it may  last  for  at  least
           that length of time.
           (5) If any question arises for the purposes of this Part  as  to
           whether a person is a British citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
           asserting that fact to prove it."


   14. The  claimant  has  raised  Article  8  grounds  in  the  context  of
       deportation under Part 13 of the Rules with the consequence that  his
       claim under Article 8 can only succeed where the requirements of  the
       Rules as at 28 July 2014 are met even though  the  deportation  order
       was served on him before then. The Rules on deportation  represent  a
       complete code on Article 8 (MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192) and must now  be  read  in  the
       light of the provisions of the 2014 Act.


   15. Because of Paragraph  398(a)  the  deportation  of  the  claimant  is
       conducive to the public good and in the public  interest  because  he
       has been convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced to a
       period of at least four years imprisonment. Paragraphs 399  and  399A
       do not apply with the result that it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
       circumstances that the public interest in maintaining the deportation
       order will be outweighed by other factors.


   16. Under paragraph 117B of the  2014  Act  this  is  a  case  where  the
       claimant is a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period  of
       imprisonment of at least four years. As a result the public  interest
       requires deportation unless there are very compelling  circumstances,
       over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


   17. Applying Devaseelan principles, the FTTJ took as her  starting  point
       the determination of Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane  promulgated  on  5
       January 2009. These are  set  out  in  paragraph  23  of  the  FTTJ's
       determination, which I adopt. I note that Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane
       was dealing with the appeals of both the claimant and his brother.


   18. The FTTJ then went on to assess the evidence since the hearing before
       Upper Tribunal Judge Lane. I  adopt  her  record  of  the  additional
       evidence and her findings of fact in paragraphs 25, 28 and 30.


   19. It is not suggested that there has  been  any  great  change  in  the
       claimant's circumstances since the FTTJ  heard  the  appeal  in  June
       2014, although I now have  the  benefit  of  the  Independent  Social
       Worker's Report and the report to Croydon  Council  the  contents  of
       which are not disputed by the Secretary of State. Some  further  time
       has passed and the provisions of the new Rules and the 2014 Act  have
       come into effect and must be considered.


   20. I also adopt what we said in paragraphs 19 to 22 of our Decision  and
       Reasons set out in the Appendix. Any delays by the Secretary of State
       in this case did not, as the FTTJ  found,  "significantly  weaken(ed)
       the case for deportation". These periods are however relevant to  the
       extent that the claimant's ties to the UK and his  family  life  have
       deepened over time. This is not a case where it is suggested that the
       claimant  has  been  the  cause  of  any   substantial   delays   for
       impermissible reasons. For example he has not tried to hide.


   21. The claimant's crime was the most serious known to the criminal  law.
       It must excite deep revulsion in society. There is a need for  public
       confidence that such offenders will be properly  punished  and  dealt
       with including by removing them from  the  country.  Other  potential
       foreign criminals need to be deterred. The judge's sentencing remarks
       do not shed much light on the circumstances of the offence,  although
       I note that the claimant was one of five  people  convicted  four  of
       whom were the main participants in an armed attack on a young man  in
       his own home. The sentencing remarks contain  no  recommendation  for
       deportation. The claimant was sentenced to life imprisonment  with  a
       tariff of 10 years which was  subsequently  reduced  to  9  years  on
       appeal. He was released on  licence  on  6  March  2006.  The  public
       interest in deporting foreign criminal convicted of such a crime must
       be at or very close to the top of any scale.


   22. Against this recognition of the strength of the public interest  must
       be set the factors which favour the claimant. I have already  adopted
       certain findings of the  FTTJ  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane.  In
       addition and in summary the claimant has turned his life around since
       leaving prison. He has become a hard-working and reliable  member  of
       the community who seeks to mentor young people who may have  been  in
       prison or risk ending up there. He is a caring family man  who  helps
       to support  three  children  one  of  whom  has  challenging  special
       educational needs (K). He has been diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome
       and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. The reports now  before
       me show that there is likely to be a  serious  deterioration  in  his
       condition if the claimant is removed. The  claimant  is  particularly
       good at helping him through  problem  periods  and  coping  with  his
       difficulties. The other two children, whilst they do not  have  their
       elder sibling's difficulties, are likely to suffer from the  knock-on
       effect of  the  deterioration  in  their  elder  brother's  sometimes
       violent behaviour which is likely to follow the breakup of the family
       by the removal of the claimant. It would be in the best interests  of
       all three children for the claimant to remain in  this  country  with
       his children. It is accepted that the family cannot leave the country
       with him. Without the joint incomes of the claimant and  his  partner
       it is likely that they will have to  give  up  their  home  with  the
       increased risk of damaging effects on K.  The  claimant,  who  was  a
       teenager when convicted of murder, has had no other  convictions  and
       is at low risk of reoffending.


   23. Like the FTTJ I find this difficult case with a  difficult  balancing
       exercise.  Looking  at  all   the   evidence   in   the   round   and
       notwithstanding all that I have said about the weight to be given  to
       the public interest I find that the  claimant  has  established  that
       there are exceptional circumstances which outweigh that interest.


   24. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction. Whilst I have not been asked to
       make a similar direction I consider it appropriate to do so.  I  make
       an order under rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any  matter
       likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant or any
       member of his family.


   25. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake that decision  and
       allow the claimant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.






       .............................................
       Signed      Date 11 February 2015
       Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

                                  APPENDIX

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By determination promulgated on 11 July 2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    comprising of Judge Eban allowed an appeal against a decision  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  dated  27  March  2014  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order in respect of the appellant.  The Secretary of  State
    now appeals against that decision.

 2. We will refer to the appellant in these proceedings as the Secretary of
    State and the respondent as the appellant as he was in the  proceedings
    before the FTT.

 3. The appellant, HM, was born on 22 October 1979.  He  is  a  citizen  of
    Uganda.  He came to the UK as a boy with his mother and brother.  On 17
    February 1998 he was convicted at the Central Criminal Court of murder.
     He was sentenced to life imprisonment and given a tariff of  10  years
    reduced on appeal to 9 years.  He was  released  from  prison  on  life
    licence on 6 March 2006.

 4. The immigration history is  lengthy  and  set  out  in  detail  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision letter.  The important  dates  for  these
    purposes are as follows.  The appellant came to the UK on  29  November
    1991.  (The determination gives the date as October 1990.   We  do  not
    think anything turns on this discrepancy; clearly he was a boy when  he
    arrived in the UK.)  He and his brother were added  to  their  mother's
    pending asylum claim as dependents.  The asylum claim was  refused  but
    the appellant was granted exceptional leave to remain as a dependent of
    his mother until 29 November 1992.  On 28 September 1996 he was granted
    indefinite leave to remain (ILR).   As  noted  above  in  1998  he  was
    convicted of murder.  On 25 February 2006, shortly before his  release
    on 6 March 2006, he was served with a liability for deportation notice.
     On 10 February 2008 he  was  detained  under  immigration  powers  and
    served with a notice of intention to deport.   The  appellant  appealed
    against deportation.  The appeal was allowed but  that  was  overturned
    following a judicial review at the instance of the UK Border Agency.  A
    further hearing before a tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal on 5
    January 2009.  An application was made for permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal but this was refused.  A further application  was  made
    and again refused.  A deportation order was made on 23 April  2009.   A
    further application to the Court of Appeal  for  an  oral  hearing  was
    refused on 11 June 2009.  On 18 June 2009  the  appellant's  solicitors
    made a human rights claim.  This was refused on 28 July  2009  and  was
    certified with an Out of Country appeal on the same date.  According to
    the decision letter the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on  18
    May 2010.  On 15 May 2012  further  representations  were  received  on
    article 8 grounds and the appellant was served with a refusal to revoke
    a deportation order on 9 November 2012.  A judicial review against that
    decision was refused in March 2013.  On 14 October 2013 a supplementary
    decision letter was served on the appellant.  On 15  November  2013  an
    amended grounds of claim was filed on the appellant's behalf.   Further
    procedure resulted in the making of the decision to refuse to revoke  a
    deportation order.

 5. In determining the appeal the FTT had regard  to  the  decision  of  UT
    Judge Lane in a decision promulgated on 5 January 2009 when he refused
    the appellant's appeal against the notice of intention to deport  dated
    11 February 2008.

Appellant's personal circumstances

 6. As noted above the appellant came to the UK when he was  aged  11  with
    his mother and brother.  He has been in the  UK  since  then.   Shortly
    after his release from prison the appellant  commenced  a  relationship
    with JR who is a British citizen.  She  has  a  child  K  from  another
    relationship.  That child is now 10 years old.  He has  been  diagnosed
    with Asperger's Syndrome and ADHD.  A letter from Maddie  Woollcott,  a
    CAMHS clinical specialist dated 13 January 2014 notes:

        "Due to his difficulties,  K  can  be  challenging  to  manage  and
        requires a firm, consistent and predictable approach.   Changes  to
        the  structure  of  his  family  can  therefore  have  a   severely
        detrimental impact upon his  behaviour  and  wellbeing.   We  would
        therefore support the family's request to remain together".

 7. The appellant has assumed parental responsibility for K who regards him
    as his father.  The appellant and his  partner  have  two  children  of
    their own now aged 7 and 4.

 8. The appellant is currently employed as a gas engineer and has been  for
    the last  8 years.   There  are  very  positive  references  from  his
    employers, friends and probation officer.  He is active in  the  church
    and in the community,  in  particular  taking  a  mentoring  role  with
    troubled teenagers and those expelled from school.

Issues before the FTT

 9. The issues for the FTT were (1) the applicability of section 72 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;  (2)  an  asylum  and
    article 3 claim; and (3) an article 8 claim.  The  FTT  rejected  the
    asylum and article 3 claim and that is not an issue for us.

Section 72

10. The Secretary of State issued a certificate under  section  72  of  the
    2002 Act that the presumption that the appellant constituted  a  danger
    to the community of the UK applied.  The FTT found that  the  appellant
    did not constitute such a danger.  The  grounds  of  appeal  include  a
    challenge to that finding on the grounds that there  were  insufficient
    reasons.  Mr Jarvis did not press that challenge.  It is in any  event
    not determinative of the matter since the asylum  issue  is  no  longer
    before us.  Suffice to say that we consider that the reasons  given  at
    paragraphs 12 and 13  of  the  determination  are  full  and  carefully
    reasoned.

Article 8 claim

11. The FTT set out its consideration of this issue in paragraphs 21 to 32.
     The starting point was Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane's determination
    which found against the appellant on the article 8 issue.  The FTT then
    notes  the  additional  evidence  since  2002  including  the  evidence
    relating to K.  At paragraph 28  the  FTT  set  out  the  factors  that
    Judge Eban has taken into account in determining proportionality.  She
    concluded at paragraph 29 that it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children that they remain with  him  and  the  family  unit
    continues as of now.  Judge Eban then goes on to consider whether there
    are exceptional circumstances.  She sets out a  number  of  factors  in
    addition to those in  paragraph 28  which  he  took  into  account  in
    considering this issue.

12. At paragraph 31 Judge Eban finds that the appellant has turned his life
    around completely.  He is a hardworking  and  reliable  member  of  the
    community who seeks to mentor young people who may have been in  prison
    or risk ending up there.  He is a caring family man looking  after  his
    children, one of whom has special educational needs.  He is  at  a  low
    risk of reoffending and it would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  his
    children were he to remain with them.  She concluded  that  on  balance
    the level of  the  appellant's  reintegration  amounts  to  exceptional
    circumstances.

13. Judge Eban then sets what she finds  to  be  exceptional  circumstances
    against the weight to  be  given  to  all  the  public  policy  factors
    identified.  She made particular reference to the need to deter foreign
    criminals from committing serious  offences,  the  legitimate  need  to
    reflect society's public revulsion of such crimes and  to  ensure  that
    the public  will  have  confidence  that  offenders  will  be  properly
    punished.

14. At paragraph 32 Judge Eban states that she has found this an  extremely
    difficult balancing exercise and continues:

        "The State's delays in dealing with this  appellant  between  March
        2006 and February 2008 and again between July 2009  and  May  2012
        have in my view significantly weakened  the  case  for  deportation
        now.  Weighing up all the public interest and the private  interest
        and taking all relevant matters into account, I find  that  on  the
        facts of this appeal the public  interest  does  not  outweigh  the
        private interest.  I find that the respondent's  decision  was  not
        proportionate".

Submissions for Secretary of State

15. Mr Jarvis relied on the grounds of appeal and  expanded  upon  them  in
    written and oral submissions.  He submitted that the FTT failed to give
    adequate  reasons  why  the  appellant's  circumstances  have   changed
    significantly  since  his  appeal  was  refused  by  UT Judge Lane's
    determination in 2009; failed to recognise that in order to demonstrate
    exceptional  circumstances  the  appellant  must  show  that  they  are
    something above and beyond that in IR 399(a) or (b) and failed to  give
    adequate weight to the public interest in deportation.  Mr Jarvis  also
    submitted that the FTT were in error in  placing  weight  on  perceived
    delays both in respect of  finding  exceptional  circumstances  and  in
    weakening the public interest in deportation.  He referred us to Onur v
    The United Kingdom [2009] ECHR 289.  In considering the issue of delay
    in a deportation case the European Court of Human Rights said:

        "Clearly there was a long delay between the  letter  notifying  the
        applicant that the Secretary of State was  considering  deportation
        and the decision to deport  him.   In  the  present  circumstances,
        however, the delay is only relevant  to  the  question  of  whether
        deportation was necessary in a democratic society as  it  permitted
        the applicant to build closer ties to the United Kingdom".

16. On this point Mr Jarvis also referred us to the cases of Patel & Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department 2013 UKSC 72  and  Hakemi  &
    Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWHC  1967
    (Admin) (19 July 2012).

Submissions for appellant

17. Ms Beach submitted that there  was  no  error  of  law.   Much  of  the
    Secretary of State's complaints were with the weight that was  attached
    to particular factors rather than the legality  of  the  approach.   It
    appeared that permission to appeal had been granted  primarily  on  the
    basis of delay.  The Secretary of State had  not  properly  stated  the
    chronology.  In particular the appellant became appeal rights exhausted
    in July 2009 not in May 2010.  The  reason  for  the  delay  in  taking
    action after July 2009 was  not  before  the  FTT  and  should  not  be
    considered.  Onur could be distinguished; the issue was one  of  public
    interest.  The basis of the immigration rules was the public  interest.
    If  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to  enforce  the  rules  it  was
    demonstrative of her approach to the public interest.

Decision

18. This was  an  extremely  difficult  decision.   On  the  one  hand  the
    appellant is a foreign criminal who has  been  convicted  of  the  most
    serious crime of murder.  It  is  difficult  to  overstate  the  public
    interest in deportation in such a case.  In our opinion that  is  fully
    recognised in Judge Eban's careful analysis.  On the other hand  Judge
    Eban was faced with a substantial amount of evidence supportive of  the
    article 8 claims.  Of particular significance are K's  special  needs.
    It is clear that the appellant's partner  would  not  go  with  him  to
    Uganda because of K's needs. That would split the family and inevitably
    impact on K.  That factor is set against the background which  includes
    the appellant's young age when he committed the offence, the  low  risk
    of reoffending, the length of time he has been in this country and  his
    role in the family and wider community including his  charitable  work.
    It is difficult to imagine a more positive set  of  circumstances  from
    someone convicted of such a serious offence.

19. However, having set out in some detail the circumstances on  each  side
    of the scales Judge Eban then went on to look at the issue  of  delay.
    It appears from paragraph 32 that it is this issue which finally swings
    the balance against the Secretary of State.  It is necessary  therefore
    to consider this point in more detail.

20. Two periods of delay are noted.  The first is between  March 2006  and
    February 2008.  The second is between July 2009  and  May  2012.   The
    first period follows the appellant's release from prison  until  served
    with the notice of intention to deport.  The second follows the refusal
    of the human rights claim in July 2009  until  further  representations
    were made on article 8 grounds in May 2012.  According to  the  grounds
    of appeal the delay  was  caused  through  police  investigations  into
    possible death threats and investigations into the  appellant's  family
    life following the birth of his child in 2011.  The Secretary of  State
    maintains that the appellant became appeals right exhausted on  18  May
    2010 but Ms Beach submitted that this date was wrong; it was July 2009.
     While the date in May 2010 comes from the Secretary of State's  letter
    we cannot determine from  the  other  dates  how  this  is  calculated.
    Accordingly we will assume for present purposes a date  of  July  2009.
    We also agree with Ms Beach that we cannot  now  consider  explanations
    for the delay that were not before the FTT.

21. The issue then is whether or not the FTT were entitled to come  to  the
    view that "the State's delays" in dealing  with  the  appellant  during
    these periods "significantly weakened the case for deportation".

22. As we understood Ms Beach's submissions they were to  the  effect  that
    the Secretary of State's delay showed that the  State  took  a  relaxed
    view of  the  public  interest  in  deportation;  if  the  State  truly
    considered that there was a substantial and overwhelming case to remove
    the appellant they would have done so already.  We cannot  accept  that
    submission.  It is of course true that  bureaucracies  sometimes  march
    slowly particularly when faced with those who  are  determined  to  use
    every legitimate, and sometimes illegitimate  means  to  resist.   That
    does not necessarily mean that the State has lost  interest.   Moreover
    the public interest should not be equated  with  those  of  the  State.
    While the State may articulate and enforce the public interest it is an
    autonomous concept which goes beyond the interests of the government of
    the day.  While we cannot say that the State's delay in  taking  action
    will never be a factor, in our opinion the real question is whether  or
    not during the period of any delay the appellant's ties to the  UK  and
    family  life  have  deepened  to  the  point   where   deportation   is
    disproportionate.

23. In our view the FTT was wrong  to  conclude  that  the  State's  delays
    significantly weakened the  case  for  deportation  for  the  following
    reasons.  First, at no point could the appellant have been in any doubt
    that the Secretary of State was minded to deport him.  During the first
    period he was subject to the liability for deportation notice.   During
    the second period he was subject to  a  deportation  order.   Secondly,
    much of the private life on which the appellant relies was  established
    during the time that his stay in the UK was precarious because  of  his
    immigration  status.   That   includes   the   establishment   of   his
    relationship and the birth of his children as well  as  his  employment
    during the time he was subject to a deportation order.  Thirdly, as the
    European Court of Human Rights pointed out in Onur the appellant  could
    have had no legitimate expectation that a decision to deport him  would
    take place within a particular time period.

24. Accordingly we have come to the view that there is an error of  law  in
    the FTT's reasoning.  Given that it plainly swung the  balance  in  the
    FTT's determination we conclude that the error is material and we  will
    allow the appeal.

New decision

25. Mr Jarvis suggested that the case should be kept in the Upper Tribunal.
     Ms Beach argued that it should be sent back for a rehearing before the
    FTT.  Given that it would fall to be considered under reference to  the
    new rules the appellant would want to adduce more evidence in  relation
    to K's condition.

26. While we can quite understand that the appellant may wish to adduce new
    evidence this can be done before the Upper Tribunal.  We shall set  the
    case down for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

27. We shall make a direction for an anonymity order.


LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
