
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00385/2013
     DA/00387/2013
     DA/00388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |                             |
|On 27 June 2014                               |On 16 July 2014              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LS
                                     ks
                                     qs
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G. Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:    Ms M. Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was  born  on  15  July
    1984.   She is the mother of the two other appellants  who  are  minors
    who were born on 23 September 2004 and 19 October 2005 respectively.

 3. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 21 February 2000 as a  visitor
    when she was about 15 years of age.  She arrived with her mother.  On 7
    January 2011 she was convicted of an offence of possession with  intent
    to supply a Class A drug, namely 27.3 grammes of cocaine, that  offence
    having been committed on 9 September 2010. On 3 February  2011  in  the
    Crown Court at Cambridge she received a sentence  of  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment.

 4. On 13 February 2013 a decision was made to deport the  first  appellant
    under the automatic deportation provisions of Section 32(5) of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007, with corresponding deportation decisions  in  respect
    of the minor appellants.  The appeals came before a panel of the First-
    tier Tribunal which allowed the appeals of each appellant,  the  appeal
    of the first appellant being allowed under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    that of the minor appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR. The Secretary
    of  State  having  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  against  those
    decisions, permission to appeal was ultimately granted.

 5. I should mention  at  this  stage  that  this  appeal  came  before  me
    initially on 11 April 2014 whereby an issue arose in  relation  to  the
    grant of permission.  I can deal with that issue very shortly  at  this
    stage.  In a 'Rule 24'  response  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  grant  of
    permission, it was contended on behalf of the appellants  that  because
    the application made to the First-tier Tribunal was out  of  time,  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have "not admitted"  that application.

 6. It was contended that in consequence, the renewed  application  to  the
    Upper Tribunal should have provided an explanation for the lateness  of
    the application to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I heard submissions from both parties in relation to that issue,  as  I
    say, on 11 April 2014. In a written decision promulgated on or about 20
    May 2014, I concluded that the decision of the Upper Tribunal  granting
    permission to appeal was a valid decision and did  confer  jurisdiction
    on the Upper Tribunal to consider the appeal.

 8. I now deal with the substantive challenge by the Secretary of State  to
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  whereby  the  appeals  of  the
    appellants were  allowed.  The  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal concern, not necessarily in order of  preference  advanced  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State, the lack  of  any  reference  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  to  risk  of  reoffending,  and  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusions under the Immigration  Rules  in  terms  of  the
    reasonableness of the minor appellants  being  required  to  return  to
    Jamaica with the appellant.

 9. It is also said in  the  grounds  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    adequate consideration to objective evidence in relation to the special
    educational needs of one of the children, Q, who was born on 19 October
    2006, and that there was a failure to give adequate reasons for finding
    that the circumstances in that child's case are exceptional.

10. With reference to various parts of the determination, Mr Jack on behalf
    of the Secretary of State submitted that there was  a lack of  adequate
    or sufficient reasons given for finding that it was not  reasonable  to
    expect the minor appellants to return to Jamaica.  I was referred to  a
    decision of the Court of Appeal reported as EV (Philippines) and others
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  That was  a  decision  concerning  a  Philippines
    national who came to the United Kingdom with a work permit as a skilled
    care worker and was given leave to remain until 8th February 2011.  She
    arrived on 12th June 2007.  She was later joined by her husband in 2008
    and three children in July 2009.

11. Mr Jack in particular referred me to [60] of that decision which stated
    that in that case none of the family is a British citizen and none  has
    a right to remain in the UK.  It further stated that if the  mother  is
    removed, the father had no independent right to remain and that if  the
    parents are removed it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to
    go with them.  The court went on to state that as the Immigration Judge
    found, it was obviously in their best interests to  remain  with  their
    parents and

         "Although it is, of course a question of fact for the  tribunal,  I
         cannot see that  the  desirability  of  being  educated  at  public
         expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to  the  children  of
         remaining with their parents.  Just as we  cannot  provide  medical
         treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world."

    Mr Jack relies on that passage  as  being  a  factor  relevant  to  the
    question of reasonableness of their return.

12. Ms Knorr points me to the factual background of  the  appeal  of  these
    appellants, in particular the history of  the  first  appellant.   That
    history is set out  extensively  at  [3]  and  [4]  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.  I do not consider it necessary to  refer  at
    this stage to the particular  details  but  they  include  a  claim  of
    physical and sexual abuse by her stepfather.

13. Ms Knorr submits that the appellant's background must have informed the
    judge's assessment of the facts, and  the  determination  reflects  the
    matters that were in issue before the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact are set out from [10] of the
    determination.  It was noted that the Secretary of State "unequivocally
    conceded" that there was no other family member who was  able  to  take
    care of the minor appellants in the  UK  given  that  their  father,  I
    understand being a Mr S, is a Jamaican national who has not settled  in
    the United Kingdom and merely had limited leave to remain until at that
    stage, at least until 11th March 2013. In the findings  the  First-tier
    Tribunal also made reference to  the  lack  of  any  challenge  to  the
    factual basis of the appeal, stating at  [10]  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's representative in closing submissions  did  not  refer  to  any
    evidence or otherwise put in issue the evidence of  Ms  H  who  is  the
    appellant's stepsister or half-sister, and whose evidence was  relevant
    to the background to the appeal.

15. The judge made many findings of fact.  He referred to the private lives
    of all the appellants in the UK.  In relation to the minor  appellants,
    he said that their private lives comprise the period of their residence
    in the UK, the development of friendships and personal ties which  were
    set out in the witness statement, and their attendance at a  particular
    school.  The judge noted that those  private  lives,  in  particular  I
    suppose the first appellant's private life, was embarked  on  during  a
    time during  which  the  first  appellant  resided  in  the  UK  as  an
    overstayer and the minor appellants as illegal residents.

16. At [15] the judge referred to the question of reasonableness, again  in
    relation to the child Q born on 19 October 2006, but who had not  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years.  The daughter  of  the
    first appellant, K, having been born on 23 April 2004, had  resided  in
    the UK for at least seven years.

17. At [16] it was recognised that K was not a British  citizen  and  there
    was again reference to her immigration  status.   The  Tribunal  stated
    that she was an illegal resident although again stating that she is not
    responsible for that status, of course having been  the  responsibility
    of her mother.  The Tribunal concluded that K had no meaningful contact
    or connection with Jamaica, that  the  first  appellant's  relationship
    with her mother is remote and that her mother suffers from difficulties
    with her health, not being able to provide meaningful assistance to the
    appellants if they were to settle in Jamaica.  The Tribunal noted  that
    K had resided in the UK for the entirety of her life and that that  was
    a period just in excess of nine years at the date of the hearing.

18. It was  also  concluded  that  she  had  been  anglicised  "to  a  very
    considerable degree" and that she had community ties and  affiliations,
    not least those which she has derived from her continuous attendance at
    the school that she attends.  The First-tier judge  went  on  to  state
    that her life and aspirations are inextricably linked with  the  United
    Kingdom and that it would be "harsh and cruel to uproot her".

19. With reference to the decision in EV, Mr Jack referred to [35] of  that
    decision which sets out a number of factors which could be  taken  into
    account, and maybe ought to be taken into account, in an assessment  of
    the  best  interests  of  a  child.  Mr  Jack  submitted   that   those
    considerations are equally applicable in a reasonableness assessment as
    required by the Immigration Rules in a deportation case.

20. I am however, satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  take  into
    account a wide range of factors in the assessment of whether  it  would
    be reasonable to expect K to leave the United Kingdom.   Those  factors
    are set out in the determination and include the length  of  time  that
    she has been here, the strength of her connections to the  UK  and  the
    connections, or lack of them, to Jamaica, as well as what support could
    be expected for the family as a whole on return to Jamaica.   Again  it
    is important to refer at this point to Ms Knorr's submissions in  terms
    of the factual background to the appeal which  was  the  platform  from
    which the judge's conclusions were reached.

21. As I observed during the course of submissions, it does seem to me that
    the First-tier Tribunal did  to  some  degree  conflate  considerations
    under Article 8 and under the Article 8 Immigration Rules, seemingly at
    [11] starting or embarking on the consideration of Article 8 proper and
    then at [14] moving on to consider the  Article  8  Immigration  Rules.
    But again, I think there is some merit in the observation made in  turn
    by Ms Knorr to the effect that the state of  the  authorities  at  that
    point was not clear in terms  of  the  inter-relationship  between  the
    Rules and Article 8.

22. In any event, notwithstanding that possible conflation between  Article
    8 and the Immigration Rules, I am not satisfied that that gives rise to
    any error of law, and indeed it was not a point relied on on behalf  of
    the respondent.

23. The grounds, as I have already suggested, take issue with the fact that
    the First-tier Tribunal made no mention of  the  risk  of  reoffending.
    The argument, it seems to me, seems to have moved on from the assertion
    that there was no mention of it in its own  terms,  to  the  contention
    that it should have been factored into  the  reasonableness  assessment
    under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants that in many cases the risk of reoffending would be a factor
    to be taken into account in the reasonableness assessment but  this  is
    not one of those cases, it was contended.

24. It is true that the First-tier Tribunal made no reference to  the  risk
    of reoffending and in many cases it would amount to an error of law  to
    have failed to have done so.

25. However, if it is an error of law in this case it is not  one  that  is
    material, either to considerations under the Immigration  Rules  or  to
    the pure Article 8 consideration. That is because, firstly, it does not
    seem to me that that was a matter relied on behalf  of  the  respondent
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   More  importantly,  in  a  forensic
    psychiatric assessment by Dr A Basu dated 3 June 2012, the  appellant's
    risk of  reoffending  is  expressed  to  be  low.  That  assessment  is
    confirmed in a report by the probation officer, Julia Bateman,  in  her
    letter dated 22 August 2012.

26. I do not believe that it has ever been contended that there is anything
    wrong with those assessments of the appellant's risk of reoffending. In
    the circumstances of this appeal, if there is an error of law  in  that
    regard it is not one that  could  have  affected  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

27. Insofar as the grounds suggest that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    take into account the public interest in deportation,  that  is  not  a
    contention which in my view has  any  merit.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    referred to the important public interest in the prevention of disorder
    and  crime  at  [12]  of  the  determination,  indicating  that   "very
    significant weight" needed to be accorded to the  public  interest  and
    the desirability of non-national criminals being deported. The same was
    again referred to at [15] of the determination.

28. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  took  into
    account everything that it should have taken into account and  did  not
    leave out of account anything  that  ought  to  have  been  taken  into
    account.  Accordingly,  I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, either in  relation  to
    the Immigration Rules or in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.




    Anonymity

    Given that these proceedings involve children, I make an order pursuant
    to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
    Consequently, this determination identifies the  appellant's  children,
    and the adults  associated  with  them,  including  the  appellant,  by
    initials only in order to preserve the anonymity of those children.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek

                                                      14/07/14
