

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: DA/00576/2013
                                                             & DA/00577/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On: 12 March 2015                    |On 1 May 2015                         |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     GB
                                     NN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:  Ms  I  Sabic,  instructed  by  Duncan  Lewis  &  Co
    Solicitors
    For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 24 September
    2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow  and  Mr  G  F  Sandall  which
    refused the deportation appeals of the appellants.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to both appellants from the issues
    put forward in the protection claim of GB and given the minority of NN.



 3. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria. GB is the mother of NN who is a
    minor. Where the appeal of NN is entirely  dependent  on  that  of  her
    mother, for the purposes of this decision we only  consider  only  GB's
    claim and refer to her as "the appellant".

 4. The appellant maintains that she and her daughter are Sudanese. She has
    given different versions of her history. Her initial claim was that she
    came to the UK from Sudan via Italy. She later provided another account
    maintaining that she came to the UK from Sudan  via  Nigeria  and  then
    Italy.

 5. Part of the appellant's claim is that  she  was  trafficked  to  Italy,
    mistreated there and suffers PTSD as  a  result,  that  mental  illness
    having a significant impact on  her  ability  to  give  consistent  and
    coherent evidence.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
    trafficked. That finding, in turn, had an impact on the  assessment  of
    whether she suffered from PTSD, had  difficulty  in  giving  consistent
    evidence and on the findings on her nationality. As the Tribunal put it
    at the beginning of its findings on credibility at [27]:

         "After lengthy  consideration  of  all  the  inter-related  issues,
         including the question of trafficking and diagnosis of PTSD, it  is
         our conclusion that the appellant has not been a  truthful  witness
         at the lower standard. (our emphasis)"

 7. At [27(b)], the First-tier Tribunal found:

         "A matter of weight is the fact that the appellant, until such time
         as it was discovered by the respondent that  she  held  a  Nigerian
         passport  and  visas  to  travel  to  the  UK,  gave  a   different
         explanation of her immigration history. ...  Hitherto  it  was  not
         claimed by the appellant  that  she  had  worked  as  a  prostitute
         whether voluntarily or otherwise."

 8. At [27(e)], the First-tier Tribunal went on:

         "We  also  make  the  finding  that  she  was  not  trafficked  for
         prostitution. Beyond the bald  assertion  of  having  worked  as  a
         prostitute, the appellant has given no details of her claimed  life
         in Italy beyond an  allegation  that  she  was  assaulted  by  'the
         manager' for refusing to abort her child and that she escaped  from
         the brothel dressed as a man. She was not under any restraint.  She
         was apparently free to come and go as she pleased.  Not  all  women
         who work as prostitutes are victims of trafficking. For  a  variety
         of reasons, usually economic, it is known that  women  do  work  as
         prostitutes."

 9. At [29] the First-tier Tribunal  confirmed  that  "[i]t  has  not  been
    established that the appellant was trafficked for  sexual  purposes  to
    Italy."

10. We were satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal was in error  in  making
    these findings.

11. Firstly, the Tribunal was  incorrect  to  state  at  [27(b)]  that  the
    appellant changed her account of having been trafficked  to  Italy  and
    being forced to work there as a prostitute before  coming  to  the  UK.
    That is her claim in every account in the materials before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal;  see,  for  example,  appendices  A,  B  and  C  of  the
    respondent's bundle which are letters dated 9 July 2008 and 12 November
    2008 from her then legal representatives and her first asylum interview
    conducted on 29 October 2008.

12. Further, the Tribunal was not correct in stating at  [27(e)]  that  the
    appellant did not provide details of her mistreatment in  Italy  or  of
    having been placed under restraint whilst there.  In  addition  to  the
    accounts referred to in the previous paragraph (see, for  example,  the
    responses to questions 35 and 53  of  the  first  asylum  interview  at
    appendix B), the appellant also gave evidence of forced prostitution in
    Italy in her evidence to a psychiatrist, Dr Brooke  in  December  2008.
    She also gave extensive detail of mistreatment whilst in Italy  in  her
    witness statement dated 6 December 2013 at paragraphs 13  to  23  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. When making its finding that the  appellant  was  not  trafficked,  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  into  account  what  was  clearly
    material evidence.  The panel  itself  acknowledged  overtly  that  the
    various findings in  [27]  were  "inter-related".   The  error  in  the
    finding on  trafficking  feeds  into  the  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant has PTSD, her nationality and her overall credibility. It was
    our view, therefore, that this was a material error on a point  of  law
    sufficient to fundamentally undermine the findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  at [27] to [29] such that  they  had  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

14. Having reached  that  conclusion  it  is  not  necessary  to  take  the
    remaining grounds any further. We would merely point out that  we  also
    saw some force in Ms Sabic's submission that, at [27(a)], in  declining
    to place weight on Dr Katona's second psychiatric  report,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not appear to approach it in line with  the  guidance
    in JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC),  the
    second report addressing as it does, in terms, the  inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's accounts, the possibility that  she  was  feigning  her
    symptoms and the earlier report of Dr Brooke which found the  appellant
    was not unwell.



DECISION

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside to be re-made.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.

DIRECTIONS

17. The appeal will  be  heard  at  Taylor  House,  not  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Callow or Mr G F Sandall.

18. No later than 7 days prior to the hearing the appellant is to  serve  a
    consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of all evidence relied  upon
    including a complete copy of the report of Dr Brooke dated  9  December
    2008 and the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge Callow.






    Signed: [pic]      Date: 28 April 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
