


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd June 2014                             |On 25th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR KUDZAI CLIVE MASHIRI
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Daykin, of Counsel, instructed by Lawrence and
Co, solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a Zimbabwean citizen born on 16th  December  1992.   He
    sought to appeal against the respondent's  decision  of  17th  December
    2013 to make a deportation order against him by virtue of Section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Place  and  Ms  J  A
    Endersby (non-legal member) on 28th March 2014.  The appeal was allowed
    on the basis that it had not been established that  the  appellant  had
    sufficient ties with Zimbabwe.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to appeal  against
    that decision, essentially seeking to argue that the approach taken  by
    the Tribunal to  the  issue  of  ties  interpreting   the  decision  of
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC)  was
    fundamentally flawed.

    Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.  Thus it  is  that  the
    matter comes before me to determine that issue.

4.   The claimant came to the United Kingdom as a minor when  aged  about  8
    years old and has remained ever since.  His main language since  coming
    to the United Kingdom has been English  although  he  understands  some
    Shona.

5.   On 17th March  2011  the  claimant  was  convicted  on  two  counts  of
    possessing a controlled class A drug  with  intent  to  supply  and  of
    possessing criminal property.  He was given a sentence of twelve months
    imprisonment suspended for  24  months.   On  22nd  December  2012  the
    claimant was convicted of supplying a class A controlled drug and being
    in breach of a suspended order.  He was sentenced to a  period  of  two
    years and six months' imprisonment.

6.   It is his claim  that  his  deportation  would  be  a  disproportionate
    breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   That brings into play the provisions of paragraphs 398 and 399A of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   Those  are  set  out  at  paragraph  5   of   the
    determination.

8.   The most relevant aspect of the  Rules,  so  far  as  the  claimant  is
    concerned, is that set out in paragraph 399A(b) namely that the  person
    is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of his  life  living
    continuously  in  the  UK  immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the
    immigration decision (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  he
    has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom.

9.   It was accepted by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  that
    paragraph 399A(b) applied to the claimant to the  extent  that  he  was
    under 25 and had spent more than half his life in the UK.  It  was  not
    accepted however that the claimant had no ties with Zimbabwe.

10.  It was contended on behalf of the Secretary of State  then  and  indeed
    before me now that the claimant had lived in Zimbabwe for  eight  years
    before coming to the United Kingdom and would have retained some of his
    mother tongue and  culture  living  with  his  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was not accepted that the claimant had no  family  members
    in Zimbabwe and not accepted that he could not return there and build a
    life for himself.

11.  The family members had given evidence  before  the  Tribunal  stressing
    that there was no-one in Zimbabwe who could care for the claimant.  All
    siblings and cousins of the extended family were in the United Kingdom.
      His Mother gave evidence to the effect that the  claimant  understood
    some Shona but could only speak English.  She did not think it possible
    for him to get by as an English speaker in Zimbabwe.

12.  She was not found to be a witness of truth  by  the  Judge  and  indeed
    reference  was  made,  as  can  be  seen  in  paragraph   27   of   the
    determination, to the comments of the  Immigration  Judge  in  her  own
    asylum claim.  The Judge found that there  was  a  family  property  in
    Zimbabwe.  The Judge did not believe the witness when she had said that
    her husband's brother had been living there but the  property  was  now
    sold.  According to the claimant's mother  the  only  person  still  in
    Zimbabwe was her mother living in a care home.

13.  The claimant's father also gave evidence  at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal .  He gave  evidence  that  he  has  a  brother  in
    Australia and another in Reading and  has  lost  contact  with  another
    sister.  He said that the family home had belonged to his aunt and  had
    been sold but he could not remember when.  He had changed that evidence
    to indicate that the family house had belonged to his  father  and  had
    been sold.  He did not know what had happened to his auntie's house.

14.  The claimant's brother and sister also gave evidence.

15.  It was  noted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that  Immigration  Judge
    McMahon, in his determination promulgated on 8th  January  2010,  found
    that the claimant's parents were not credible witnesses.  The  Tribunal
    did not find them to have given reliable evidence and had indeed  given
    conflicting evidence about the name and whereabouts of  family  members
    and confusing evidence about family property.   Their  statements  were
    largely not accepted, it being the finding of the  Tribunal  that  they
    were seeking to minimise their level of  contact  that  they  or  other
    family members have with Zimbabwe.  Although  the  Tribunal  found  the
    claimant's siblings to be a little more reliable there  was  still  the
    finding that they too were seeking to minimise their relationship  with
    Zimbabwe.

16.   The crucial passages therefore in relation  to  ties  and  links  with
    Zimbabwe are those set out in paragraph 46 and 47 as follows:-

         "That said, the basic core of the evidence of the appellant and all
         four witnesses is consistent.  On the basis  of  that  evidence  we
         find that the appellant has had no contact with anyone in  Zimbabwe
         since he left there when he was 8.  We find that he can  understand
         some basic Shona but cannot speak that language.  We find  that  he
         is not aware of any family members or family property in  Zimbabwe.
         We find that he is not aware of any family friends in Zimbabwe.  He
         has some basic linguistic ties to Zimbabwe but his cultural, social
         and family ties are all to the United  Kingdom.   He  was  educated
         here for all but two years of his time in  education  and  all  his
         immediate family members are here.  He also has extended family  in
         the form of aunts,  nephews,  nieces  and  cousins  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

    The Tribunal went on as follows:-


         "We found the appellant's parents so unreliable that we cannot make
         any definite findings about whether they have any remaining contact
         with Zimbabwe, other than with Mrs Mashire's  elderly  mother.   We
         do, though find, that  if  the  appellant's  parents  do  have  any
         remaining ties in Zimbabwe, they are not ties of the  appellant  or
         any ties which could result in support  to  the  appellant  in  the
         event of his return there."

17.  The Tribunal noted the case of Ogundimu  and  on  the  basis  of  their
    finding that the claimant had  no  ties  in  Zimbabwe  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

18.  It was argued in the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  approach  by  the
    Tribunal was not logical.  If it was the view of the Tribunal that  the
    parents' evidence was unreliable there was no reason therefore  to  act
    upon it.

19.  Further it was contended that the panel failed to direct itself to  the
    correct interpretation of the no ties tests.  The claimant retained the
    ability to reintegrate into  the  country  of  origin;  he  had  family
    members living there and a working knowledge of the language.   It  was
    likely that he  also  had  property  to  live  in.   It  was  contended
    therefore that there were proper links to Zimbabwe and accordingly  the
    claimant failed to meet the test under paragraph 399A(b).

20.  The Tribunal in the case of Ogundimu said as follows at  paragraph  123
    of that judgment

         "The natural ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports, we think,
         a concept involving something more than merely remote and  abstract
         links to the country of proposed deportation or removal.  They have
         also  been  in  continued  connection  to  life  in  that  country;
         something that ties a claimant to his or her country of origin.  If
         this were not the  case  then  it  would  appear  that  a  person's
         nationality of the country of proposed deportation could of  itself
         lead to a failure to meet the requirements of the Rule.  This would
         render the application of the Rule, given the context within  which
         it operates, entirely meaningless."


21.  The Tribunal at paragraph 124 went on as follows

         "We recognise that the text  of  the  Rules  is  an  exacting  one.
         Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to such  a  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         but  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and   family
         circumstances'.  Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the  appellant
         has no ties with Nigeria.  He is a stranger  to  the  country,  the
         people and the way of life.  His father may have ties but they  are
         not ties of the appellant or any ties that could result in  support
         to the appellant in the event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly,
         given the length of the appellant's residence here,  all  his  ties
         are with the United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  appellant  has  so
         little connection with Nigeria so as to mean that the  consequences
         for him to establish private life there at the age of 28, after  22
         years residence in the United Kingdom, would be justifiably harsh."

22.  The Tribunal indicated that each case would turn on its own facts.

23.  The Tribunal  in  that  case  had  the  advantage  of  having  credible
    evidence about such connections whereas in  this  case  there  is  less
    clear cut presentation of the evidence.

24.  The Tribunal seems  to  accept  the  truthfulness  of  the  appellant's
    belief as to the lack of ties but does not necessarily accept  that  it
    is being told the truth by his family.

25.  Sadly it will often be the case, particularly in cases of  deportation,
    that family members would be reluctant  to  give  any  support  to  the
    removal of a claimant.  There would therefore be a  natural  desire  to
    minimise the existing links with the country to which ties are alleged.
     Undoubtedly this is the case in this particular example as indeed  the
    Tribunal have found.

26.  All that can reasonably be expected of a Tribunal is for it to  conduct
    a rounded assessment in the light  of  all  of  the  evidence  that  is
    presented.  There will be evidence that is rejected and that  which  is
    accepted and that which  the  Tribunal  find  difficult  to  accept  or
    reject.

27.  The fact that there may be misleading evidence presented as to  a  true
    state of events  does not without more bring into  being  such  events.
    Unreliable evidence may be an important factor in  considering  whether
    or not the burden of proof is discharged.   The  fact  that  less  than
    truthful evidence is being given as to the situation and  circumstances
    of a family home, does not without more establish either that there  is
    such a family home or  indeed  that  it  would  be  accessible  to  the
    appellant.

28.  What is being said in this case is that in reality this  young  man  is
    to be separated from his family to make his way in Zimbabwe without any
    apparent family assistance or practical supportive community links.

29.  The case of Januzi makes it clear there must  be  the  opportunity  for
    economic survival.  The greater the family ties the more  chance  there
    will be for the appellant to forge a life for himself.  Equally without
    that support it would be more difficult.

30.  I detect no illogicality in the approach  taken  by  the  Tribunal.  An
    overall rounded  assessment  has  to  be  made  and  I  detect  nothing
    illogical or perverse or inaccurate in the approach which is  taken  by
    the Tribunal.

31.  The Immigration Rules set a higher standard but not an impossible  one.
     This was remarked by the Tribunal in Ogundimu that it would defeat the
    object of the Rules if the bar to successfully meeting  the  Rules  was
    raised so high as to be unattainable.

32.  The Tribunal can only proceed upon a fact by fact  basis  and  in  this
    case had made a conclusion as to fact which  was  open  to  them,  they
    having properly warned themselves of the weaknesses of the evidence  as
    well as the strengths.

33.  In the circumstances therefore the Secretary of State's  appeal  before
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The original findings of the Tribunal
    shall be upheld namely  that  appeal  is  allowed  on  the  basis  that
    paragraph 399A(b) is satisfied in the circumstances of this case.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

