

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
DA/00198/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated:              |
|On 17 October 2014                          |On 31 October 2014        |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                             Arvydas Mykolaitis
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission on
      27 August 2014 by Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  in
      respect of the determination of a panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      chaired by Judge Petherbridge which dismissed the appeal  following  a
      hearing at Taylor House by way of a  determination  promulgated  on  5
      August 2014.

   2.       The applicant is a Lithuanian national born on 22 June 1989.  He
      challenges the decision of the respondent on 15 January 2014 to deport
      him from the UK following his conviction on 29 May 2013 on two  counts
      of robbery and concurrent prison sentences of 8 and 20 months.  It  is
      relevant to mention that the offences were street robberies  committed
      on the same night with two other individuals (also convicted) and that
      the second offence involved violence. He was previously  convicted  on
      13 August 2010 at Liverpool  Magistrates  Court  of  being  drunk  and
      disorderly and has three cautions; two for shoplifting on 7 March 2009
      and 6 October 2009 (in North Wales) and  one  from  British  Transport
      police on 20 March 2012 for being drunk and disorderly. At the time of
      his last arrest he was living in Walthamstow.

   3.       The appellant arrived here with his parents (now divorced) and a
      younger brother on 5 March 2008.  He is unmarried and has  no  partner
      or children.

Appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal

   4.       The appeal came before me on 17 October 2014. The appellant  was
      present. Although unrepresented, he was content to proceed. He  relied
      on his grounds and argued that the judge had applied  the  wrong  test
      when assessing whether he should be deported. He argued that as he had
      completed five  years  of  residence,  he  was  subject  to  the  more
      stringent criterion applicable  to  those  with  permanent  rights  of
      residence; i.e. that they may not be removed except on serious grounds
      of public policy or public security which is a higher level  than  the
      general criterion that removal may be  justified  on  the  grounds  of
      public policy, public security or public health.

   5.       Mr Walker responded. He relied upon  the  respondent's  Rule  24
      letter and submitted that whilst the Tribunal had not  been  clear  in
      paragraphs 60 and 62 with regard to the test  applied,  it  was  plain
      from the abundantly clear findings at paragraphs 66 and  67  that  the
      error was not material because those findings are that  the  appellant
      was not rehabilitated, that there  were  no  reasonable  prospects  of
      rehabilitation at present and that he still represented  a  threat  to
      public policy.

   6.       The appellant replied. He said that he had a job, his family was
      here and he had taken some courses.

   7.       At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

   8.       On commencing the preparation of my determination,  I  had  some
      concerns over the calculation of the period of residence  accepted  by
      the respondent, and by the Tribunal. As the appellant had  spent  time
      on remand prior to his conviction and as that had been taken  off  his
      eventual sentence, I invited further submissions from the  parties  on
      this matter to be received by 27 October. Mr Walker took the view that
      the appellant had not completed five years.   The  appellant  has  not
      responded. I now proceed to determine the appeal on the basis  of  the
      evidence before me.

Findings and Reasons

   9.        The  First-tier  Tribunal  took  account  of  the   appellant's
      circumstances.  It  took  account  of  supporting  letters  from   the
      appellant's mother and his employer. It noted that since  his  release
      from prison he had resumed work for the  same  employer  he  had  been
      working for at the time of  his  offences.  It  took  account  of  the
      appellant's evidence that he had  not  undertaken  any  rehabilitation
      courses whilst in prison, that he had restricted his drinking and that
      he was in good health. It noted that he had  committed  two  offences,
      one being violent, at a time when in full time employment and that  he
      had expressed no remorse. He had been assessed at being at medium risk
      to the public.

  10.       The Tribunal set out the terms of regulations  19  and  21.  The
      relevant sections are:

      Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

      This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Memorandum has no associated
19.  .....

      (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has been admitted
to, or acquired a right      to reside in, the United  Kingdom  under  these
Regulations may be removed from the United   Kingdom if-

      (a)he does not have or ceases to have a right to reside under these
Regulations; or

      (b)he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
under these Regulations      but the Secretary of State has decided that
his removal is justified on the grounds of public  policy, public security
or public health in accordance with regulation 21.

      (4) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) as the automatic
consequence of   having recourse to the  social  assistance  system  of  the
United Kingdom.

      (5) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if he has a right
to remain in the       United Kingdom by virtue of leave granted  under  the
1971 Act unless his removal  is  justified      on  the  grounds  of  public
policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with    regulation
21.

      Decisions taken on public policy, public security  and  public  health
grounds

      This sectionnoteType=Explanatory Memorandum has no associated
  21.  (1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
taken on the grounds   of public policy, public security or public health.

      ....

      (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with a
permanent right of     residence  under  regulation  15  except  on  serious
grounds of public policy or public security.

      (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative grounds
of public security in  respect of an EEA national who-

      a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
least ten years prior to the      relevant decision; or

      (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is necessary
in his best interests, as    provided for in the Convention on the Rights
of the Child adopted by the General Assembly       of the United Nations on
20th November 1989(1).

      (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy or
public security it shall,    in addition to  complying  with  the  preceding
paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in   accordance with  the  following
principles-

      (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

      (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of
the person concerned;

      (c)the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
genuine, present and   sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
fundamental interests of society;

      (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate
to considerations of   general prevention do not justify the decision;

      (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
justify the decision.

      (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
or public security in  relation to a person who is resident  in  the  United
Kingdom the decision maker must take    account of  considerations  such  as
the age, state of health, family and economic situation of the       person,
the person's length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's  social
and   cultural integration into the United Kingdom and  the  extent  of  the
person's links with his      country of origin.

  11.       It is the appellant's case that he has  acquired  the  right  of
      residence because be entered the UK on 5 March 2008 and  has  remained
      here. He was convicted on 29 May 2013 by which time he had  been  here
      for over five years. Although I was at first hesitant  as  to  whether
      the respondent had been correct in her calculations,  I  can  now  see
      that she was for the reasons I set out below.  This an important point
      to clarify as the threshold of protection afforded to a resident under
      the Regulations is higher than that a non resident is entitled to: reg
      21(3) as opposed to 21(1). It is even greater for  an  individual  who
      has completed ten years in the UK but that does not apply here.

  12.       Whilst there is no evidence of the date or place  of  entry  and
      the appellant's own written evidence suggests he may have entered  via
      Dublin[1] and not the UK (and there is no information on how  long  he
      spent in Ireland), I take the date of 5 March 2008 as a starting point
      as that is accepted by the respondent and has not been disputed during
      the course of these proceedings. The appellant therefore has  to  show
      that he has spent five years from that date excluding time  in  prison
      in order to meet the five year residence period and  qualify  for  the
      'second tier' of protection - "serious grounds  of  public  policy  or
      public security". His case, put simply, is that he has  and  that  the
      judge applied the wrong test or at best was unclear about  whether  he
      applied the lower level or the second, intermediate, level.

  13.       It may be seen from the evidence that  the  appellant  committed
      the two offences, for which he was convicted, on 16 January  2013.  It
      may also be seen that the appellant spent time on remand and  that  81
      days of that period was deducted from  his  sentence.  It  is  unclear
      whether that is 81 days prior to the conviction on 29 May 2013 or  the
      date of  sentencing  on  26  June  2013.  However,  even  if  time  is
      calculated from the earlier date, the appellant had completed his five
      year period just three days before the start of the 81 day  period  on
      remand. There is also reference by the sentencing judge to a period of
      being electronically monitored[2] but no information on  whether  that
      was in addition to the  81  days  or  part  of  it.  I  also  have  no
      information on whether the period was an unbroken 81 days  or  whether
      an arrest took place soon after the offences in  January;  plainly  if
      that had been the case, the appellant may well have  not  completed  a
      continuous period of residence  in  the  UK  outside  prison.  In  the
      absence of this information, I take the issue no  further  and  accept
      that the  position  of  the  respondent[3]  and  the  judge  that  the
      appellant had acquired the status of a resident. Given  this  finding,
      the  appellant's  failure  to  respond  to  my  request  for   further
      submissions is of no matter.

  14.       I now consider whether the appellant has made out his case  that
      the judge applied  the  lowest  level  of  protection  when  assessing
      whether the respondent had done enough to discharge her duty under the
      Regulations.

  15.       The appellant  has  criticised  paragraphs  62  and  63  of  the
      determination as being  contradictory.   In  paragraph  62  the  panel
      states:

      Insofar as the appellant is concerned we are concerned with the  first
level of protection:   grounds of public policy, public security  or  public
health. This is because the appellant  does    have  a  permanent  right  of
residence.

  16.       At paragraph 63 the panel states:

      Regulation 19 of the 2006 Regulations provide as set  out  above  with
particular reference to      Regulation 19(3)(b):
      "It is for the respondent to prove that the personal; conduct  of  the
appellant does represent  a    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of     society and  it  is
accepted that there does need to be a sufficiently serious threat  affecting
one   of the fundamental  interests  of  society  for  an  expulsion  to  be
justified".

  17.       Plainly there is a conflict between the two  paragraphs.  I  now
      consider whether that error is such as to invalidate the determination
      and such that I am required to set aside and re-make the decision. For
      the following reasons I find it is not.

  18.       It is plain from the determination as a whole that the panel was
      well aware of the higher level of protection and  of  the  appellant's
      permanent  residence.  At  paragraphs  4  and  7  it  sets   out   the
      respondent's case which included application of the correct test of  a
      sufficiently serious threat. The correct threshold is also  stated  at
      paragraphs 16, 25, 50 and 63.   It  noted  the  appellant's  permanent
      residency at paragraphs 7, 14  and  15.  It  may  be  that  the  first
      sentence  of  paragraph  62  was  simply  a  typographical  error  but
      notwithstanding that, I have considered whether the Tribunal undertook
      a full consideration of all the factors argued  for  and  against  the
      appellant and whether  its  assessment  that  the  appellant  posed  a
      sufficiently serious risk to warrant deportation was supported by  the
      evidence and properly reasoned.  It  is  the  respondent's  case  that
      regardless of the lack of clarity in paragraphs  62-63,  the  findings
      made in the subsequent paragraphs are such that no other outcome would
      have been likely.

  19.       The panel applied relevant case law (at paragraphs 60,  61,  64,
      65 and 70). It also considered the Regulations and  the  factors  that
      are required to be examined  prior  to  any  decision  on  deportation
      (paragraphs 50 and 64). As far as the  appellant's  circumstances  are
      concerned, the panel noted the following  facts:  1)  the  appellant's
      parents were divorced, 2) the  appellant  has  been  living  with  his
      father since his release from prison, 3) he has returned to  the  same
      employment he held prior to his conviction, and 4) his employer  spoke
      highly of his work. However it also noted that: 1) the  appellant  had
      been convicted of two serious offences at a time when he was  employed
      in the same job and when, therefore, he would have had  no  reason  to
      commit those crimes, 2) it was likely that the offences were committed
      through alcohol abuse and peer pressure, 3) the appellant has for that
      reason been assessed as posing a medium risk of harm to the public, 4)
      it is the job of professionals to make  the  assessments  as  to  risk
      posed, 5) the appellant did not provide any evidence that he undertook
      any alcohol dependency courses in prison, 6) although he  said  he  no
      longer drank he had only been out of prison three months  (and  indeed
      in oral evidence had referred to one occasion when he  had  indulged),
      7) he  had  not  been  rehabilitated  and  there  were  no  reasonable
      prospects of rehabilitation at the present time, 8)  he  was  in  good
      health, 9) he was resourceful and would be able to use his  skills  to
      find work in Lithuania. The Tribunal did not accept that the appellant
      had no relatives or friends in Lithuania; indeed five years of absence
      is not that long for ties to have been severed. The panel undertook an
      article 8 assessment and accepted that the appellant  had  established
      private life here via his parents, friends and  employment.  It  found
      that those ties could  be  maintained  after  removal.  There  was  no
      evidence of family life. It found that the evidence  did  not  suggest
      the appellant was estranged from Lithuanian culture  or  the  language
      and considered he was of an age where he could live independently.

  20.       The panel's findings are abundantly clear. The  medium  risk  to
      the public and the lack of rehabilitation are findings which certainly
      support the conclusion that deportation is  justified  under  reg  21.
      Notwithstanding the lack of clarity in paragraph 62,  they  amount  to
      findings that support expulsion in circumstances where  the  potential
      deportee is a permanent residence.  They  are  clearly  matters  which
      amount to a serious threat to public policy and public security.  They
      relate to the appellant's own conduct and do not simply  take  account
      of  the  convictions.  The  appellant's  circumstances,  his  previous
      conduct with regard to  alcohol  abuse,  previous  run  ins  with  the
      police, lack of evidence of courses taken during prison, assessment of
      risk by a professional, the absence of  rehabilitation  and  the  fact
      that past employment and the presence of his family failed to rein  in
      his offending are all matters which  factor  into  the  assessment  of
      whether he poses a sufficiently serious threat to  justify  expulsion.
      I am of the view that having properly considered all the  factors  and
      circumstances, the panel reached sustainable which are not  flawed  by
      the clumsiness of paragraph 62.

Decision

  21.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make errors of law which  render
      the determination unsustainable. The decisions to dismiss  the  appeal
      under the Regulations and under article 8 are upheld.

Anonymity

  22.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order  and  no
      request for one was made to me.



      Signed:






      Upper Tribunal  Judge Keki?




      30 October 2014


-----------------------
[1] F4: respondent's bundle
[2] At B7; respondent's bundle.
[3] The acceptance of permanent residence at paragraph 14 of the refusal
letter is however contradicted by paragraph 22 but the Home Office
Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal appears to have proceeded
on the basis that permanent residence had been acquired.

