
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00858/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th April 2013                              |On 11th June  2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                              Anthony Matthews
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chirico, instructed by Wilson and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 8th  October  1986.   He
    has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

 2. The history to the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant was born on 8th
    October 1986 in Jamaica.  He left that country on  15th  December  2002
    and arrived in the United Kingdom to join his mother and siblings.   On
    12th May 2003, an application was made for indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a child of a settled parent.  This application
    was rejected on 2nd June 2003 but a further application  was  submitted
    on 10th June 2003 which was accepted and culminated  in  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain on 7th November 2003.

 3. On 7th June 2010 at Snaresbrook Crown Court the Appellant was convicted
    of an offence of robbery for which he was sentenced to a period of four
    years' imprisonment.  On 23rd July  2010,  the  Appellant  was  sent  a
    notice of liability to deport.  However a letter  dated  6th  September
    2010 was received by his representatives  claiming  that  he  had  been
    served this only on 23rd August 2010.  Following this  a  liability  to
    deportation notice was served upon the Appellant on 22nd October  2010.
    Representations were  received  that  the  Appellant  sought  to  claim
    asylum.  An interview subsequently took place but  was  not  concluded.
    UKBA were later informed that he decided not to claim asylum in January
    2011 however on 31st January it was confirmed that  the  Appellant  did
    wish to pursue an asylum claim.

 4. On 23rd October  2012  a  deportation  order  was  signed  against  the
    Appellant and a decision was made that Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 applied.  The Appellant exercised his  right  to  appeal  that
    decision and the appeal came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel,
    consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall and  Mrs  W  Jordan,  at
    Hatton Cross on 6th December 2012.

 5.  The  Appellant  appeared  before  the  panel  unrepresented.   He  had
    previously been represented by solicitors but it appears  that  shortly
    before the hearing the representatives came off record.  The  Appellant
    was in custody at this time.   Those  representatives  had  produced  a
    short letter, dated 29th October 2012 setting out some matters that the
    Appellant wished to have taken into account.  The Tribunal  heard  from
    the Appellant in short terms in that he accepted that  matters  in  the
    interview and those in the refusal letter were true and that there  was
    nothing else he wanted to add.  In cross-examination, the Appellant was
    asked about his family circumstances and he confirmed that his  mother,
    his aunt, two sisters and brother were in the United Kingdom.  He  said
    that his mother did not know that he was appearing in  court  and  that
    "he himself did not think that he would be here".  He later appeared to
    be saying that the family had known about the hearing but did not  know
    that he would be present and  later  in  his  evidence,  the  Appellant
    confirmed before the panel that he had not known that he was  going  to
    be at court today otherwise the family would have been  at  court.   In
    essence, the  Appellant  told  the  panel  that  as  he  had  lost  his
    representation, he had not appreciated that the appeal would  be  going
    ahead and thus his family members were not present to give evidence  on
    his behalf.

 6.   The panel reminded themselves that this was an automatic  deportation
    case and that it was not in dispute that the Appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal within the meaning of Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act  2007,
    his deportation was deemed to be conducive to the public good and  that
    the Respondent must make a deportation order in respect of  him  unless
    one of the exceptions set out in Section 33 of the Act  applied.   They
    identified that in this case the Appellant's  rights  under  the  Human
    Rights and Refugee Conventions would apply.  The panel then set  out  a
    number of matters of law including that of Boultif v  Switzerland[2001]
    33 EHRR and the principles from  Uner v Netherlands [2007] INLR 273.and
    reminded themselves that they should apply the five stage test approved
    by the House of Lords in Razgar and confirmed in EB (Kosovo)  [2009]  1
    AC 1159.  They then dealt with the nature of the  public  interest  and
    made reference to a number of cases dealing with  those  issues  before
    considering the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MF  (Nigeria)  [2012]
    UKUT 00393.  At paragraphs 44 to 51 the panel embarked upon a  detailed
    consideration of the Tribunal's  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)  and  gave
    reasons as to why they considered that the principles in  MF  were  not
    consistent with the view of the Court of Appeal  in  Gurung.   However,
    the panel made it clear that they had not heard  any  argument  on  the
    point.

 7.   The panel then made an assessment of the  evidence.   They  began  by
    considering the asylum/Article 3 claim that  had  been  raised  by  the
    Appellant based on return to Jamaica and his fear of  serious  harm  at
    the risk of criminal gangs in Jamaica.  The panel noted in  respect  of
    this issue that  they  were  satisfied  that  they  should  uphold  the
    certificate  pursuant  to  Section   72(9)(b)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  They were satisfied that he had  been
    convicted by  final  judgment  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constituted a danger to the  community  of  the  United  Kingdom.  They
    dismissed the asylum claim.  The panel nonetheless considered the basis
    of his Article 3 claim between paragraphs  54  to  59.   They  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was at any risk upon  return  to  Jamaica  in
    consideration of his  personal  circumstances  nor  did  they  consider
    insofar as his claim was based on a  general  fear  that  violence  was
    prevalent in Jamaica and that he would be at risk on return.

 8. The panel then turned to consider  Article  8.   They  noted  that  the
    Appellant was unmarried and had no children and whilst he  had  claimed
    to be in a relationship, they did not  accept  that  that  relationship
    amounted to "family life" within the meaning of Article 8.   The  panel
    did accept that he had relatives in the United  Kingdom  including  his
    mother and brothers and whilst accepting that there was a genuine  bond
    of affection between him and other family members (as evidenced by  the
    letters produced to  the  Respondent)  they  did  not  accept  that  it
    amounted to family life within the meaning of Article 8 as there was no
    evidence to demonstrate that it went beyond the normal  emotional  ties
    expected between adult relatives.  The panel noted that in  respect  of
    his sister, who was a minor, that they had heard no real evidence as to
    the relationship between the Appellant and her.  Thus they reached  the
    conclusion that the relationship had not been demonstrated to  be  more
    than one that would be expected between a 16  year  old  girl  and  her
    adult brother.  The panel  further  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    concerned about his mother's  health.   There  had  been  a  number  of
    medical reports placed before the Tribunal historically concerning  his
    mother's health and that she suffered from a  brain  tumour  which  was
    being medically controlled.  They noted that there had been no evidence
    concerning the medical aspect of his mother and whilst his concern  for
    her was understandable it did not amount to  "family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8".

 9. The panel then turned to the Appellant's private  life.  They  accepted
    that during the time  that  he  had  been  in  the  UK  he  would  have
    established a private life.  They found the questions in Razgar  to  be
    answered in the affirmative leading to  that  of  proportionality.   In
    respect of this issue, they noted that the Appellant had spent slightly
    over half of his life in Jamaica and that he was a relatively young and
    fit man.  Whilst they accepted that he may not have any close relatives
    living in Jamaica that he would have  no  difficulties  establishing  a
    private life and nothing to prevent his family from visiting him.   The
    panel then went on to deal with the offence  in  the  case  which  they
    considered was extremely serious.  They found this to be  reflected  in
    the sentence passed and the sentencing  remarks.   They  further  noted
    that there was "no evidence before us as to any professional assessment
    of the risk of re-offending."   They  went  on  to  note  that  in  the
    evidence that they heard, he accepted that he was still using  cannabis
    and they found that to be disturbing.  Having balanced the factors  and
    weighed up the evidence, the panel  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    public  interest  vastly  outweighed  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant and reached the conclusion that his removal would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference in his Article 8 rights.  The panel  then
    added that even if they had been satisfied that it amounted  to  having
    been established a family life in the UK, they would  still  have  been
    satisfied the decision was proportionate.  In those  circumstances  the
    panel were satisfied that none of the exceptions applied in this  case.
    Thus the appeal was dismissed.

10. Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of  the  Appellant.   It  was
    refused initially but upon renewal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Spencer on 14th February 2013.  The grounds,  in  summary  assert  that
    there was firstly  a  procedural  unfairness  in  this  appeal  as  the
    Tribunal had not considered  the  duties  towards  a  person  like  the
    Appellant who was left without legal representation (see  AK  (Iran)  v
    The SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 941).  It is asserted that  on  the  facts  of
    this appeal, the panel was presented with an unrepresented and detained
    Appellant who had recently  lost  his  representation.   There  was  no
    suggestion that this was as a result of prevarication or delay  on  the
    Appellant's own part  and  that  it  was  clear  on  the  face  of  the
    determination that the panel was  made  aware  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant would have presented the case differently had he  been  aware
    of the relevant procedure (see  paragraph  29  of  the  determination).
    Furthermore, when considering the procedural fairness  of  the  appeal,
    the panel had received no submissions on the Appellant's behalf on  any
    points of law and they had not been raised with the Appellant.  It  was
    further argued in the grounds that even if the panel had been  entitled
    to proceed without considering the possibility of an  adjournment  that
    the panel fell into error in its assessment of the issue of  Article  8
    and in particular the family life between  the  Appellant  as  a  young
    adult and his family members in the UK.  The panel  had  no  regard  to
    documentary evidence concerning the Appellant's conduct since offending
    or about his rehabilitation.  The panel had relied expressly  upon  the
    fact that there had been no evidence before  them  without  making  any
    enquiry as to why there had been no such evidence or  whether  a  short
    adjournment would permit  the  Appellant,  who  was  unrepresented,  to
    produce such evidence.  There had now been evidence before the Tribunal
    in the form of an extract of the OASys report and evidence  of  courses
    undertaken in prison which were relevant to the  issue  of  reoffending
    which would have been made available  had  enquiry  been  made  by  the
    panel.

11. At the hearing before us, Mr Chirico on behalf of the Appellant  relied
    upon the grounds of appeal as drafted by himself on 30th January  2013.
    It is not necessary for us to set out in great detail  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the Appellant as the grounds of appeal drafted by  Mr
    Chirico are substantial and set out all matters raised on behalf of the
    Appellant.  It is only necessary to  summarise  the  main  points  from
    those grounds.

12.   In respect of the ground relating to procedural fairness, he reminded
    the Tribunal that it had powers to ensure  that  procedures  were  fair
    including case management powers which included the power  to  adjourn.
    He referred us to the  decision  of  AK  (Iran)  (as  cited)  which  is
    relevant to this  particular  Appellant's  circumstances  who  appeared
    before the panel unrepresented having lost his  representation  shortly
    before the hearing.  He invited the Tribunal to consider the  situation
    that the Appellant was in by reference to a recent  statement  produced
    by the Appellant.  He submitted that there was  no  suggestion  on  the
    face of the determination that the panel considered at any  point  that
    there should be an adjournment of the appeal or to invite him  to  make
    such an application.  As a result, the Appellant  had  not  appreciated
    that the  appeal  would  proceed  on  the  basis  of  having  lost  his
    representation but also having been in custody  and  unable  to  obtain
    representation.   Whilst  the  panel  does  not  have  to  adjourn  all
    proceedings where  an  Appellant  appears  unrepresented,  they  should
    consider the particular individual's circumstances and whether there is
    any prejudice.  In its determination there is no  indication  that  the
    panel gave any consideration to such an application at paragraph 7.  As
    regards the effect upon relevant evidence, his mother did not  know  he
    was appearing at court (paragraph 14) and he himself did not know  that
    he would be at court.  In his statement he stated that he did not think
    that the case would have proceeded otherwise his family  members  would
    have been at court and that was supported by reference at paragraph  29
    of the determination to that proposition.  Thus the family members, who
    could speak to the issues concerning Article 8 were not present at  the
    hearing.  It was submitted further that even if not clear at the outset
    that there were potential difficulties in law and fact,  as  recognised
    at paragraph 29 that had he known that he had been  in  court  and  the
    case proceeding the other family members would have been present.   The
    absence  of  witnesses  that  would  have  been  called  was   material
    particularly as  weight  appeared  to  be  given  to  the  Respondent's
    submission at paragraph 27 that he had no witnesses present  concerning
    his "family life" and at paragraph 61 the panel's  finding  that  there
    was no real evidence concerning the relationship between the  Appellant
    and his sister.

13. In  this  case  the  failure  to  adjourn  led  to  other  difficulties
    identified in the grounds.  The panel had concluded that the  Appellant
    did not enjoy family life in the United Kingdom  however  an  important
    aspect was missing from their assessment which they did not  take  into
    account namely that he was a young  adult  who  had  remained  at  home
    living with his mother, siblings and aunt throughout his  time  in  the
    UK.  The Appellant's circumstances plainly  required  an  enquiry  into
    those facts but they were not taken into  account  nor  were  enquiries
    made about this.  There was no reference to the jurisprudence on issues
    relevant to this particular  Appellant's  circumstances  and  thus  the
    panel reached the conclusion that there was no family life upon a false
    basis and thus their assessment was flawed.  Whilst  at  paragraph  27,
    they appeared to say that even if they found family life, they would be
    satisfied that the  decision  was  proportionate,  this  was  simply  a
    generic  reference  made  that  could  not  supplant   clear   findings
    concerning the nature of family life which had not been carried out  by
    the panel.

14.  The  third  issue  identified  related  to  the  Appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending.  The panel stated that there was no  evidence  as  to  his
    conduct since reoffending without making  any  further  enquiry.   They
    noted that there was no professional evidence relating to this but  now
    it is clear that there has been an extract from  a  document  which  is
    said to be an OASys report which would have been made available had the
    Appellant had the opportunity to obtain legal  representation  to  deal
    with this issue.  As Masih recognises, the Appellant's situation at the
    date of the hearing should be considered including  his  conduct  after
    his offence which would include the consideration of OASys  reports  or
    consideration of any courses that were undertaken.  As  to  this  there
    was a factual error made by the panel in which the  panel  relied  upon
    evidence they said the Appellant had told them concerning  the  use  of
    cannabis whilst in custody.  The Appellant denied saying  that  he  had
    smoked cannabis but that he referred to smoking "weed"  which  was  not
    cannabis but amber leaf which is a standard tobacco and thus  based  on
    that misunderstanding of the evidence the panel took that into  account
    when making an assessment of the risk of reoffending.

15. Mr Avery submitted that there was no indication from the  determination
    that the Appellant  had  applied  for  an  adjournment  nor  was  there
    anything to indicate that he would or  that  he  could  obtain  further
    representatives in a short timescale or give any indication of  whether
    an adjournment was appropriate.   Whilst  submissions  have  been  made
    concerning the fact that family members were not present at court,  the
    panel did not draw any adverse inference from their failure  to  attend
    and did give their statements appropriate weight.  An  issue  has  been
    raised concerning family life but the  panel  considered  that  in  the
    light of the seriousness of the offence which was a very  serious  one.
    His connections were not strong having come to the UK  at  16.   Whilst
    there have been criticisms made of the Appellant's risk of reoffending,
    the panel did appear to take into account the Appellant's own  evidence
    concerning the use of cannabis.  There was no Presenting Officer's note
    on file to confirm what the Appellant had said in  evidence.   At  this
    point, we considered the  Record  of  Proceedings  in  the  file.   The
    relevant part as far as we could ascertain appeared to be the following
    "still taking cannabis (which appeared to be a question) the  answer  I
    smoke weed."  Mr  Avery  submitted  that  the  panel's  concerns  about
    reoffending were justified.  He submitted that the outcome would not be
    any different in this case and that there was nothing sufficient before
    the panel to lead them to conclude that the Appellant should have  been
    granted an adjournment.

16. By way of reply  Mr  Chirico  submitted  that  the  issue  relating  to
    cannabis was not a separate ground of appeal however it did appear that
    there was some misunderstanding concerning this  as  evidenced  by  the
    Record of Proceedings.  Furthermore, the Appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    fair hearing in a balancing exercise.  In a case  where  the  Appellant
    did not have a fair hearing, it should not fail on materiality aspects.
     In this case, the alternative finding as to family  life  was  generic
    and was not a proper assessment of family life as it was  not  specific
    to the circumstances of the Appellant, it did not say what kind of life
    there was between the Appellant and the family members  and  that  such
    cases are fact-sensitive.  Thus the finding in  the  alternative  could
    not be relied upon.  In those circumstances the only fair  outcome  for
    the Appellant was for the case to be set aside and for the appeal to be
    heard taking into account all the evidence that was available.

17. We reserved our determination.

Conclusions on the error of law:

18. The thrust of the submissions stem from the procedure  adopted  by  the
    panel and  in  the  circumstances  of  this  particular  Appellant  who
    appeared unrepresented before them,  having  been  left  without  legal
    representation shortly before the hearing.

19. The Tribunal's duties towards  a  person  who  is  left  without  legal
    representation was considered by the Court of Appeal in the decision of
    AK (Iran) v The SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 941.  In that case it had not been
    clear from the material before the  court  whether  the  Appellant  had
    asked for an adjournment and had  been  refused  one  or  whether  upon
    learning what had happened, the judge failed to  offer  him  one.   The
    court considered that in  either  event,  the  question  was  "was  the
    Appellant treated with a degree of unfairness sufficient to vitiate the
    eventual determination."  The court considered  Rule  21  of  the  2005
    Procedure Rules (as amended) noting that the  first  three  limbs  were
    predicated on the basis of a party having applied for  an  adjournment.
    They considered that if there was no such application then Rule 21  had
    no immediate relevance.  However at paragraph 21 the court went  on  to
    state,

         "but  it  is  of  considerable  direct  relevance  if  there  is  a
         continuing obligation on the judge to keep an eye on  the  fairness
         of his or her own proceedings because it cannot  be  right  that  a
         less stringent test is to be used if nobody  has  actually  applied
         for an adjournment."

    Thus the court considered that where an  Appellant  has  found  himself
    without representation at a  hearing  at  which  it  is  apparent  that
    professional representation would be of benefit to him, it is incumbent
    upon  the  judge  to  consider  whether  the  appeal  could  be  justly
    determined without a fair  opportunity  to  obtain  representation  (by
    adopting the vocabulary of Rule 21(2)).

20. In the decision of the panel, it does not  appear  that  the  Appellant
    made any application for an adjournment.  In the  statement  which  has
    been produced before us concerning the error of law, he stated that  he
    did not know that he could  do  so.   However  it  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant was unrepresented and the circumstances  in  which  this  had
    arisen.  What is clear from the determination is that the Tribunal  did
    take steps to ensure that he understood the procedure  and  ascertained
    whether or not he wished to give  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  (see
    paragraph 7).

21. In reaching a conclusion on this issue we remind ourselves  that  there
    is no inalienable right to representation and that it  is  not  unusual
    for parties to represent themselves before the Tribunal and that in the
    coming future it is likely that the Tribunal will deal with  many  more
    cases of unrepresented Appellants given the changes to  the  legal  aid
    provisions.  It is also right to observe that it is a routine  part  of
    the work of a Tribunal Judge to deal with cases where an  Appellant  is
    unrepresented.  Nonetheless, we have given careful consideration to the
    submissions made by Mr Chirico and the decision of AK (Iran) (as cited)
    and have reached the conclusion that the panel fell into error.  On the
    face of the determination, it does not appear that the Appellant  asked
    for an adjournment.  However we  place  no  weight  upon  that,  it  is
    reasonable in the circumstances and in the light of the statement  that
    he has produced that he would not know the exact procedure  that  would
    be required.  It is also clear that  the  panel  were  aware  that  the
    Appellant was unrepresented and the circumstances of this  and  he  was
    therefore no longer with representation although  he  was  in  custody.
    There  is  no  reference  in  the  determination  as  to  whether  they
    considered the questions identified  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  as  to
    whether  the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined  without   a   fair
    opportunity  to  obtain  representation  nor  whether  to  address  the
    question with the Appellant himself by asking him what steps  had  been
    taken to obtain any representation or questions concerning timescale if
    any representatives  could  be  instructed.   Furthermore  to  consider
    whether there was a realistic prospect of obtaining such representation
    in a short timescale.  The Tribunal should have considered this of  its
    own motion (see paragraph 23 of the decision of AK (Iran)).

22. In this case, had the Tribunal asked itself those questions, there is a
    likelihood that they may have reached the conclusion that  there  would
    have been the  prospect  of  instructing  representatives  in  a  short
    timescale.  As indicated for this appeal, the Appellant after receiving
    the  decision  obtained  representation   quickly.    Furthermore,   an
    adjournment would have made a difference to  the  evidence  that  would
    have been placed before it.  It was part of the Appellant's  case  that
    his deportation would be contrary to the UK's obligations under Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention and thus was an exception under the UK
    Borders Act relying upon the existence of his family life  and  private
    life established since his arrival in 2003.  This was a matter referred
    to in the refusal letter and taken into account  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  There  were  potentially  a  number  of  family  members  whose
    evidence  was  relevant  in  considering  this  issue   including   the
    Appellant's mother, aunt, two sisters and brother  including  a  minor.
    It is recorded in the determination that the Appellant  confirmed  that
    his mother was in the UK but did not know  that  there  was  an  appeal
    hearing and "he himself did not think he would  be  there."   This  has
    been  explained  by  the  Appellant  subsequently  that  he   had   not
    anticipated that the hearing would have gone ahead in the light of  his
    lack  of  representation.   We  note  that  the  evidence  recorded  at
    paragraph 14 is not consistent with that recorded at paragraph 15 where
    it appears that he was asked whether family members had been told about
    the hearing and he said that they knew but they did not think  that  he
    would be present.  It does seem to conflict with paragraph 14 where the
    Appellant had said that his mother did not know  there  was  an  appeal
    hearing.  However what is clear is what the panel recorded at paragraph
    29 where the Appellant stated "he had not known that he was going to be
    at court today otherwise the family would have been there."

23. The Appellant was clearly referring to  relevant  evidence  that  would
    have been put before the Tribunal had  he  appreciated  that  the  case
    would have gone on in the absence of any representation.   We  consider
    that further enquiries should have been undertaken which would have had
    particular relevance to the facts of  this  appeal.   The  Respondent's
    submissions at paragraph 27 were premised on the basis that he  had  no
    family life as "there were no witnesses."  We do not find that that  in
    itself was used as a basis for drawing any  adverse  inference  by  the
    panel, however the panel did say at paragraph 67 when  considering  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his minor sister that  they  had
    no real evidence concerning the relationship between the Appellant  and
    his sister.

24.   Other issues arise from the Appellant's lack of representation.   The
    court recognised in AK (Iran) that there would be cases in which it may
    be apparent that there are issues which the Appellant is not  going  to
    be able to deal with.  There were two potential  issues  identified  in
    the grounds that fall into this category, namely Article 8 and the risk
    of reoffending.  A feature in this case which appears to be absent from
    the factual matrix is that the Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom
    as a minor aged 16 and had been living continuously  with  his  mother,
    aunt and siblings.  This is relevant to the consideration of Article  8
    in relation to the existence of family life and the proportionality  of
    any interference with it.  The panel did not find that  there  was  any
    family life and that Article 8 was engaged  because  they  stated  that
    there was no evidence before them to suggest the  relationship  between
    the Appellant and his family  members  went  "beyond  normal  emotional
    ties".  In respect of his sister, who was a minor, they said  "we  have
    heard no real evidence as to the relationship between the Appellant and
    her.  We do not consider the relationship  demonstrates  anything  more
    than one would expect between a 16 year old and her brother."   However
    as a result of the procedure adopted, the Appellant did  not  have  the
    opportunity to call witnesses on his behalf in respect  of  the  family
    life he claimed to have established in the United Kingdom.  Nor does it
    appear that he was asked about the nature of his family life or that he
    appreciated the significance of those factual matters.  There  is  much
    jurisprudence  concerning  the  issue  of  family  life  between  adult
    members.  It is not necessary for us  to  set  out  that  jurisprudence
    here.  The question generally arises, when does an adult child cease to
    enjoy family life with his parents for the purposes of Article 8.   The
    case most frequently cited is that of Kugathas v The SSHD  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31.  The panel did not refer to this case although we  accept  that
    at paragraph 61 the panel made reference to  some  of  the  terminology
    used in that decision.  It has been recognised  that  family  life  may
    continue between parents and adult children even after  the  child  has
    attained majority and  as  we  have  observed  earlier  there  is  much
    jurisprudence on this area and as cited in the grounds  for  permission
    before us.  What is clear is that each case is fact-sensitive  and  has
    to be analysed on its  own  facts.   As  Kugathas  identifies  relevant
    factors include identifying who are the near relatives, the  nature  of
    the links between them, the ages, where and with whom they  resided  in
    the past, form of contact maintained and other such factors.  The panel
    do not make any reference to the past  cohabitation  of  the  Appellant
    with the family members and it appears that there was no  enquiry  into
    this issue when making an assessment.  That is not a criticism  of  the
    panel as the Appellant may not have  appreciated  the  significance  of
    these factors and was unrepresented and  there  were  no  witnesses  to
    speak to such facts.  We take into account that the panel later  on  in
    the determination recorded that even if there was family life they were
    satisfied the decision was proportionate. We do not consider that to be
    sufficient to deal with the issue.  The factual  elements  as  to  what
    constituted family life had not been considered earlier  as  the  panel
    reached the conclusion that family life was not engaged.

25. The second issue relates to  the  issue  of  reoffending.   Whilst  the
    Appellant did say that he had completed courses, there was  no  enquiry
    as to what they were or how it was relevant to the offence that he  had
    committed.  The Appellant would not have been likely to appreciate  the
    significance of this.  As identified in  the  decision  of  Masih,  the
    court is required to consider the situation at the date of the  hearing
    including taking into account full developments since sentence  passed,
    whether there had been any adjudications or the contents of  any  OASys
    report.  The  panel  record  that  there  was  no  professional  report
    considering assessment of risk of reoffending but it appears that there
    were documents in existence (unknown to the Appellant) which could have
    been considered; one document is described as an extract from an  OASys
    report.  Whilst those documents cannot themselves give rise to an error
    of law, they are relevant to the issue as to whether or not  they  were
    matters that the Appellant was unable to deal with due to his  lack  of
    representation before the panel.  There has been some issue  concerning
    a misunderstanding of the evidence of the Appellant relating to whether
    or not he had smoked cannabis in prison.  This does not in itself  form
    any separate ground and we make  no  finding  upon  that.   Nor  do  we
    consider that ground 4 really has any relevance to the issues.

26. Having considered the grounds in the light of the determination and the
    submissions made by the parties, we find that an error of law has  been
    established for the reasons set  out  above.   It  was  agreed  by  all
    parties that if we were to find an error of law in  the  decision  that
    the correct course would be for the matter to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing. Therefore the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside and the case is to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing in  accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2 of the  practice
    statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).

Decision:

 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the case is to  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House or Hatton  Cross  for  a
hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
Enforcement Act at paragraph 7.2 of the practice statement of 10th  February
2010 (as amended).



Signed                              Date: 7/6/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

