

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00032/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by Skype for Business                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 6 January 2021                           |On 18 January 2021             |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               KRISTAP RIZOVS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Rea, of Rea Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The  respondent's  decision,  dated  8  January  2020,  to  make  a
         deportation order under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Conway, promulgated on 4 April 2020.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, 1 - 9, stated  in  the
         application to the FtT for permission to appeal, filed on 17  April
         2020.

      v) The refusal of permission by the FtT.

     vi) The appellant's application to the UT  for  permission  to  appeal,
         filed on 12 June 2020; advancing the same grounds  but  emphasising
         ground 1.

    vii) The grant of permission by UTJ Jackson, dated 3 July 2020.

 2. A technical issue  prevented  the  hearing  on  6  January  from  being
    mechanically recorded.  However, parties agreed to  dispense  with  any
    requirement for oral recording, and were satisfied that the  technology
    enabled an effective hearing to take place.

 3. Mr Rea relied on  the  grounds,  which  are  quite  fully  stated.   He
    submitted that the FtT essentially erred by placing  the  onus  on  the
    appellant  rather  than  on  the  SSHD;  failed  to   carry   out   the
    proportionality exercise required by regulation 27 (5); and  failed  to
    deal with the submission that the appellant, in terms of regulation  27
    (5) ( c) did not present "a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society" (emphasis
    as placed by Mr Rea).

 4. Mr Howells, dealing with the grounds in order, maintained that no error
    on a point of law had been shown, and the decision should stand.

 5. Mr Rea in  reply  said  that  [43]  of  the  decision  is  contrary  to
    regulation 27 (5) (b), which provides that a decision " must  be  based
    exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned";  that
    error taints the rest of the decision; the decision dealt with the case
    as if under the immigration rules, not the regulations,  and  "set  the
    bar too high" for the appellant; and the case  should  be  remitted  to
    another judge of the FtT.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. Ground 1 asserts that the judge failed to carry out the proportionality
    assessment "in accordance with EU law" and left material matters out of
    account.

 8. The first proposition in this ground does  not  reflect  the  decision,
    which refers to the regulations in detail and decides the case in their
    terms.  There is also reference to article 8 of the ECHR and to part 5A
    of the 2002 Act,  but  that  is  a  "belt  and  braces"  exercise,  for
    avoidance of doubt.

 9. The second proposition in ground 1 is vacuous.  Neither in grounds  nor
    in submissions did the appellant specify anything which  is  not  dealt
    with in the decision (other than in ground 4, dealt with below).  As Mr
    Howells demonstrated in his  submissions,  the  judge  dealt  with  all
    material matters.

10. Ground 2 is that the judge did not  recognise  the  importance  of  the
    appellant's free movement rights, as illustrated by Straszweski  [2016]
    1 WLR 1173.  Mr Rea  did  not  refer  to  anything  in  that  decision.
    Deportation under the regulations is essentially an  exercise  in  when
    free movement rights may be restricted.  This ground  is  only  another
    vague disagreement, dressed up under a  legal  generalisation  with  no
    purchase on the facts of the case.

11. Ground 3 is that at [35] the judge referred to the appellant's  failure
    to produce an expert risk assessment, leaving out of account  that  the
    onus to do so was on the SSHD.

12. All the judge said at [35] was that no expert report  was  before  him,
    which is correct.

13. Mr Rea referred to no authority for an onus on the SSHD  to  provide  a
    report.

14. The context is that the judge did not give weight  to  the  appellant's
    claim to have reformed, for which several reasons are given.  No  error
    is shown in those reasons.

15. The decision does not bear out the assertion that  the  judge  reversed
    the burden of proof.

16. In any event, once the evidence is out,  cases  turn  on  weighing  it,
    rather than on where the onus  lies,  other  than  in  exceptional  and
    finely balanced instances.  The judge did not find this case to turn on
    any such fine point.

17. Ground 4 says that the judge failed to  note  or  give  weight  to  the
    evidence from the appellant's partner  that  although  they  no  longer
    cohabited, she was willing to support him.

18. This issue is subsumed into the judge's reasons for giving her evidence
    little weight.  She did not attend; her "statement"  was  unsigned  and
    undated; the claimed provision of emotional support is quoted at  [37];
    and she told the appellant to leave.  It is misleading to present  this
    relationship as a factor which might realistically  have  advanced  the
    appellant's case any further than it was found to do.

19. Ground 5 is only a vague disagreement on whether the judge was entitled
    to find the appellant to be a persistent offender.  It  does  not  show
    any legal error in that conclusion.

20. Grounds 6 and 7 run together.  The proposition is  that  the  SSHD,  in
    hypothesising about the consequences of the  appellant's  offending  on
    victims of his offences, went against  regulation  27  (5)  (d),  which
    provides that "matters isolated from the particulars of the case ... do
    not justify the decision";  and that in finding that to  be  reasonable
    at [43], the judge erred in law.

21. The consequences of offending are not isolated from the particulars  of
    a case.  They form an intrinsic part.

22. The consequences of offending on victims are not  baseless  hypotheses;
    they are obvious.

23. As Mr Howells observed, at [43] the  judge  was  not  embarking  on  an
    unprompted exercise.  He was dealing, sensibly, with a  submission  put
    to him by Mr Rea.

24. Grounds 8 and 9 also appear to run together.  Mr Rea  did  not  add  to
    these in his submissions.  I find in them no clear proposition of error
    in the decision on a point of law.

25. The grounds and submissions for the appellant have not shown  that  the
    FtT went wrong on the burden of proof, or that it failed to conduct the
    proportionality exercise required  by  the  regulations,  or  that  its
    conclusions should be set aside for having involved the making  of  any
    other error on a point of law.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


       Hugh Macleman

      7 January 2021
      UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

