
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00489/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                                |On 19 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SIICID ABDUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fouladvand, Legal Representative from MAAS


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands, born on 1  August  1989.
    Following his convictions on 17 December 2014  for  supplying  class  A
    drugs (10 counts) and his sentence of 36 months' imprisonment  with  an
    antisocial behaviour order imposed, the respondent made a  decision  to
    deport him under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro ("the FtJ") on 22 February 2016.  She
    allowed the appeal.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 4. The respondent's grounds contend that  the  FtJ  failed  to  take  into
    account  that  the  appellant's  periods  of  imprisonment  broke   the
    continuity of his residence.  Furthermore,  those  custodial  sentences
    affected his ability to claim that he was integrated in the UK  over  a
    10 year period.  The FtJ had erred in failing to appreciate the need to
    count backwards from the date of the respondent's decision in order  to
    assess whether  the  appellant  had  acquired  the  relevant  10  years
    residence.  The FtJ had misapplied the decision in Warsame v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 16 in this respect.

 5. It is also argued  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    submissions made on behalf of the respondent at  the  hearing  and  the
    cross-examination  of  the  witnesses  in  her  conclusions  that   the
    witnesses were credible.  A Home Office minute is referred  to  in  the
    grounds, although it was not provided with the grounds.  The minute was
    provided to me at the hearing.

 6. In a 'rule 24' response on behalf of the appellant, it is  argued  that
    it was open to the Tribunal to find that the appellant  should  not  be
    deported, in  the  light  of  the  FtJ's  findings.   The  respondent's
    decision in terms of rehabilitation and integration, in the context  of
    proportionality, was wrong.

 7. It is also  said  that  the  appellant  had  produced  ample  evidence,
    including from his mother and sister, and with reference to documentary
    evidence, that he had 10 years continuous residence in the UK.   It  is
    said that in these circumstances, and in the light of the finding  that
    the appellant did not represent a genuine and present threat to  public
    security, the FtJ was bound to allow the appeal.

 8. In submissions Mr Kotas relied on the  grounds.   He  referred  to  the
    decision in Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  MG  [2014]
    EUECJ C-400/12 in relation to the issue of 10 years residence  and  the
    level  of  protection  from  deportation   that   the   appellant   had
    established.

 9. It was also argued that the FtJ had not assessed the  extent  to  which
    the appellant's 10 years residence was broken  by  periods  of  absence
    from the UK, the FtJ having stated at [44] that the appellant had  been
    absent for short periods but not longer than two years.

10. So far as credibility is concerned, it was  submitted  that  the  FtJ's
    conclusions at [63] about the appellant's integration into the  UK  and
    no ties to the Netherlands failed to take into  account  the  arguments
    advanced on behalf of the respondent at the hearing.

11. Mr Fouladvand sought initially to put before me what was said to be  an
    email from the appellant.  However, he accepted that this was  material
    that was not before the FtJ and was on the face of  it  therefore,  not
    relevant to the issue of whether the FtJ had erred in law.

12. Insofar as I understood  Mr  Fouladvand's  submissions,  he  sought  to
    suggest that the appellant had acquired a permanent right of  residence
    in the UK on the basis of the exercise of Treaty rights over  a  period
    of five years, although as I reminded him on more  than  one  occasion,
    this was a matter that was resolved against the appellant by the FtJ.

13. On behalf of the appellant the decision in Gheorghiu (reg 24AA EEA Regs
    - relevant factors) [2016] UKUT 00024 (IAC) was relied on, although  it
    was not then, and is not now, clear to me the basis upon  which  it  is
    said that  that  decision  supports  any  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

14. Generally, it was submitted that the FtJ's  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal were sustainable.

    My assessment

15. At [47], relying on the decision in Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ 1199, the FtJ  stated  that  it
    was there held that the continuity of residence for the purposes of reg
    21(4)(a) was not broken by a period of imprisonment.   The  FtJ  stated
    that the court had said that the question of whether the requirement of
    a continuous period of 10 years residence was established at  the  date
    of the  decision  to  deport,  turned  on  the  degree  of  integration
    established at that  time,  which  was  a  question  of  fact  for  the
    Tribunal.  At [48], with reference  to  the  decision  in  Warsame  she
    stated that:

         "it was held that when  considering  a  foreign  criminal's  appeal
         against  deportation,  and  whether  he  had  accrued   10   years'
         continuous lawful residence in the UK under the [EEA  Regulations],
         the Upper Tribunal had erred by including periods spent in prison"

    In the  next  paragraph  the  FtJ  stated  that  by  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision the appellant had already been resident in the UK
    for 10 years, even if time spent in  prison  was  taken  into  account.
    Accordingly,  she  found  that  the  appellant  had  been  continuously
    resident in the  UK  for  more  than  10  years  by  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision.

16. In coming to these conclusions, I am satisfied that the  FtJ  erred  in
    law.  She failed to take into account the decision in MG  which  states
    that "in principle" periods of imprisonment interrupt the continuity of
    residence, and that the 10 year period of residence necessary  for  the
    grant of enhanced protection from deportation, must  be  calculated  by
    counting back from the date  of  the  decision  ordering  the  person's
    expulsion.  It appears that the FtJ misunderstood  the  effect  of  the
    decision in Warsame which, amongst other things, said that  FV  (Italy)
    was no longer good law.   The  conclusion  that  by  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision the appellant had been resident in the UK for  10
    years is legally flawed, on the basis of the decision in MG,  which  in
    fact is quoted in Warsame.

17. That is reason enough for the FtJ's decision to be set aside.  The  FtJ
    concluded that the appellant was  entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
    protection from removal, that is to say that he could not  be  deported
    except on imperative grounds of public  security.   Imperative  grounds
    apply where a person has accrued 10 years residence.  This appellant at
    least "in principle" has not done so, by reason  of  his  sentences  of
    imprisonment.  The appellant had been imprisoned on two occasions, once
    on 17 December 2014 for a period of 36 months and earlier than that  on
    14 March 2008, again for an offence involving  class  A  drugs,  for  a
    period of 21 months.

18. In addition, the  FtJ  said  at  [63]  that  the  appellant  "is  fully
    integrated into British society".  Earlier, at [50] she  said  that  by
    the time the appellant had been sentenced to imprisonment  in  December
    2014, he was by then "well integrated" into British society.   However,
    those  conclusions  fail  to  take   into   account   the   appellant's
    convictions, which the  FtJ  herself  set  out  at  the  start  of  her
    decision.  The appellant has been convicted on numerous  occasions  for
    various offences, some, admittedly as a young person.   However,  aside
    from the sentence of imprisonment of 21 months in March  2008,  he  has
    been convicted of possession of class  B  drugs  and  was  involved  in
    supplying class A drugs which led to his imprisonment  on  17  December
    2014.  Albeit that submissions could be made  about  the  relevance  of
    some of the appellant's convictions in terms of  integration,  it  does
    not seem to me that the FtJ took into account the appellant's offending
    in terms of whether he was integrated into society in the UK.

19. Furthermore, the FtJ's assessment in this respect fails  to  take  into
    account that as part of his sentence on 17 December 2014 the  appellant
    was subject to an antisocial behaviour order until December 2022.

20. Mr Fouladvand submitted that the OASys report before the FtJ said  that
    the risk of reoffending was low.  However, that  cannot  be  the  case,
    since the  FtJ  said  at  [59]  that  she  had  seen  no  recent  OASys
    assessment.  My attention was not drawn  to  any  OASys  assessment  or
    other documentary risk assessment.

21. The respondent's grounds contend that the FtJ had failed to  take  into
    account the cross-examination of witnesses and the submissions made  on
    behalf  of  the  respondent  when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses called on behalf  of  the  appellant  and  of  the  appellant
    himself.  The Home Office minute relied on, in effect, states that  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that all parties were less  than  truthful
    in their statements, as the appellant had been taught in Dutch, that he
    is not his mother's main carer as claimed and that there  are  ties  to
    the  Netherlands.   The  minute  continues  that  there   were   severe
    credibility issues with the assertions made both by the  appellant  and
    his witnesses.

22. In the rule 24 response, no issue is taken with  the  grounds  in  this
    respect, albeit that the Home Office Presenting  Officer's  minute  was
    not provided with the grounds.  Mr Fouladvand,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant before the FtT, accepted before me that submissions were made
    in respect of the credibility of the witnesses.  At the hearing  before
    me it was not initially clear from my perusal of the  FtJ's  record  of
    proceedings what submissions were  made  in  terms  of  the  witnesses'
    credibility.  However, having had a further opportunity  to  look  more
    carefully at the FtJ's manuscript notes, it is clear that on behalf  of
    the respondent the credibility of the appellant and his  witnesses  was
    called into question.  Broadly speaking, the matters reflected  in  the
    minute were put to  the  FtJ  in  submissions.   The  FtJ's  record  of
    proceedings records that it was submitted on behalf of  the  respondent
    that a credibility finding was sought in relation to a clear attempt to
    mislead the court.  The respondent's representative before the FtJ took
    issue with the contention that the  appellant  provides  care  for  his
    mother.

23. It is  not  apparent  from  the  FtJ's  decision  that  there  was  any
    evaluation of the arguments advanced on behalf  of  the  respondent  in
    terms of the credibility of the witnesses.  This  is  relevant  to  the
    issue of rehabilitation and integration, and the proportionality of the
    appellant's removal to the Netherlands.  I am satisfied  that  in  this
    respect also, the FtJ erred in law.

24. In turn, this affects the FtJ's conclusions that the appellant does not
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society, albeit that  the  FtJ  did
    not express the matter in that way.  In this respect I also  note  that
    at [59], with reference to the sentencing remarks, the FtJ pointed  out
    that the sentencing judge had said that the appellant was no  longer  a
    class A drug user and that  since  2008  the  appellant  had  not  been
    involved in the supply of drugs.  Plainly however, the sentencing judge
    was referring to the interval between 2008 and 2014,  because  in  2014
    the appellant was convicted of 10 counts of supplying  class  A  drugs.
    He had therefore, since 2008, been involved in the supply  of  class  A
    drugs contrary to what appears to have been concluded by the  FtJ.   At
    the very least, the  FtJ's  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  risk  of
    reoffending  are  not  fully  explained.   In   addition,   issues   of
    integration and rehabilitation are relevant to the risk of reoffending.

25. I am satisfied in all the circumstances that the errors of law made  by
    the FtJ are such as to require the decision to be set aside, and  I  do
    so. I have carefully reflected on whether it  is  appropriate  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT. Certain, albeit limited, findings  of
    fact are not infected by the error of law. In particular, there  was  a
    finding by the FtJ that the appellant  had  not  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence.  So much is clear from [42] of her decision.

26. However, given that there will need to be a reassessment of credibility
    in the light of the matters I have referred to above at [21]-[24],  and
    taking into  account  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2, I consider that the appropriate course is for the appeal
    to be remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo. Although  the  finding
    that the appellant had not acquired a permanent right of  residence  is
    not infected by the error(s) of law, given that the fresh hearing  will
    consider significant credibility issues  afresh,  I  consider  that  no
    findings of fact should be preserved.

    Decision

     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro, with no findings of
    fact preserved.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            15/07/16








