
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00428/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2017                           |On 27 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR FARID CHAOU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Dirie, counsel instructed by BID

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  D
    Alty, promulgated on 27 June 2017. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge EB Grant on 20 July 2017.

Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. The respondent is a French national who came  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the year 2000. He has acquired a string of convictions,  the
    last being  for  affray  which  resulted  in  a  13-month  sentence  of
    imprisonment on 13 March 2015. The respondent has  a  partner  and  two
    minor children in the United Kingdom now aged 7 and 4.

 4. The decision to deport the respondent under the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was made on 21 July  2015.  His  appeal
    was initially heard in his absence on 8 December 2015 and dismissed. He
    was removed from the United Kingdom on 10 April 2016. The said decision
    was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and his appeal was remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where it was dismissed, again in  the  respondent's
    absence, on 8 August 2016. That decision was  also  set  aside  by  the
    Upper Tribunal and it was listed before Judge Alty on 8 June 2017.

 5. The respondent applied for readmission to attend  the  hearing  of  his
    appeal under Regulation 29AA of the 2006 Regulations  but  was  refused
    owing to the Secretary of State's concerns that he would pose a  danger
    to the public if readmitted. The  respondent  did  not  challenge  that
    decision by way of judicial review.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from  the  respondent's  partner  and  submissions  from  both
    representatives. Despite hearing arguments solely regarding whether the
    decision to remove the respondent from the United Kingdom was justified
    and proportionate, the judge  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR because he had not been allowed to re-enter  the  United
    Kingdom to give  evidence  and  had  not  therefore  had  an  effective
    hearing, Kiarie & Byndloss [2017] UKSC 42 applied.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  argued  firstly,  that  the
    judge ought to  have  used  the  powers  within  [2]  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014 to address the effectiveness of the hearing or  to
    have afforded the Secretary of State the opportunity to ensure that the
    respondent's rights were not breached. It was contended that the  judge
    had no regard to the reasons why the Secretary of State  considered  to
    be too  dangerous  to  admit  the  respondent  under  regulation  29AA.
    Secondly,  it  was  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    misdirected itself by failing  to  consider  whether  the  decision  to
    deport the respondent was justified.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 9. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 24 August  2017,  argued
    that the judge was  correct  to  find  that  the  respondent  had  been
    deported without benefitting from the necessary  procedural  safeguards
    contrary to Article 8 ECHR. It was also submitted that the respondent's
    deportation was contrary to Article 7 of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights of the European Union. It was noted that the Upper Tribunal  had
    previously refused to give the respondent permission to  give  evidence
    by Skype. Reliance was placed on the judgment  in  Kiarie  as  well  as
    guidance given in Nare [2011] UKUT 443 as to how  the  Tribunal  should
    approach an application for a direction that evidence be given by video
    link. It was argued that the Tribunal was not in  a  position  to  find
    that those  conditions  could  be  met.  Lastly,  it  was  said  to  be
    "immaterial" that the judge made no findings in relation to  Regulation
    27 of the 2016 Regulations.

10. On 25 September 2017, there was a case management review  hearing,  the
    outcome of which was that Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson  directed  that
    this matter be listed for an error of law hearing and that  each  party
    was to file a skeleton argument addressing the applicability of  Kiarie
    to EEA Regulation deportations as well as the directions  available  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The Secretary of State applied for an adjournment of the error  of  law
    hearing on 3 November 2017. The reason for that  application  was  that
    the Secretary of State wished for this  hearing  to  be  adjourned  and
    stayed pending the guidance expected from the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    test   cases   of   ACJ   (Nigeria)   (HU/03027/2015)   and   Bola-Audu
    (HU/00023/2015). The said cases which were  to  address  the  practical
    impact of Kiarie had themselves been stayed pending a Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in test cases relating to section 94 certificates and  out  of
    country appeal rights generally. That application was  refused  because
    there was no indication that the aforementioned cases touched  on  "the
    discrete issues raised concerning appeals  under  the  EEA  Regulations
    where there is a possibility of return."

The hearing

12. When this matter came before me, neither party had  complied  with  the
    directions of Judge Gleeson. Ms Pal's explanation was  that  she  would
    rely on a brief document  headed  "Deport  submissions"  and  that  she
    intended to renew the adjournment application. Ms Dirie stated that she
    wished to rely on the Rule 24 response. I heard submissions  from  both
    representatives on the renewed  adjournment  application.  Ms  Pal  was
    unable to provide any further information about the test cases  and  Ms
    Dirie, who took instructions, was able to  say  little  other  than  to
    indicate her client's objection to  the  adjournment.  I  declined  the
    application for the reasons given previously as well  as  the  lack  of
    clarity as to the length of any stay  and  invited  submissions  as  to
    whether there was an error of law in the decision under challenge.

13. Ms Pal argued that the judge had no power to adjudicate on  the  issues
    of the respondent's  non-admittance  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    purpose of attending his appeal hearing. The judge had gone beyond  his
    or her powers. She contended that the judge ought to have had regard to
    the Tribunal's procedure rules in order to ensure the proceedings  were
    fair and just.

14. Ms Pal suggested that the judge could have transferred  the  appeal  to
    another hearing centre where video link facilities were available.  The
    judge had erred  in  finding  that  the  respondent's  deportation  was
    unlawful because he was unable to attend the  hearing  of  his  appeal.
    Otherwise, Ms Pal reiterated the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal
    and she invited me to find an error of law and remit the matter to  the
    First-tier Tribunal once more.

15. Ms Dirie relied on the Rule 24 response. She described the respondent's
    family circumstances as well as the difficulty he  had  experienced  in
    finding representation. She argued that there were  no  facilities  for
    Skype, no mention of video link and that the appellant  was  unable  to
    effectively  participate  in  the  hearing.  She  contended  that  this
    amounted to an unlawful interference with his right to a  family  life.
    Ms Dirie confirmed that the respondent had not sought a judicial review
    of the Secretary of State's  refusal  to  readmit  him  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

Decision on error of law

16. As acknowledged at [10] of the decision  and  reasons,  there  was  one
    issue before the First-tier Tribunal, that of  whether  the  respondent
    was justified in deporting the respondent from the United Kingdom owing
    to his offending history. At [29], the judge further acknowledges  that
    he or she has not considered this issue. Thus, the issues in the appeal
    went without determination. That alone is  a  material  error  of  law.
    Furthermore, the judge appeared to take no procedural steps to  address
    the difficulties encountered in relation to the respondent's  effective
    participation in the appeal. Lastly, the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
    adjudicate on the issue of the respondent's removal pending his appeal,
    a matter regarding which no submissions were made and  which  had  gone
    unchallenged by the respondent.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
by any judge except First-tier Tribunals Judges Alty, Grimmett or Brunnen

Directions

This appeal is to be  listed  for  a  case  management  review  hearing  for
discussion of the practical arrangements for the hearing of the  substantive
appeal. The CMRH is to be listed at Taylor House for the convenience of  the
representatives who are acting Pro Bono.


Signed                                  Date 12 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
