

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: DA/00285/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of      |Promulgated                       |
|Justice                           |                                  |
|On 17 November 2014               |On 18 November 2014               |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                Amit Naithani
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                        Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms H Short, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          Determination and Reasons




Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1.   This appeal comes before me following  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Reid  on  10  September  2014  in
    respect of the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Meah  who
    dismissed the appeal against deportation of this Kenyan national.

 2.   The appellant was born on 1 April 1985 and arrived here aged 10  with
    his mother and sister as  a  visitor.  Thereafter,  the  family  sought
    asylum. This was refused on 17 March  2000  but  exceptional  leave  to
    remain was granted for four years. Eventually, ILR  was  granted  on  2
    February 2005.

 3.   The appellant's offending commenced in 1998. He  has  received  three
    cautions and has at least fifteen convictions between 2003 and 2012.  A
    previous attempt to deport the appellant in 2009  was  unsuccessful  as
    the appellant's appeal was allowed in April 2010 by the  Tribunal.  The
    judge found that the case was finely balanced but was persuaded to give
    the appellant one last opportunity to show he had mended his ways.  The
    judge gave a clear warning to the appellant that if he continued to re-
    offend, he would only have himself  to  blame  if  further  deportation
    proceedings were brought. Regrettably, the appellant did continue  with
    his criminality and on 20 January 2014 a deportation order pursuant  to
    section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 was made.

 4.   The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House on  12
    August 2014. The appellant was detained and was not produced due to  an
    outbreak of a contagious illness  at  the  centre.  His  representative
    sought an adjournment which was unopposed but the judge refused it  and
    proceeded to remit the appeal to the Secretary of State on the  grounds
    that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  The  judge
    reasoned that the respondent had failed to consider section 19  of  the
    2014 Act or rule 399(b) and had also miscalculated the period  of  time
    the appellant had been resident here.

The Hearing

 5.   At the hearing on 17 November, I heard submissions from the  parties.
    For the appellant, Ms Short submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    refusing the adjournment, that he  should  have  considered  the  rules
    himself and if he found that the Secretary of State  had  miscalculated
    the period of residence, should have allowed the appeal  outright.  She
    conceded, however, that residence was not the only requirement and that
    there were other limbs to the rules.

 6.   Mr Melvin submitted that the respondent was ready to  serve  a  fresh
    decision on the appellant which would generate a fresh right of appeal.
    He submitted that the judge was required to consider the rules  at  the
    date of the hearing and not the decision so irrespective of whether  or
    not the appeal was reconsidered, the appellant could  not  succeed.  He
    asked that the decision be upheld.

 7.   Ms Short repeated her earlier  submission  and  maintained  that  the
    appeal should have been adjourned.

 8.   At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination which  I
    now give.

Findings and Conclusions

 9.   The appellant was not produced for his hearing through  no  fault  of
    his own. Regrettably, the request for an adjournment is not dealt  with
    in the determination and so I am unable to ascertain what  reasons  the
    judge had in mind when he refused to grant it. Regardless of the merits
    of his case, however, he was entitled to be present at the hearing  and
    the judge erred in refusing to allow him that opportunity.

10.   I now consider whether that error was material to the outcome of  the
    hearing or whether there were any further errors such that  would  make
    it necessary for the determination to be set aside.

11.   The judge based the need for the remittal on the coming into force of
    s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 on 28 July. This  occurred  after  the
    decision had been made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  but  before  the
    hearing. The judge appears, however, to have misunderstood  the  effect
    of section 19. That section, at 117B and C, sets out the factors  which
    need to be considered in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals and at 117A makes it plain that consideration is  in  respect
    of the Tribunal. As argued in the grounds,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    'failure' to comply with an obligation not placed upon her but  on  the
    courts and the Tribunal, cannot render her decision unlawful. The point
    is well made. I do not, however, agree with  the  ground  which  raises
    concerns over whether section 19 even applies to the appellant's  case.
    This section requires the courts  and  Tribunals  to  consider  certain
    matters  when  determining  an  appellant's  case  and   that   applies
    regardless of when the decision was made. The judge failed to undertake
    such an analysis.

12.   It is also argued that the  judge  should  have  allowed  the  appeal
    outright once he found that the requirements of paragraph  399(b)  were
    met. It is unclear however whether the judge did make such  a  finding.
    Certainly the grounds do not point to a particular paragraph where this
    would be apparent and in any event, length of residence is not the only
    requirement to be  met.  I  can  see  no  consideration  of  the  other
    requirements.

13.   The judge should have considered the new rules. He was obliged to  do
    so.  Under  A362,  where  Article  8  is  raised  in  the  context   of
    deportation, the claim will only succeed where the requirements of  the
    rules as at 28 July 2014 are met, regardless of  when  the  deportation
    order was served. In that sense, the judge also erred in directing  the
    Secretary of State to consider the old rules (see paragraph  8  of  the
    determination).

14.   I have considered Mr Melvin's submission that the appellant would not
    be prejudiced by reconsideration of his case by the  respondent  as  he
    would have a full right of appeal against the fresh decision.  That  is
    an attractive submission. However, I am required to consider first  and
    foremost, whether the judge made errors of law.    For  the  reasons  I
    have  set  out  above,  the  judge  did  make  such  errors.   In   the
    circumstances, the fair and proper course of action is to set aside the
    determination in its entirety. The appeal shall  be  heard  by  another
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal, preferably a panel, and  all  matters
    shall be determined afresh.

15.   The appellant should not take this decision as an indication  of  the
    merits of his  substantive  appeal.  He  has  serious  obstacles  ahead
    particularly given his conduct following his last successful appeal.

Decision

16.   The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the  determination  is
    set aside to be  re-made  by  another  judge/panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Signed:

Dr R Keki?
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

    18 November 2014



