

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/00343/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2018                           |On 11th October 2018          |
|And 25 September 2018                         |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                              Mr Osazee Eguagie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Pickering, instructed by David Gray Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of the respondent  made  on  7
    June 2017  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  Regulation  23(6)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016.  His  appeal
    against that decision was  allowed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    November 2017. For the reasons set out below, following a hearing on 27
    February 2018, I found that that decision involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside. The remaking  of  that  decision  took
    place on 25 September 2018.

 2. The appellant is an Italian national  who  has  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since 16 July 2012.  His father, mother and brother live
    in the United  Kingdom,  are  also  Italian  nationals,  and  have  now
    acquired permanent residence.

 3. On 22 December 2016 the appellant  was  convicted  of  four  counts  of
    sexual activity with a  female  child  under  16  years  of  age  which
    involved penetration.  He was sentenced  to  22  months'  imprisonment,
    placed on the Sex Offenders' Register for ten years.

 4. The respondent's case is that given the  assessment  that  he  posed  a
    medium risk of reoffending and that the serious  harm  which  would  be
    caused as a result and that he has the propensity to reoffend, that  he
    represents a genuine and present and sufficiently serious threat to the
    public to justify his deportation.   She considered also  that  it  was
    proportionate having had regard to the factors set  out  in  Regulation
    27.

 5. The judge found, having directed himself in accordance with Schedule  1
    of the EEA Regulations [39] that:-

      i) That there are concerns raised by the nature of the offence and the
         attitude of the appellant towards it certainly leading  up  to  the
         time of his sentence, the offence being a serious  one  which  does
         relate to several of the fundamental interests  of  society  as  it
         involved the appellant aged 20 meeting  a  14  years  old  girl  on
         social media, knowing her age, and have penetrative  sex  with  her
         involving ejaculation on  two  occasions  with  severe  aggravating
         features that has caused severe psychological harm to her [42];




     ii) It was relevant to take into the fact that this was  not  the  most
         serious form of grooming and there was no indication of  repetition
         or continuing offending [43];




    iii) The appellant's attitude towards his offending at the time of  plea
         and sentence raised concerns about the fact that he  presents  [44]
         and that this contributed to the assessment that although there was
         a low risk of probability of general reoffending  he  fell  into  a
         group classed as a medium risk of causing sexual harm [45],  albeit
         the risk may be  reduced  if  he  were  to  explore  his  offending
         behaviour in depth via a treatment programme albeit both the report
         concluded [46] that the appellant still poses a medium risk of harm
         to children and concerns still existed about his  attitude  towards
         the victim.




     iv) Having heard the evidence from the appellant and  his  family,  and
         although his evidence of accepting full  responsibility  and  being
         effectively a  changed person had to be taken with a large note  of
         caution, and there was  little  doubt  about  the  genuineness  and
         support from the family [50] that the respondent had not shown that
         the personal  conduct  the  appellant  represents  is  genuine  and
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests. of society [52].

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had:-

      i) Failed properly to assess the seriousness of the  risk  that  would
         flow from the appellant's reoffending given the potential  harm  to
         female children.




     ii) That the judge had erred in  his  assessment  of  the  prospect  of
         rehabilitation given that the appellant had not required  permanent
         residence.




    iii) That the judge had erred in why he had accepted that the  appellant
         had changed given his attitude towards the offending in the past.




 7.  On  28  November  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martins   granted
    permission to appeal.

 8. Mr Diwnycz submitted that  it  was  legitimate  to  look  both  at  the
    likelihood of  reoffending  and  the  harm  that  would  be  caused  by
    reoffending.  He submitted that it was clear that the risk in this case
    was of serious harm to children and that the  judge  had  not  attached
    weight to the damage to be caused by the reoffending.  He did,  however
    accept that weight was a matter for the judge where  it  was  submitted
    that the judge had failed properly to consider this issue.

 9. Miss Pickering submitted that the decision Kamki [2017] EWCA  Civ  1715
    was not relevant to the facts of this case and was  entirely  different
    given that was an appeal brought by an appellant  in  respect  of  whom
    there was a finding that he was at high risk of harm to females and  he
    had not accepted his guilt.

10. She submitted that the judge  had  in  this  case  considered  all  the
    factors and it was difficult to see what more could have been done with
    the decision.   She  submitted  it  was  clear  from  the  decision  at
    paragraphs 42 and 43 that the sentencing remarks  and  the  presentence
    report had properly been taken into account and  that  he  had  weighed
    this report  including  the  assessment  against  the  appellant.   She
    submitted that beyond this the Secretary of  State's  case  was  little
    more than attempts to reargue the case and  that  the  judge  would  be
    entitled to note that on the facts of this case the appellant's  family
    were able to provide protective links.

11. I accept that, as Ms Pickering submitted,  Kamki  is  not  entirely  on
    point with this case given that it rose in a  different  way  it  being
    argued for the appellant in that case that it was wrong  to  take  into
    account both the likelihood of further offending and  the  harm  to  be
    caused thereby.  The case  does,  however,  illustrate  there  are  two
    factors to be taken into account:-

    The chance of an offence being committed and also the harm  and  damage
    that would flow from that.  Both of these must be taken into account in
    assessing whether an individual  presents  a  genuine,  subsisting  and
    sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society

12. It is evident from  the  pre-sentence  report  on  which  both  parties
    addressed me that the author considered that in this case there  was  a
    risk of serious harm.  It states that Mr Eguagie is currently  assessed
    as posing a medium risk of sexual harm and subsequent emotional harm to
    children.

13. Whilst the judge clearly assessed the likelihood of  reoffending  there
    is no proper indication that he considered what  the  impact  would  be
    were it to occur.  That was a material error as it  forms  an  integral
    part of the assessment of risk and the decision must be set aside.

    Remaking the decision

14. At the hearing on 25 September 2018 I heard evidence from the appellant
    as well as from his father and brother.

15. The appellant adopted his witness statement adding  since  his  release
    earlier this  year  he  had  undergone  a  treatment  programme  called
    "Horizon" which he expected to finish the following day.  This  was  to
    be followed by meeting his probation officer and others involved in the
    course, the expectation that his risk would  be  reassessed  medium  to
    low.  He said that he had learnt from the programme about relationships
    and to be cautious and to stop to think before making a decision.

16. The appellant accepted that he had  initially  denied  sexual  activity
    with his victim and that he had initially told  the  probation  officer
    the victim was 16; and, that he had  initially  told  the  officer  the
    victim had fabricated the claim.  He  denied  accepting  responsibility
    shortly before the trial date to avoid a custodial sentence and that he
    should have accepted his responsibility.  He said that he  had  thought
    about all his mistakes and at the time he was  not  thinking  straight.
    That was when he said he did not know it was wrong and illegal to  have
    sex with a 14 year old.  He said that his attitude had now  changed  as
    he had had a chance to think about it in prison and he was not claiming
    to have changed simply to avoid deportation to Italy.

17. The appellant said that he had not shaken his head when being sentenced
    by the judge because he did not accept what he was saying, but  through
    shame, and he did not have an opportunity to tell the judge that.

18. Re-examined the appellant said that he now knew what consent meant  and
    that the victim had not been able to give consent due to her age.

19. I asked what the appellant thought he understood by remorse.   He  said
    he was not sure he thought that it meant somebody that you did not show
    compassion or feeling towards somebody.  He  said  as  a  Christian  he
    prays for his victim every day.

20. The appellant's father adopted his statement adding that  his  son  had
    changed since he had been released, always tells him where he is  going
    and makes sure that he goes to all his appointments with the  Probation
    Service and the programme.

21. The appellant's brother adopted his letter in support  noting  that  he
    observes  his  brother  now  attends  all  his  appointments  with  the
    Probation Service and has now become more confident and happy since  he
    had been released from prison.

22. Mr Howells drew my attention to the fact that there was no OASys Report
    and that the letter from 2018 states the appellant is of medium risk of
    sexual reoffending and medium risk of causing serious harm to children.
     It is submitted that whilst the probation officer  had  written  there
    was not an imminent risk this was not a necessary requirement and  that
    the  existence  of  the  appellant  posing  a  medium  risk   justified
    deportation on public  policy  grounds,  the  sentencing  judge  having
    noting severe psychological harm to the victim which  demonstrated  the
    risk of seriousness of consequences if the appellant were to  reoffend.
    Mr Howells submitted that the appellant's change of mind was due to the
    threat of the sentence of deportation and that it was telling  that  he
    was unable to explain what was meant by remorse.

23. Mr  Howells  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  disproportionate  in
    removing the appellant given his age, lack of  ties  other  than  adult
    family  members  and  lack  of  employment.   He  submitted  that   the
    possibility of rehabilitation was not a  matter  which  attracted  much
    weight, that removal would be proportionate.

24. Miss Pickering submitted that the core issue was whether the  applicant
    presents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  public
    order.  She accepted that there was currently an assessment he  was  of
    medium risk but he had had a programme and that  a  further  assessment
    was to be made.  It was submitted it was likely that the risk would  be
    lowered on that basis and she accepted that he was on the Sex Offenders
    Register for ten years.

25. Assessing medium risk, Miss Pickering submitted that  as  described  it
    means that at present he did not pose an active risk due to  protective
    factors being in place.  Therefore it was unlikely that he would  cause
    serious harm.  That was due to the protective factors.

26. Miss Pickering submitted that the appellant's attitude before the judge
    should be treated with caution given his evidence before me and that he
    had been candid and he now accepted the position that he had  not  been
    truthful in the past  and  accepted  that  he  had  denied  the  sexual
    activity.  Miss Pickering submitted also that the appellant had in  his
    first statement expressed regret for the harm caused to the victim.

27. Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:-


    27.-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
taken on the grounds
    of public policy, public security or public health.


    (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


    (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with  a
right of permanent
    residence under regulation 15  except  on  serious  grounds  of  public
policy and public security.


    (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative  grounds
of public security in
    respect of an EEA national who-
         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in  the
    best interests of the person
         concerned, as provided for in the Convention on the Rights  of  the
    Child adopted by the
         General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989


    (5) The public policy and public security requirements  of  the  United
Kingdom include
    restricting rights otherwise conferred by these Regulations in order to
protect the fundamental
    interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds
of public policy or    public security it must also be taken  in  accordance
with the following principles-

     (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

    (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of
         the person concerned;

    (c)  the personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society;

    (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate
         to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not  justify   the
         decision;

    (e)  a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

    (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even  in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.

    ...

    (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether the requirements  of  this
    regulation  are  met  must  (in  particular)   have   regard   to   the
    considerations  contained  in  Schedule  1  (considerations  of  public
    policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society etc.).

28. It is important to note Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40]

    I have to say that I have considerable difficulty with what was said by
    the Advocate General in relation to rehabilitation. In the first place,
    it had no, or very little, relevance to the questions referred  to  the
    Court, which concerned the meaning of  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security". Secondly, it is only if there is a risk of reoffending  that
    the power to expel arises [emphasis added] It is illogical,  therefore,
    to require the competent authority "to take account of factors  showing
    that the decision adopted (i.e., to expel) is such as  to  prevent  the
    risk of re-offending", when it is that very risk that gives rise to the
    power to make that decision. Secondly, in general "the conditions of [a
    criminal's] release" will be applicable and  enforceable  only  in  the
    Member State in which he has been convicted and  doubtless  imprisoned.
    ...

29. The sentence highlighted is confirmed at paragraph [55].

30. In MC the Upper Tribunal held as follows:-

    1.   Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions taken  on
         public policy, public security  and  public  health  grounds  under
         regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

    2.   It is only if the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  is
         found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).

    3.   There is no specific reference  in  the  expulsion  provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).

    4.   Rehabilitation is not an  issue  to  be  addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).

    5.   ...

31. The core issue in this case  is  whether  the  appellant  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  It  is  common  ground  between  the
    parties that he is not entitled to any  enhanced  level  of  protection
    pursuant to reg 27 (4).

32. The starting point in assessing the risk that  the  appellant  presents
    are the pre-sentence reports dated 1  December  2016  and  15  December
    2016.  Both were prepared by Lorraine Wood.  In the first report it  is
    recorded that the appellant had pleaded  guilty  to  the  offences  but
    denied any sexual activity with the victim  other  than  kissing.   The
    account given of the incident is that the appellant met the victim  via
    social network; they met and kissed and that  on  the  second  occasion
    they met and it was on that occasion, upon  leaving,  that  the  victim
    told him that she was 14 adding that he said they could  not  be  in  a
    relationship as a result.  It was accepted that he had further  contact
    with her by telephone.

33. The victim's version was different in that she said that he  was  fully
    aware of her age when they chatted on line; that he asked her  to  meet
    him; that she had felt somewhat forced into partaking oral, digital  or
    penile  penetration.   It  is  also  noted  that  the  victim  detailed
    emotional harm  she  had  suffered  which  had  affected  her  personal
    relationship with family and friends, her educational and her emotional
    wellbeing which may affect her in the long run into adult life.

34. It is recorded:-

         "Mr Eguagie admits to behaving inappropriately,  in  that  he  says
         that he accepts that he kissed the victim after she  had  told  him
         her real age, but he attempts to justify this  by  stating  the  he
         'felt sorry' for her.  Mr Eguagie says  that  he  was  a  different
         person when he made this "mistake" he has matured since  then.   He
         is of the opinion that the victim has  fabricated  the  allegations
         because  he  would  not  have  a  relationship  with  her  when  he
         discovered her age.

         Mr Eguagie's denial  of  the  sexual  activity,  knowledge  of  the
         victim's age and .............  of  his  offending  behaviour.   He
         denies requesting contact with the victim because of her age, being
         attracted to her for this reason, or targeting her because she  was
         vulnerable.   It  is  claimed  that  this  offending   was   solely
         underpinned by immaturity is questionable and does  raise  concerns
         with regards to how effective any sort of treatment would be."

35. It is also of note that the appellant is assessed as  posing  a  medium
    risk of sexual harm and  subsequent  emotional  harm  to  children  but
    although there are positive supportive factors in his  life  there  are
    significant concerns regarding his attitude towards the offences to the
    victim.  It is observed that the risk may be reduced if he is  able  to
    explore his offending behaviour in depth via a treatment programme  and
    that he will be subject to Sex Offender Registration  in  future  which
    may assist in reducing the risk.

36. In the second report it is recorded that the appellant now accepts that
    he was aware of the victim's age when he met her and  fully  admits  to
    sexual activity that she describes taking place.  The author  wrote  of
    the appellant: "he tells me that he accepted her 'friend  request'  out
    of 'kindness' but, with challenge, was able to explore this further and
    concedes he may have been attracted to her and  meeting  her  with  the
    potential of engaging in sexual activity with her.

37. It is also recorded that although the appellant knew the  victim's  age
    he did not consider that his behaviour was inappropriate or illegal  at
    the time and acknowledged being attracted to the victim but denied  any
    ongoing attraction to children.  It is stated

         "Mr Eguagie expresses regret for his offending but he continues  to
         be unable to explore the harm caused to the victim in much  detail.
         This appears to be due to the ill feeling that she has 'ruined  his
         life/career'.

         Mr Eguagie continues to be assessed posing a medium risk of harm to
         children as detailed in the previous report.  Although he says that
         he now accepts responsibility for his  offending,  he  has  yet  to
         engage and comply in any form of treatment that would aim to reduce
         the risk and concerns mainly regarding  his  attitude  towards  the
         victim.   There  are  also  additional  concerns  that  his  recent
         exceptions of the events could be due to the threat of a  custodial
         sentence."

38. The appellant was sentenced on 22 December  2016.   Ms  Recorder  Wigin
    stated as follows:-

         "You are now 22 years of age.  When you were 20 years of  age,  you
         met, through social media, a girl whose age  was  14.   You  always
         knew that was her age.  You met her on two occasions, on both those
         occasions you committed offences of penetrative sexual  intercourse
         with her.

         ...

         You pleaded guilty on the day of your trial.  It has been indicated
         the week before that the complainant should not attend on the first
         day of the trial, but nonetheless as far as she was  concerned  the
         first intermission she had of your plea was on the day that she was
         expecting to give evidence.  Some nine months had passed  from  the
         time when you first entered your guilty plea.

         The  severe  aggravating  feature  of  this  case  is  the   severe
         psychological harm you have caused to that  complainant.   You  are
         shaking your head at me in the dock.  May I say that I  have  noted
         in the presentence report that you are described as  still  feeling
         resentment towards the complainant on the basis that  she  has,  in
         your words, 'ruined your life.'

         The case falls in the tariff at the very top of category  1B.   The
         reasons I have put it in 1B is  because  having  heard  submissions
         from Counsel, I have taken the view that it is  hard  to  see  that
         communications which you had on the social  media  is  conventional
         grooming I have taken the opportunity of reminding  myself  exactly
         what the contents of those  communications  were.   He  has  argued
         eloquently that there was not a significant disparity in your  age,
         there being some six years, nor can it be said on your behalf  that
         you did not contribute to the severe psychological harm  this  girl
         has suffered, both by the fact that this was a plea  entered  at  a
         very late stage and I have also  read  those  texts  in  which  you
         expressed to her what is summarised in the opening as  your  desire
         not to have a relationship or indeed a child by her.

         I have read the pre-sentence report and I take  into  consideration
         that you have no relevant previous convictions and that the view is
         that there is work that could be done with you in  a  non-custodial
         setting but taking all the matters into consideration it  seems  to
         me that the only appropriate sentence  here  is  one  of  immediate
         custody and accordingly that is the  sentence  I  impose  upon  you
         today.  The shortest period of custodial sentence that I can impose
         upon you, taking all matters  into  consideration,  is  one  of  22
         months and I make that sentence on you accordingly.

39. It is noted also that a Sexual Harm Prevention Order has been made  and
    that the appellant will be on the Sex Offenders Register for ten years.

40. Section 103A of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 permits a court to make  a
    Sexual Harm Prevention Order in respect of a person when the  court  is
    satisfied it is  necessary  to  make  the  order  for  the  purpose  of
    protecting the public or any particular  members  of  the  public  from
    sexual harm from  him  or  protecting  children  or  vulnerable  adults
    generally or any particular children or vulnerable adults  from  sexual
    harm from the defendant outside the United Kingdom.   By  operation  of
    Section 103C an order prohibits him from doing things described in  the
    order for a fixed period of at least five years or until further order.

41. I accept that the appellant has been released from prison and from  the
    letter from his defendant manager, Cheryl McCulla.   She  records  that
    the appellant has engaged well with probation, contact being reduced in
    level in line with his level of risk and due to good compliance.  It is
    noted also that he has  voluntarily  enrolled  in  the  Horizon  Sexual
    Offending Programme and the feedback from the programme had  been  very
    positive.  The letter also notes that he is not assessed as  posing  an
    imminent risk of harm and has said he has several protective factors in
    place including support from family, engaging in his licence provision,
    attending church, awareness and insight  into  his  risk  of  offending
    behaviour, good internal  controls  and  a  high  level  of  motivation
    capacity to desist  further  offending  and  to  develop  a  pro-social
    lifestyle."

42. It is noted also that his  risk  management  officer  with  Northumbria
    Police has no current concerns.

43. In the letter dated 10 April 2018 Ms McCulla confirms further that  the
    appellant  has  attended  all  appointments,  that  the   static   risk
    assessment tool to assess the risk of reoffending to be low in relation
    to both general and violent offending and that  the  Risk  Matrix  2000
    Risk Assessment with regard to the risk of sexual reoffending  assesses
    that he poses a medium risk  of  both  sexual  and  non-sexual  violent
    offending, basic consideration of static factors such as  age  did  not
    take into account any dynamic risk factors.  It is noted also  that  he
    is currently assessed as posing  a  medium  risk  of  serious  harm  to
    children and a low risk of serious harm to known adults, members of the
    public, staff.

44. The definition from medium risk of serious harm is  as  follows:  there
    are identifiable indicators of a risk of serious  harm.   The  offender
    has the potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely to do so unless
    there is a change in circumstances.  The low risk of serious harm is to
    find as: current evidence does not indicate  a  likelihood  of  serious
    harm.  When referring to serious harm, this is  defined  as:  an  event
    which is life threatening and/or traumatic, and for which  a  recovery,
    whether physical or psychological can be expected to  be  difficult  or
    impossible.  The level of risk considers the likelihood of  this  event
    occurring.

45. The letter concludes that it is not assessed that the  appellant  poses
    an  imminent  or  active  risk  of  engaging  similar  behaviour   when
    considering his current  situation  and  protective  factors  in  place
    including voluntary participation in  the  Horizon  Programme.   It  is
    stated also:-

         "Although risk is dynamic it can change at any time, an  assessment
         of low risk would not be considered at this stage of  Mr  Eguagie's
         sentence due to the relatively short duration of his  time  in  the
         community.   However  should  he  continue  in  the  current   vein
         continuing to engage with the probation and  address  his  risk  of
         offending behaviour on the Horizon  Programme,  this  is  something
         that will be reconsidered at a later date."

46. I have considered this material, and the evidence of the appellant  and
    his family as a whole, bearing in mind that attitudes and the threat  a
    person poses can change over time, and that the  purpose  of  probation
    and the Horizon Programme is to assist an offender to change.

47. There is a stark contrast between the appellant's attitude between  the
    first and second probation reports which were  written  14  days  apart
    from denial and accusations of the  complainant  ruining  his  life  to
    acceptance of the offence. I  have  considered  carefully  the  reasons
    given for the change and for what is now said to  be  further  positive
    changes.  Much  of  this  comes  from  Ms  McCulla,  and  while  it  is
    encouraging, it is speculative as to whether  the  risk  the  appellant
    presents may be assessed as low. Nonetheless, looking at  the  evidence
    in the round, I consider that there is significant merit in  Ms  Wood's
    observation that the apparent change in heart is due to the fear  of  a
    custodial sentence.   While I note that  the  appellant  now  says  the
    shaking of his head before the sentencing judge was not a denial of the
    facts, I am not in a position to reach a conclusion different from her;
    I did not see what occurred, and she did.

48. I bear in mind that, as Miss Pickering  submitted,  medium  risk  means
    that the appellant is unlikely to cause serious harm unless there is  a
    change in circumstances, but the risk is of course still there.  It  is
    still a serious risk, given the nature of the harm that may flow.

49. The evidence from the appellant and his family that he has  changed.  I
    attach  less  weight  to  their  evidence.   The  appellant  has  every
    incentive to show he  has  changed,  and  his  family  are,  naturally,
    disposed to support him. It is to their credit that they have supported
    him,  but  equally  their  assessment  of  the   risk   he   poses   is
    understandably coloured by the strong emotional ties between them.

50. I consider that I can rely on the assessment by the National  Probation
    Service that although the appellant does not pose an imminent  risk  of
    harm, nonetheless he is assessed as presenting a medium risk of serious
    harm.  Given the gravity of serious harm as defined and given  that  he
    has been required to sign on the  Sexual  Offences  Register  and  that
    there is a Sexual Harm Prevention Order against  him  I  consider  that
    notwithstanding his own and his family's assessment that he is unlikely
    to commit a crime again, I am not persuaded me that I should not accept
    that assessment that he presents a risk of serious harm to children  is
    in my view sufficient to show that there is a risk to the interests  of
    society and that it is sufficiently serious.  It  is  also  genuine  in
    that it is real.

51. I do not consider having had regard to  proportionality,  that  removal
    would be disproportionate.  The appellant presents a significant threat
    to children and young people. He is not in a relationship and  while  I
    accept he is close to his family, I am not persuaded that there is  any
    degree of dependency over and above the usual emotional ties such  that
    there exits a family life with them.  He is young and  healthy  and  he
    has some links with Italy. He has lived here for a number of years  but
    has not acquired permanent residence. There is limited evidence of  the
    appellant's integration into the United Kingdom in any true  sense  and
    his offending behaviour  and  the  circumstances  in  which  the  crime
    occurred indicates that he has not integrated into society.

52. The appellant has not yet acquired permanent residence, but  he  is,  I
    accept, taking steps to rehabilitate himself as shown by his attendance
    on a relevant course, and the improvements which have  been  identified
    by Ms McCulla. There is, however, little evidence of  anything  further
    to be done, or that further courses, or other means  of  rehabilitation
    could not be undertaken in Italy. While it is a factor to be taken into
    account in the appellant's favour it has to  be  balanced  against  the
    serious threat which he presents.

53. Taking all of the evidence  into  account,  and  weighing  the  factors
    identified  in  the  balance,  I  conclude  that  notwithstanding   the
    improvement in the appellant's position, that the risk of serious harm,
    that is an event which is life threatening and/or  traumatic,  and  for
    which a recovery, whether physical or psychological can be expected  to
    be difficult or impossible, is  such  that  removal  is  shown  by  the
    respondent to be proportionate and I dismiss the appeal on all  grounds
    accordingly.

Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

