

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00567/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 28th September 2016                |On: 06th October 2016               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     K S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    IMD Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a national of Poland born on the 18th February  1996.
    On the 26th May 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Place) allowed  his
    appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
    decision to deport him from the  United  Kingdom  under  the  terms  of
    Regulations 19 and 21  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006. The Secretary of State now has permission  to  appeal
    against that decision.




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. It is not in dispute that on the  13th  May  2014  the  Respondent  was
    convicted of causing grievous bodily harm with intent and was sentenced
    to 54 months in prison.   The circumstances  of  the  assault  are  not
    entirely clear but it was the view of the  sentencing  judge  that  the
    Respondent had taken a lead role in a group attack on a lone individual
    and he was sentenced accordingly.   That was plainly a serious  offence
    and it was proper that the Secretary of  State  give  consideration  to
    deporting the Respondent. Nor had  this  been  the  Respondent's  first
    offence.  The decision to deport was taken on the 10th November 2015.


 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Secretary  of
    State relied on the fact of the conviction, the sentencing  remarks  of
    the judge, a 'detention and training order' imposed in  respect  of  an
    earlier offence and the conclusions of the probation service about  the
    likelihood of further offending. These were set out in an OASys  report
    dated 21st November 2014.   For his part the Respondent relied upon his
    own evidence, that of his mother, and the fact that he had undertaken a
    'Thinking Skills' assessment whilst in prison.

 4. In its determination dated 26th May 2016 the Tribunal proceeded on  the
    basis that the Respondent had acquired  neither  ten  years  continuous
    residence nor a permanent right of residence under Regulation  15.  The
    central test to be  applied  was  therefore  whether  the  Respondent's
    personal conduct  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society".
    The Tribunal held that in this particular case that meant it was  bound
    to assess the risk, at the date of the appeal, of the Respondent  being
    involved  in  another  or  similar  offence  involving  violence.   The
    Tribunal had regard to the OASys report and to the sentencing  remarks.
    He then weighed that against the evidence presented by  the  Respondent
    and  having  done  so  concluded  that  his   "thinking   had   changed
    considerably since the OASys report was  compiled".    Looking  at  the
    more up to date evidence, the Tribunal was satisfied that there was not
    a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  posed  by  the
    Respondent's continuing presence in the United Kingdom  and the  appeal
    was allowed.

 5. The Secretary of State appeals on the following grounds:

              i) The Judge's analysis was superficial and he has  failed  to
                 have adequate regard to the pertinent risk factors  as  set
                 out in the OASys report;


             ii) The determination focusses solely  on  those  factors  that
                 have been addressed by the Respondent,  and  not  upon  the
                 matters that were outstanding;


            iii) The Judge  impermissibly  relies  on  speculation  when  he
                 comments that teenagers have a poor perception  of  actions
                 and consequences;

             iv) The determination fails to engage with the findings of  the
                 OASys  report,  in  particular  the  identified  'offending
                 trigger' of alcohol.


 6. The points made at (i)-(iv)  above  are  in  part  concerned  with  the
    Tribunal's treatment of the Respondent's relationship with alcohol  and
    its involvement in his offending behaviour. The case can be  summed  up
    in the closing paragraph of the grounds:


         "The Secretary of State for the Home Department contends that  this
         represents a clear on-going risk factor and that as a result  there
         is a present risk of recidivism. It is clear  that  any  such  risk
         would be genuine and sufficiently serious in  light  of  the  index
         offence and the escalation of offending that has occurred  in  this
         case"


 7. As for the OASys report, this  was compiled in November 2014, just over
    a year after the index offence was committed. The probation officer who
    compiled it noted  that  the  subject  had  one  previous  offence  for
    violence, when he was sixteen years old.  The officer asked  him  about
    the offence, a vicious assault carried out in the  victim's  home.  The
    Respondent denied that he had been there and completely refused to take
    any responsibility for it. When the officer put  it  to  him  that  his
    fingerprints had been found in the property, in a  position  consistent
    with the victim's account of where he had been standing as he delivered
    kicks, the Respondent suggested that perhaps he had been  there  before
    but he could not remember when.  He  denied  knowing  the  victim.  His
    attitude towards this offence was similar to that displayed when  asked
    about the earlier conviction, also an assault committed in the  company
    of a friend.  He appeared "demotivated" to attend any courses whilst in
    prison.   He was reluctant to discuss his use of  alcohol  and  denied,
    contrary to the information held on file, that it had  any  involvement
    in either of his offences. Given this, it is easy to understand why the
    officer concluded as he did that the risk of violent reoffending  would
    be classed as "imminent" once the Respondent was released back into the
    community. The Secretary of State's complaint is that this evidence was
    not considered properly by the Tribunal and that if it  had  been,  the
    decision would have been different.







    My Findings
 8. Given the very serious nature of  the  Respondent's  offending  I  have
    given careful consideration to these grounds. I am  however  unable  to
    find that they are made out. That is  because  it  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the Judge did have regard to  the  findings  in  the
    OASys report; for the sustainable reasons that he gives, he  considered
    it to be outweighed by the evidence that post-dated it.


 9. At paragraph 25 the determination notes the  tenor  of  the  sentencing
    remarks. The Judge is recorded as having found the Respondent  to  have
    played a leading role in the assault, and to have displayed no remorse.
    The only mitigating factor was his young age (he was seventeen  at  the
    date of the offence).  Paragraph 26 notes the emphasis that  Mr  Bates,
    the Presenting Officer on the day,  gave  to  the  OASys  report.  That
    report had assessed him as presenting a high risk of harm to the public
    and a medium risk  to  other  prisoners,  principally  because  of  the
    Respondent's attitude to the violence that  he  had  inflicted  in  the
    past.  At paragraph 28 the Tribunal notes the three areas identified by
    the probation service which could reduce the level of risk posed by the
    Respondent: understanding his motivation to react to a  situation  with
    violence, association with "pro-social  peers"  and  understanding  the
    effect of alcohol on him.

10. At paragraph 29 the Tribunal finds there to be "no evidence"  that  the
    third of these matters has been addressed. Notwithstanding the evidence
    that alcohol had played a part in the first assault the Respondent  had
    denied that he had any problems with drinking. It goes on:

         "30. However, the Appellant has made  progress  in  the  other  two
         areas. He has undertaken a Thinking Skills course  and,  though  Mr
         Bates argued that there was much in it that he did not  understand,
         I find that there is evidence  before  me  that  his  thinking  has
         changed considerably since the OASys report was compiled.


         31. Page 134 of the Appellant's bundle  contains  evidence  from  a
         review after the Thinking Skills course of what the Appellant feels
         he has learnt. That review was compiled in August 2015. It  records
         that the Appellant has learnt that his thinking and behaviour  used
         to be spontaneous but  that  now  he  will  stop  and  think  about
         consequences. He has identified a method of using a green  and  red
         flag system to help him think about people who may or  may  not  be
         helpful to him. In my view, he  shows  understanding  in  observing
         that things in prison are not as they will be  out  of  prison  and
         that he will have to see what happens when he is released.  He  has
         also used a Self Help method to keep himself positive and  to  keep
         himself out of arguments and keep control over what he says. He has
         decided to aim towards Enhanced Prisoner Status.


         32. Although he has not undertaken an alcohol awareness  course  it
         is clear, at page 135, that he now recognises that alcohol was  one
         of the triggers to his offending behaviour.


         33. I  find  honesty  and  clear  sightedness  in  the  Appellant's
         comments at page 139 where he says that he cannot say 100% that  he
         will not reoffend but that he really does want to try not to and is
         not going to be doing the same things as before. There  is  a  real
         difference in this type of comment from the young man  who  refused
         to engage with the process of compiling the OASys report".


11.  The determination goes on to record the evidence  of  two  members  of
    prison staff. The Respondent's 'Personal Officer', who had worked  with
    him over a period of time,  describes his attitude as  having  come  on
    "leaps and bounds". This view  is  shared  by  the  instructor  in  the
    Plastics  Workshop  who,  having  observed  his  initially  "haphazard"
    behaviour now finds the Respondent to  be  calmer  and  more  positive.
    This improvement is noted across the prison records. The Respondent had
    initially been given a job as a cleaner but had lost that position  due
    to poor work and lack of commitment.   The up to date  material  before
    the Tribunal showed him to be  attending  regularly,  interacting  well
    with peers and completing all tasks he was given.  Although  the  OASys
    report had assessed him as presenting a medium risk to other prisoners,
    there had been no incidents  at  all.    The  Tribunal  weighs  in  the
    balance the fact that the Respondent was 17 when he committed his  last
    offence and that as a teenager he  had  a  poor  understanding  of  his
    actions. At the age of twenty he has now shown  himself  to  have  made
    progress and matured.   All of this led the Tribunal  to  conclude,  at
    37: "I find that there is a substantial amount of evidence to  back  up
    the Appellant's assertion that he has changed and now wants to get  his
    life sorted out".   It is that finding which leads to the appeal  being
    allowed.


12. I cannot see, in light of that  evidence-based  reasoning,  that  these
    grounds have any merit.  The damning conclusions of  the  OASys  report
    are carefully examined against the later evidence.   The  Tribunal  did
    not ignore the concerns  expressed  about  alcohol,  but  addressed  it
    squarely in its assessment of the evidence. The  assessment  of  likely
    recidivism in the OASys report was baed  largely  on  the  Respondent's
    poor attitude.  Having had regard to all of the evidence before it  the
    First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that this attitude  had  changed.  It
    was entitled to allow the appeal on that basis.













    Decision

13. The grounds  are  not  made  out  and  the  appeal  is  dismissed.  The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

14. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            6th October 2016


