
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2013                           |On 18 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR JASON JAMORY SMYTHE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Solanki, Counsel



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This matter came before us as an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("the Tribunal") prepared
    11 July 2013.  The Secretary of State had on 22  January  2013  made  a
    deportation order in terms of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.
     The respondent appealed against that decision  to  the  Tribunal,  who
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8).  It was against
    that decision which the  Secretary  of  State  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Background

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica  who  was  born  on  25  January
    1980.  He is accordingly 33 years old.

3.   The respondent arrived in the UK on 15 December 1997 seeking  leave  to
    enter as a visitor.  That was refused, but  he  was  granted  temporary
    admission for two days and was requested to report to  Gatwick  Airport
    on 17 December 1997 for removal to Jamaica.  He failed  to  report  and
    was considered an absconder.  He claimed asylum on 20 January 1998  but
    that was refused on 19 March 2001.  His  appeals  were  dismissed.   He
    applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person in the UK
    but that was refused in March 2002.

4.   On 19 June 2006  he  was  convicted  of  wounding  with  intent  to  do
    grievous bodily harm.  He was sentenced at the Central  Criminal  Crown
    Court to an indeterminate sentence for public protection and to serve a
    minimum of three years four months' imprisonment.  He was served with a
    notice of liability to deportation on 5 March 2009.

5.   The respondent has two children who are British citizens,  born  on  17
    August 2001 and 19 May 2004 respectively.  He married their  mother  in
    2001.

6.   Their mother is their primary carer although they did  make  visits  to
    the respondent when he was in prison.   On  his  release  in  or  about
    December 2012 the respondent had contact every other weekend  with  his
    daughters but that had stopped shortly prior to the hearing before  the
    Tribunal.

7.   Given  the  way  that  the  discussion  developed  before  us  and  the
    significance of paragraphs  20  to  23  of  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal to that discussion it is perhaps at this stage convenient  for
    us to set out in full these parts of the determination:

         "20. The appellant set out his history in  his  witness  statement.
             We have taken that into account as well as the contents of his
             interview recorded on 12 October  2012.   The  interview  took
             place because the appellant had claimed asylum.   He  said  at
             the start that he no longer wanted to claim asylum, but he did
             want to make clear some issues regarding human rights  to  put
             to the Home Office.  These were reasons why he would not  wish
             to be removed from the UK.   At  the  hearing  he  spoke  very
             lucidly about his childhood and his marriage and his children.
              He gave  his  account  of  the  incident  which  led  to  his
             sentence.  It is clear that he understands his situation.   We
             listened carefully to his oral evidence at the hearing and  we
             found that he was a very  articulate  speaker  and  he  showed
             intelligence in understanding the procedure and his situation.
              He remained calm and sensible throughout.  He  has  explained
             how his mother and father left Jamaica when he was 5 years old
             and left him with his grandmother in Jamaica.  He said that he
             did not have a good education because he  did  not  understand
             things and he has now learned that in fact  he  has  dyslexia.
             He was brought to the UK by his aunt when he was 17  in  1997.
             He has now been in the UK for 15 years.  He acknowledged  that
             he lived on  a  rough  estate  and  he  started  taking  drugs
             including ecstasy and cocaine.  He also smoked  cannabis.   He
             describes how his offences took place and it  was  clear  from
             his evidence that he had a full understanding of how  he  came
             to be imprisoned.  He informed us that he has been training as
             an optician and has some experience in  that  occupation.   He
             has also been mentoring  others  whilst  in  prison.   He  has
             helped prisoners to read and has given basic teaching.  He has
             also helped  other  inmates  to  consider  their  offences  by
             addressing his own criminal behaviour.  He is genuinely  upset
             that his marriage has not succeeded but he continues  to  have
             access to his two children.  The two witnesses both emphasised
             that he is now totally different in attitude from the time  of
             his convictions, and he has  grown  up.   He  clearly  has  an
             insight into his past and his present and he has come to terms
             with his present situation.


         21.  We found the appellant to be a truthful witness.  He  supplied
             in his bundle copies of several written complimentary comments
             from prison staff and workers, including a letter stating that
             he has acted as  a  mentor  in  helping  people  with  reading
             difficulties,  since  he  had  learning  difficulties  himself
             because of his dyslexia.  There is evidence of his  collecting
             money by organising a charity run  through  his  own  efforts.
             The Parole Board recommended his  release  in  December  2012.
             The Decision Letter following an oral hearing  of  the  Parole
             Board on 4 December states that he has been drug free  for  at
             least 5 years  and  there  was  no  evidence  of  violence  in
             custody.  The Board also states that he has been learning  the
             work of a spectacle technician with a charitable organisation,
             and he said he would like to work in an  optician's  business.
             It was quite clear from his evidence that  he  had  a  genuine
             understanding of his situation.


         22.  There is no suggestion that he  has  any  relatives  still  in
             Jamaica.  He told us he had no knowledge of any family members
             still in Jamaica.  We believe that he was  truthful.   He  has
             now been 15 years in the UK.  He has  ties  here  and  he  has
             children here.  All his relatives are in the UK or in the USA.
              He would have no contacts in Jamaica.  He has in the UK  many
             family  members  including  his  own  two  children.   He  was
             convicted in June 2006.  He was served with a notice  that  he
             was liable for deportation in March 2009, which is more than 4
             years  ago.   The  respondent  did  not  actually  order   his
             deportation until January 2013.  Our view is  that  since  the
             appellant has been in the UK  for  more  than  15  years,  the
             chances are that the appellant would find it very difficult to
             integrate.  There is no evidence of any  potential  assistance
             that might be available on his arrival.


         23.  We have considered the appellant's rights under article  8  of
             the ECHR.  We follow the guidance provided in the case of R  v
             SSHD Ex Parte Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   We  consider  the  5
             questions  identified  by  the  House  of   Lords.    In   the
             circumstances here we find that the appellant's  removal  will
             be an interference with the exercise of his rights to  respect
             for his private and  family  life.   The  decision  does  have
             consequences of such gravity as to  engage  the  operation  of
             article 8.  We do not hesitate in finding that the decision is
             in accordance with the law and is necessary  in  a  democratic
             society for public safety and for the protection of the rights
             and freedoms  of  others.   We  therefore  come  down  to  the
             question of proportionality.  We have  already  discussed  the
             appellant's circumstances in the UK.  To return him to Jamaica
             would sever his contact with his children and with  his  aunts
             and other relations who are living in the UK.   His  evidence,
             which we accept, is that he has no known relatives or  friends
             in Jamaica.  He has his 2 children in the UK and it is  highly
             unlikely that, if removed, he would be able to see them in the
             flesh again even though he may, perhaps, be able to  speak  to
             them on the phone.  He will not  have  any  contact  with  his
             aunts and his nieces and nephews.  He has also learned  skills
             in this country and will be able to put those to good  use  in
             finding employment in the future.  We also take  into  account
             the fact that there have been some significant delays  on  the
             part of the respondent before  making  the  deportation  order
             (almost 4 years).  We have come to the conclusion that he  has
             shown that he has the merits of a good citizen and could be of
             benefit to the  community.   We  therefore  conclude  that  to
             deport him would constitute a breach of his human rights under
             article 8.  We therefore allow the appeal."

Submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State

8.   The submissions on behalf of the Secretary of  State  fell  into  three
    broad chapters.

9.   The first challenge to the determination was  this:  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to have regard to the Immigration Rules in making its Article  8
    assessment and accordingly had materially erred in law.

     In elaboration of that point Mr  Walker  contended  that  in  making  a
    decision on an application it was necessary for the decision  maker  to
    consider all the legislation relative to that decision and give reasons
    for the way that it applied that legislation to the facts of the  case.
    Applying this to the circumstances of the present  case,  the  Tribunal
    had had no regard at all to the relevant sections  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He submitted that this was not an appropriate approach.

10.  It was  his  position  that  the  Immigration  Rules  were  a  detailed
    expression  of  government  policy  on  controlling   immigration   and
    protecting the public.  The Article 8 sections of the Immigration Rules
    reflected, it was his submission, the Secretary of State's view  as  to
    where the balance lay between the individual's rights  and  the  public
    interest.  They reflected the broad principles set  out  in  Strasbourg
    and domestic jurisprudence.  Therefore, when a Tribunal  considered  an
    individual appeal it should consider proportionality in  the  light  of
    this clear expression of public policy and the Secretary of State would
    expect the courts to defer to her view, endorsed by Parliament, on how,
    broadly, public  policy  considerations  were  to  be  weighed  against
    individual family and private life rights, when  assessing  Article  8.
    He submitted that the failure to do so in the instant case  meant  that
    the decision the Tribunal had made on  Article  8  was  incomplete  and
    therefore unsustainable.  It was his position  that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider a key element in the assessment of the  case  before
    it.

11.  The second broad chapter of Mr  Walker's  submissions  was  founded  on
    what he submitted were failures on the Tribunal's part to give reasons,
    or at least adequate reasons, for findings on material  matters.   This
    broad submission fell into a number of detailed sections.

12.  He first submitted that the Tribunal had erred in law at  paragraph  21
    where it had noted the respondent's various actions since his  offence.
    However, what he submitted the Tribunal had failed to do  was  to  give
    any reasons for the view it had formed regarding the respondent's  risk
    of harm and re-offending.  It was  his  position  that  the  respondent
    still remained at risk and that this  was  demonstrated  by  him  being
    assessed as a medium risk of further offending, as he is managed  as  a
    MAPPA offender and that whilst he had resided in  the  UK  since  1997,
    when he was 17, he was  not  a  homegrown  criminal  as  was  noted  at
    paragraph 8 of the determination and that his drug habit had  begun  in
    Jamaica and continued shortly after arrival in the  UK.   Moreover,  he
    pointed to paragraph 10 where it was stated that the respondent's  aunt
    had confirmed that she knew of his drug habit but was unable to prevent
    him from continuing to take drugs.  It was submitted that there was  no
    evidence that this aunt would be able to exert any sufficient influence
    over him now.  Accordingly, in relation to these matters, he  submitted
    that no adequate reasons had been given and  there  was  accordingly  a
    material error of law.

13.  He turned next to a finding of the Tribunal at paragraph 22  which  was
    to this effect: the respondent had no ties to Jamaica and would have no
    support there.  He submitted that the Tribunal had  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons  for  these  findings.   His  position  was  that  the
    respondent had spent the first seventeen years of his life  in  Jamaica
    and thus his formative years there and would be used to the culture and
    customs of that country.   Therefore, although he  may  encounter  some
    initial difficulties, he would be in a position to fully adapt to  life
    there.  Furthermore, during his time there he  would  have  established
    friendships who could help support him and  even  if  he  did  not,  as
    stated in the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  deportation  letter,
    there were various agencies offering assistance to those  returning  to
    Jamaica who could support the respondent and the Tribunal  had  ignored
    this evidence in their consideration.  He submitted that  the  Tribunal
    had further failed to take into account that the respondent's residence
    here had been unlawful and that he had known throughout his  time  here
    that he could be returned to Jamaica at any time.  Again  he  submitted
    that this amounted to a material error of law.

14.  The next detailed argument under this head related  to  the  Tribunal's
    findings at paragraph 23 that deporting the respondent would sever  his
    contact with his  children.   Again,  it  was  his  position  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons for such a finding.  He
    drew to our attention that within the determination at paragraph 13  it
    was noted the respondent no longer had contact with  his  children  and
    had not seen them since April of  that  year.   Further,  even  if  the
    respondent did have contact with his children, he  submitted  that  the
    respondent's wife had been their main carer since their birth  and  the
    respondent had been in prison for most of the children's lives  without
    direct contact with them.  He went on to contend that if in the  future
    contact was resumed with the children, and there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that it would, he could  maintain  contact  with  them  through
    modern methods of communication as he had demonstrated he could for the
    majority of their lives whilst he had been in prison.  His position was
    that the Tribunal had failed to provide any reasons as to why it was in
    the children's best interests for him to remain in the UK.  Nor, in his
    submission had  the  Tribunal  provided  any  reasons  as  to  why  the
    children's best interests, in the circumstances of  this  case,  should
    outweigh the public interest to deport him.  Given that  he  no  longer
    had any contact with them and for the majority of their lives  had  had
    no contact with them and given the nature  of  his  offending  and  his
    risk, he submitted that the  public  interest  to  deport  him  clearly
    outweighed the children's interests.  However, no consideration of this
    particular matter had been made by the Tribunal.

15.  The third chapter  of  his  challenge  related  to  a  finding  of  the
    Tribunal at paragraph 23 of the  determination  to  this  effect:  that
    there had been significant delays on the part of the Secretary of State
    in making the deportation order.  He submitted that  this  finding  was
    wrong in law.  It was his position that the Secretary of State had been
    unable to make a deportation decision until  a  decision  was  made  in
    regard to the parole position of the respondent and, had the  Secretary
    of State made a decision prior to this, her decision  would  have  been
    unlawful.  The respondent was granted parole in December 2012  and  the
    Secretary of State  made  a  deportation  order  on  22  January  2013,
    therefore he submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  made  her
    decision as soon as possible after a decision was  made  regarding  the
    respondent's parole and it was not  an  appropriate  finding  that  the
    respondent had been subjected to any form of delay by  any  actings  of
    the Secretary of State.

16.  For the foregoing reasons he submitted that  there  had  been  material
    errors of law requiring the decision of the Tribunal to be set aside.




Reply on behalf of the Respondent

17.  It was Miss Solanki's broad submission that the determination  did  not
    contain any material errors of law.

18.  Her position was this.  As  regards  the  Secretary  of  State's  first
    challenge to the decision  and  in  particular  regarding  the  alleged
    failure  to  consider  the  Immigration  Rules:   regardless   of   the
    Immigration Rules the conclusions reached by the Tribunal were open  to
    it.

19.  As to the approach to the new Rules  which  the  Tribunal  should  have
    taken she referred to Izuazu (Article 8 - new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT  45
    (IAC).  From the said case she took the following:

    (a)  The procedure adopted in relation to the introduction of  the  new
         Rules provided a weak form of  parliamentary  scrutiny;  Parliament
         had not altered the legal duty of the judge determining appeals  to
         decide on proportionality for himself or herself.


    (b)  There could be no presumption that the  Rules  would  normally  be
         conclusive of the Article 8 assessment  or  that  a  fact-sensitive
         enquiry was not normally needed.  The more the new Rules restricted
         otherwise relevant and weighty considerations from being taken into
         account, the less regard would be had to them in the assessment  of
         proportionality.


    (c)  When considering whether a decision was  in  accordance  with  the
         law, it had been authoritatively established by the  Higher  Courts
         that the test to be applied was not  exceptional  circumstances  or
         insurmountable obstacles.


    (d)  The weight to be attached to any reason for rejection of the human
         rights claim indicated by particular provisions of the Rules  would
         depend both on the particular facts found by the judge in the  case
         in hand and the extent that the Rules themselves reflected criteria
         approved in the previous case law of  the  Human  Rights  Court  at
         Strasbourg and the higher courts in the United Kingdom.


20.  Applying the foregoing to the circumstances of this case she  submitted
    that the Tribunal should have considered whether the claimant  complied
    with Rule 194 and Appendix FM.  She accepted that the Tribunal had  not
    done so.  However, she pointed out that it was accepted  in  this  case
    that the respondent did not comply with the Rules.  However, any  error
    of law in failing first to assess the claim under the  Rules  would  be
    immaterial if the assessment of the Article 8 case as a matter  of  law
    apart from the Rules were satisfactory and she submitted  that  it  was
    satisfactory.  She reminded us under reference to Green  (Article  8  -
    new Rules) Jamaica [2013] UKUT 254 that the existence of  an  error  of
    law was a necessary condition to setting aside a  decision  but  not  a
    sufficient one.  Where any error was not material to the  outcome,  the
    Upper Tribunal would not normally set aside the decision below and  re-
    make it.  She submitted that the only arguable error  of  law  in  this
    case was the failure to explain how paragraph 399A(b)  applied  to  the
    facts of this case.  It was her position that any such failure was  not
    material and that it was not  capable  of  having  any  effect  on  the
    conclusions.

21.  She went on to look at MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT
    393.  She took the following points from that case:

    (a)   The  new  Immigration  Rules  set  out  a  number  of   mandatory
         requirements relating to claims reliant on  Article  8  which  make
         clear that if such requirements are not met, the  Article  8  claim
         under the Rules  must  be  refused.  They  also  contained  related
         provisions which confer discretion but it was discretion  to  grant
         leave in response to an Article 8 claim only if the  new  mandatory
         requirements are met.


    (b)  However, the new Rules only covered Article 8 claims brought under
         some,  not all, parts of the Rules and  only  accommodated  certain
         types of Article 8 claims.


    (c)  Even if a decision to refuse an Article  8  claim  under  the  new
         Rules was found to be correct, judges must still  consider  whether
         the decision was in compliance with a person's human  rights  under
         Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  and,  in  automatic  deportation
         cases, whether removal would breach a person's  Convention  rights.
         Thus in the context of deportation and removal cases the need for a
         two-stage approach in most  Article  8  cases  remained  imperative
         because the new Rules did not encapsulate  the  guidance  given  in
         Maslov  v Austria App no.1683/03 [2008] ECHR  546  which  had  been
         endorsed by the higher courts.


    (d)  When considering Article 8 in the  context  of  a  respondent  who
         failed under the new Rules, it would remain the  case,  as  before,
         that "exceptional circumstances" was not to be regarded as a  legal
         test and "insurmountable  obstacles"  was  to  be  regarded  as  an
         incorrect criterion.


22.  She went on to contend that the Tribunal had applied the correct  test,
    namely that set out in R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    ex-parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   She  in  particular  referred  to
    paragraphs 19 and 23 of the determination.

23.  Moving on,  she  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  exercised  proper
    judgment in taking into account all the relevant factors  in  the  case
    between paragraphs 20 and 23 of its determination.

24.   In  summary,  it  was  her  position  that  the  assessment   of   the
    respondent's case under Article 8  was  more  than  satisfactory.   The
    Rules were not conclusive of the respondent's Article 8 case.  It could
    not be said in these circumstances that  they  reflected  the  criteria
    approved in the case law of the higher courts.

25.  Turning to the  second  broad  chapter  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    argument regarding the alleged lack of  a  reasoned  determination  she
    replied as follows: the Tribunal had written a nine-page, single spaced
    detailed determination.  The oral, documentary and background  evidence
    were set out in detail as  were  the  submissions  and  the  Tribunal's
    findings.

26.  In detail she said this: the Tribunal did deal with risk  of  harm  and
    offending in this case.  She referred to paragraphs 2, 8,  9,  10,  11,
    13, 20 and 21.  It was clear that they had had  these  issues  in  mind
    throughout the determination but found for the respondent.   They  were
    entitled to do this.

27.  Findings on the respondent's lack of ties to Jamaica were detailed  and
    adequate and not in reality contested in this case.  She referred us to
    paragraphs 9, 10, 11, 16, 20 and 22 of the determination.

28.  As regards its findings so far as the severing of  the  ties  with  the
    respondent's children, the Tribunal she submitted had acknowledged that
    as at April 2013 his contact had been stopped but prior to  this  there
    was a large amount of evidence of contact and  he  was  seeing  lawyers
    about further contact.  The finding was that his removal would mean  he
    would not see them in the flesh again, against the  background  of  the
    evidence of a large amount of contact even whilst in prison by  visits,
    their findings in this matter were adequately reasoned.

29.  She reminded us by reference to R (Iran) & Others v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 that the  Court  of  Appeal
    warned that "an appellate court (was) not to  overturn  a  judgment  at
    first instance unless it really cannot understand the original  judge's
    thought processes when he/she was making material findings."

30.  She in addition referred us to  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC).  In that case it had been held
    that: although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    these reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the  judge.   Further,
    although a decision may contain an error of law where the  requirements
    to give adequate reasons were not met, the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not
    normally set aside a decision of the First Tier  Tribunal  where  there
    has been no misdirection of law, the fact-finding process could not  be
    criticized and the  relevant  country  guidance  had  been  taken  into
    account, unless the conclusions of the judge drew from the primary data
    were not reasonably open to him or her.


31.  Overall it was  her  position  that  the  findings  were  adequate  and
    reasoned when the determination was read properly and together and  not
    in the selective manner carried out by the Secretary of State.

32.  She accepted that the Tribunal's findings on delay  were  an  error  of
    law but, it was her position that it was not a material  error  of  law
    when placed in the context of the other findings made by  the  Tribunal
    which, in her submission were unchallengeable.

Discussion

33.  We turn to the first broad ground of appeal put forward  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  The reasons for  the  Tribunal's  decision  in
    relation to its Article 8 assessment of  proportionality  are  entirely
    contained within paragraphs 20 to 23 of  the  determination.   That  is
    clear from a reading of the determination as a whole, from the  way  it
    is structured and from the heading above paragraph 20:

         "Our Findings and Reasons".

34.  The following had been submitted to  the  Tribunal  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State:

         "Mr Bose in his submissions relied  on  the  refusal  letter.   The
         starting point  is  the  public  interest.   There  was  a  serious
         incident in which the appellant had used significant violence.   He
         produced a machete; the offence occurred within four  months  after
         an offence which involved a bladed instrument.  The Parole Board in
         December reduced the perception of harm to 'medium'  but  the  risk
         was  certainly  not  extinguished."  (see:  paragraph  16  of   the
         determination).


35.  It is trite law to say that in a deportation case, in carrying out  its
    assessment of proportionality in terms of Article 8, a  decision  maker
    must have  regard  to  the  public  interest.   In  carrying  out  that
    assessment the decision maker must have regard to various facets of the
    public  interest  including,  among  others:  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, the question of risk of  harm  to  the  public,  risk  of  re-
    offending and deterrence, as defined by Aikens LJ  at  para  43  of  RU
    Bangladesh [2011] EWCA Civ 651.  With  respect  to  the  importance  of
    public policy and public good, the importance of  that  aspect  in  the
    Article 8 assessment and its effect on the margin of discretion of  the
    decision maker the following guidance has been given by Laws LJ  in  SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 at paragraph 55:

        "At the same time H (H) shows  the  impact  of  a  powerful  public
        interest  (in  that  case  extradition)  on  what   needs   to   be
        demonstrated  for  an  Article  8  claim  to   prevail   over   it.
        Proportionality, the absence of an "exceptionality" rule,  and  the
        meaning  of  "a  primary  consideration"  are  all,  when  properly
        understood, consistent with the force to be attached  in  cases  of
        the present kind to the two drivers of the decision-maker's  margin
        of discretion: the policy's source and the policy's nature  and  in
        particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act attributes to the
        deportation of foreign criminals".

36.  When the reasoning of the Tribunal on the issue of  proportionality  is
    examined there is no reference to, and no consideration of, the  public
    interest.  There is no reference  to,  and  no  consideration  of,  the
    seriousness of the offence and that the offence  occurred  within  four
    months of an offence which involved a bladed instrument.  There  is  no
    reference  to,  and  no  consideration  of  the  Parole  Board  finding
    regarding likelihood of harm.  There is no consideration of deterrence.
     Public interest far from being given the importance which in terms  of
    the case law it must be accorded in the course of  the  proportionality
    assessment appears not to be considered.

37.  From the point at which the  actual  consideration  of  proportionality
    commences in paragraph 23, when the Tribunal says:

         "We therefore come down to the question of proportionality"


     to the point at which the Tribunal says there would be a breach of  the
    respondent's human rights, if he were to be deported the  position  put
    forward on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  regarding  the  public
    interest far from being considered is not even alluded to.

38.  The only reference to the Secretary of State in  that  particular  part
    of the determination is in  relation  to  delay  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State, which it is accepted at all hands is wrong in  law.
    It is perhaps interesting to note that this point  on  delay  has  been
    included in the determination although on looking  to  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the respondent at  paragraph  17  of  the  Tribunal's
    determination we can find no submission that there had been  any  delay
    on the part of the Secretary of State which the  respondent  wished  to
    found upon.  Thus, the issue  of  delay  has  wrongly  been  raised  ex
    proprio motu by the Tribunal.

39.  The assessment of proportionality by the Tribunal in our  view  is  not
    proper or adequate.  It entirely fails  to  engage  with  the  duty  to
    consider proportionality  in  any  way  which  could  be  described  as
    meaningful.  It has entirely failed to take into account  all  relevant
    matters in that it completely fails to have regard to the Secretary  of
    State's position as regards the issue of public interest.

40.  Looking to paragraphs 20 to 23 of the determination,  these  amount  to
    little more than a recitation of  findings  regarding  the  respondent.
    The only part of this section of the determination which looks  at  all
    at the position of the Secretary of State is when in paragraph  23  the
    third and fourth questions which the Tribunal was required to answer in
    terms of Razgar, are answered in favour  of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    These questions, of course, the Tribunal was bound to answer in  favour
    of the Secretary of State.

41.  The result  of  these  failures  is  to  produce  a  wholly  unbalanced
    assessment of proportionality, which cannot be upheld.

42.  In holding that the Tribunal has failed to carry out the assessment  of
    proportionality properly we have considered the whole of the Tribunal's
    determination.  We have not sought to select particular  parts  of  the
    determination and then not read them in the context of the rest of  the
    determination.  It is true that in the first nineteen paragraphs of the
    determination the  Tribunal  has  set  out  the  background,  both  the
    appellant's and the respondent's cases, what happened  at  the  hearing
    and both parties' submissions.  However, it does not follow that it has
    therefore taken into account all of these matters when it has turned to
    make its decision.  What then requires to be examined is that  part  of
    its decision in which it sets out its reasoning  and  that  is  between
    paragraphs 20 and 23 and it is where it sets out that reasoning that as
    we have said we can detect no consideration of the various  factors  to
    which we have referred.  In paragraphs 20 to 23  when  one  should  see
    consideration of both sides of the case and  the  weighing  up  of  the
    factors relied upon by the Secretary of State and  the  factors  relied
    upon by the respondent, all that one sees  is  a  setting  out  of  the
    respondent's position and no consideration of the Secretary of  State's
    position and thus no consideration of the public interest.

43.  We are reinforced in our view that the  assessment  of  proportionality
    has not been properly undertaken by the Tribunal when we have regard to
    MF (Nigeria).

44.  It is clear from MF (Nigeria) and from Izuazu  that  the  approach  the
    decision maker must follow in a case of this type is  a  two-step  one:
    first consideration should be given as to whether the applicant fulfils
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and secondly there should  be
    a separate and freestanding consideration of the applicant's Article  8
    position.  However, in considering  the  issue  of  proportionality  in
    terms of Article 8 we note the  following  observations  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MF (Nigeria):

    At paragraph 43 the Upper Tribunal says:


         "Whereas previously it has  been  open  to  judges  within  certain
         limits to reach their own view of what the public interest  is  and
         the weight to be attached to it, the scope for doing so now is more
         limited."


    At paragraph 48 the Upper Tribunals says that the new Rules have:


         "enhanced judicial understanding of the public interest".


    Finally, at paragraph 70 the following is said:


         "that (the appellant) has failed to meet the requirement of the new
         Rules is a  very  significant  consideration  when  conducting  our
         proportionality assessment."


45.  The foregoing  reinforces  our  view  that  it  was  critical  for  the
    Tribunal in carrying out its proportionality exercise to have regard to
    the nature and weight of the public interest and that this it failed to
    do.

46.  We are clear that the foregoing amount to material errors of law.   The
    issue of the assessment of proportionality  was  the  core  task  being
    carried out by the Tribunal and these errors go to the heart  of  their
    carrying out of that task and wholly undermine the assessment which  it
    carried out.

47.  Turning to the second broad branch of the appeal: whether there  was  a
    reasoned determination?  To  some  extent  this  ground  overlaps  with
    ground 1.

48.  As regards its reasons for its views on risk of harm  and  re-offending
    we have already commented that the Tribunal did not have regard to  the
    Secretary of State's position on this and accordingly  their  reasoning
    is flawed and inadequate.

49.  As regards its findings that the respondent has no ties to,  and  would
    have no support in Jamaica, we do not believe that there  are  adequate
    reasons for these findings.

50.  These findings are contained in  paragraph  22  of  the  determination.
    This paragraph again refers to the delay  in  serving  the  deportation
    order on the part of the Secretary of State.  The  whole  paragraph  in
    our view is coloured to a material extent by this error of law.

51.  The paragraph takes no account of the fact that  the  respondent  lived
    in Jamaica until the age of 17.

52.  There is also a specific finding in this paragraph:

         "There is no evidence of any potential  assistance  that  might  be
         available on his arrival."


53.  This finding is clearly wrong.  From the  notice  of  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State at pages 6 to 8 there are set out the services which
    would be available to the respondent in relation to his return.   These
    are under four headings:  Facilitated Returns Scheme; Support for Needy
    or Vulnerable Adults in Jamaica; Emergency Accommodation  for  Men  and
    Resettlement Services.  The foregoing appears  to  have  been  entirely
    overlooked by the Tribunal.

54.  We believe, having regard to their failure to consider  these  matters,
    their reasons for reaching their decision regarding his ties to Jamaica
    cannot be said to be adequate.

55.  With respect to the Tribunal's reasoning as  regards  the  severing  of
    the link that the respondent has with his children  we  agree  with  Mr
    Walker's submissions that this has not been adequately reasoned.

56.  This finding is at paragraph 23.  Clearly it was a  significant  factor
    in  the  Tribunal  reaching  its  decision  that  it   would   not   be
    proportionate for the respondent to be removed.  However,  in  reaching
    its conclusion as to its significance the Tribunal does not  appear  to
    have taken into account the following: that the respondent had been  in
    prison since 2005 (paragraph  7  of  its  determination)  and  was  not
    recommended for parole until December 2012.   Thus,  for  most  of  the
    children's lives he has been in prison and other  than  contact  during
    prison visits could have had no real relationship with these  children.
    Nor does it appear to us that any account was taken by the Tribunal  of
    the fact that at paragraph 13 of the determination it  was  noted  that
    such contact as he had had since his release from prison  had  stopped.
    In our view the Tribunal  had  to  explain,  if  they  were  to  attach
    significant weight to the ties being severed with the children, what it
    made of this evidence.  It entirely failed to do this.

57.  It is clear in this case that the link between the respondent  and  the
    children is not a strong one.  The family life aspect of  the  case  is
    accordingly a weak one.  However the Tribunal gives no adequate reasons
    why in these circumstances the children's interests  outweigh  what  is
    equally clearly a pressing public interest in the  deportation  of  the
    respondent.  There is no analysis of this question contained within the
    reasoning of the Tribunal.

58.  Overall, it appears to us that the reasons given by  the  Tribunal  for
    reaching its decision are not adequate.  The thought processes  of  the
    Tribunal on key issues in the proportionality assessment  in  our  view
    cannot be understood.  The inadequacy of the reasons is such we believe
    as to separately amount to a material error of law.

59.  Lastly, we turn to the Tribunal's reliance on delay on the part of  the
    Secretary of State as  a  factor  which  favours  holding  that  it  is
    disproportionate to remove the respondent.  The only issue in  relation
    to this is: did it amount to a material error of law?  In our judgment,
    when looked at on its own, it amounted to a material error of law.

60.  Looking to the determination delay was clearly a significant factor  in
    the Tribunal's decision.  It was mentioned expressly  on  two  separate
    occasions within the determination (see: paragraphs  22  and  23).   In
    particular it was mentioned in that section of paragraph  23  when  the
    Tribunal specifically states that it has turned to the consideration of
    the question of proportionality.  It was, as we have earlier  noted,  a
    consideration which the Tribunal had regard  to  ex  proprio  motu  and
    therefore must have been a matter which particularly concerned it.   We
    also note that the delay is described by the Tribunal as "significant".



61.  We hold that given the significance attached  to  this  factor  by  the
    Tribunal it is when looked at separately a material error of law.

62.  In summary, we hold that  each  branch  of  the  argument  advanced  on
    behalf of the Secretary of  State  was  well-founded  and  amounted  in
    itself  to  a  material  error  of  law.   In  any  event,  when  taken
    cumulatively, they clearly amounted to  material  errors  of  law.   In
    light of the above the decision of the Tribunal cannot stand  and  must
    be set aside.

Further Procedure

63.  With respect to the issue of further  procedure  we  heard  submissions
    from both parties.  The broad position of the Secretary  of  State  was
    that we should re-make the decision and if not it should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal without any preserved findings  in  fact.   The
    position of the respondent was that we should not re-make the  decision
    and should return the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  certain
    preserved findings of fact, which failing we should return the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal but with no preserved findings of fact.

64.  Having considered the matter we have decided that the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no preserved findings in  fact
    for a hearing de novo.

65.  We believe that the extent of  the  imbalance  in  the  proportionality
    assessment renders it inappropriate that we should seek to re-make  the
    decision on the findings in fact as they presently stand.

66.  Equally, the same considerations rendered the  remitting  of  the  case
    with preserved findings in fact an option which was not attractive.

67.  We believe in the whole circumstances that the  extent  to  which  this
    determination is flawed as set out above renders the only proper course
    to be a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.










Signed                                  Date


Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

