
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00241/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                     Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 1 February 2016                    |                     On 12 February 2016|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                            Mr Nerijus Dulinskas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian, Counsel instructed by Mondair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is citizen of Lithuania and his date of birth is  5  June
    1982.  On 5 January 2012 the Secretary of  State  made  a  decision  to
    deport the appellant under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2006  ("the  2006   Regulations")   resulting   from   the
    appellant's conviction of robbery at Lincoln Crown  Court  on  17  June
    2011.  The appellant did not appeal against this conviction and he  did
    not appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State.  In fact  it
    appears from the original decision letter that he agreed to  return  to
    Lithuania and indicated that  he  wished  to  return  to  Lithuania  on
    completion of his sentence.

2.   The appellant made an application  to  revoke  the  order  pursuant  to
    Regulation 24A of the 2006 Regulations.  This was refused in a decision
    of 19 May 2015.  The appellant appealed against this decision  and  his
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Parkes  in  a
    decision that was promulgated on 4 November 2015 following a hearing on
    23 October 2015.  Judge Kimnell granted permission to the appellant.

3.   I heard oral submissions from parties and I had regard to the  original
    skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr  Kandola
    conceded that the judge did not engage with the  evidence  relating  to
    permanent residence, in particular the payslips that were  before  him,
    but he submitted that this was not  material.  The  appellant  had  not
    appealed against the earlier decision appellant is unable to relitigate
    this issue.

4.   In my view the  initial  decision  was  made  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant in this case  did  not  have  permanent  residence.   At  the
    hearing before Judge Parkes this issue was raised.  The argument before
    Judge Parkes was that the original decision had been made on the  wrong
    basis because the appellant did have permanent residence.


5.       The judge did not  consider  the  evidence  relating  to  permanent
    residence and in my view paragraphs 9 and 15  do  not  adequately  deal
    with the issue as raised by  the  appellant.   I  appreciate  that  the
    appellant did not appeal the original decision in 2012,  but  in  order
    for the judge to properly determine Regulation 24A (whether  there  has
    been a material change in the circumstances that justified  making  the
    order), there needs to be consideration of the level of  protection  to
    which the appellant was entitled in order to determine  proportionality
    in the context of Reg. 21(6).   I  note  Mr  Kandola's  submissions  in
    relation to res judicata but it is not applicable in this case.   There
    has been no finding by a court.

6.   The judge did not make  a  proper  assessment  under  Article  8.   The
    decision is inadequately reasoned.  I note  that  directions  had  been
    made issued to the parties directing the respondent to file  and  serve
    evidence including the PSR but there  was  a  failure  to  comply  with
    these.  It does not amount to an error of law that the judge  proceeded
    with the hearing in the absence of that evidence (particularly  in  the
    absence of an application for an adjournment).

7.   However, the judge materially erred for the  reasons  given  above  and
    for this reason the decision is set aside.  The decision  needs  to  be
    remade and in doing  so  a  judge  needs  to  determine  the  level  of
    protection to which this appellant was entitled in  order  to  consider
    the issue of proportionality under the Regulations and  Article  8  and
    there must be consideration of the appellant's  circumstances  as  they
    are now as opposed to the situation  in  2012  in  order  to  determine
    whether there has been a material  change  in  the  circumstances  that
    justified the making of the order.

8.   Both parties conceded that in the event of  a  material  error  of  law
    such that the decision is set aside the matter should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and I accept this.

Notice of Decision

The appeal  is  allowed  and  the  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Signed         Joanna  McWilliam                         Date    8  February
    2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam





