
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00765/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 August 2015                     |On 24 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                             OLUWATOSIN OMONIYI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Hart, Solicitor, Terence Ray Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 14 February 1993.  He is
    said to have arrived in the UK in December 2002 with  his  father.   In
    due course he was granted indefinite leave to remain,  on  22  February
    2011.

 2. The appellant's criminal offending has brought him before the  criminal
    courts on a number of occasions, the latest being on 15 March 2013 when
    he was convicted of offences of possession with intent to supply  class
    A drugs which resulted in a total sentence of two years'  imprisonment.
    Following those convictions, the respondent made a decision to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant under the automatic deportation
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 1 July 2014, whereby a Panel  consisting  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and non-legal member Mr G. F.  Sandall
    dismissed the appeal, which was advanced on human  right  grounds  with
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The grounds of appeal and submissions

 4. In summary, the grounds of appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  contend
    that the Panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  misapplied  the  relevant
    Article 8 Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and  furthermore,  failed  to
    make a finding in relation to a particular feature of  the  Immigration
    Rules that did apply.  More specifically, the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    required to assess under  paragraph  399A(b),  whether  the  appellant,
    being under the age of 25 years, had  lived  at  least  half  his  life
    continuously  in  the  UK  immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the
    immigration decision, discounting any period of imprisonment,  and  has
    "no ties", including social, cultural  or  family  with  Nigeria.   The
    decision letter at [48] conceded the 'length of time'  issue,  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal was required to decide the 'no ties' issue.

 5. It is argued that  there  is  no  conclusive  finding  on  that  issue.
    Furthermore, at [52] of the determination it appears that in concluding
    that  the  appellant  had  not  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid   leave
    continuously for at least 15 years immediately preceding the  decision,
    he had not met paragraph 399(b) which was not a part of the Rules  that
    applied to him.

 6. Other issues in the grounds concern  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of
    Article 8 proper, the appellant's relationship with his foster  family,
    and the Tribunal's refusal to adjourn the hearing.

 7. In submissions Mr Hart essentially relied on the written  grounds.   We
    were referred to evidence in the appellant's bundle that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal in  terms  of  his  relationship  with  his  foster
    family.  It was conceded however,  that  the  grounds  in  relation  to
    Article 8 proper, and concerning the  Tribunal's  failure  to  adjourn,
    were not the strongest grounds.

 8. Mr Clark argued that any error  of  law  was  not  material.   We  were
    referred to [48]-[51] of the determination whereby the Tribunal adopted
    what was said in the decision letter about the  appellant's  residence,
    connections with the UK and connections  with  Nigeria.   The  decision
    letter also rejected the suggestion that the  appellant's  relationship
    with his foster parents constituted family life.  It was submitted that
    the Tribunal was entitled to adopt those assessments.

 9. It was further argued  that  under  the  Rules  as  they  now  are  the
    appellant would have to satisfy  the  'integration  test'  as  well  as
    establishing that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Ghana.

10. Although there is no express reference  in  the  determination  to  the
    evidence in the appellant's bundle  about  his  relationship  with  his
    foster parents, nothing in that  evidence  established  a  relationship
    that extended beyond ordinary emotional ties.

11. So far as the failure to adjourn is concerned, it is not explained  how
    that prejudiced the appellant in his appeal.

Our conclusions

12. One of the  issues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  determine
    concerns paragraph 399A(b) of the Rules.  That paragraph applies  where
    a person is under the age of 25 years, has spent at least half  of  his
    life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding  the  date  of
    the immigration decision (discounting any period of imprisonment),  and
    has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

13. That aspect of the Rules was set out at [25] of the determination.   At
    [46] and [47] the Tribunal referred to paragraph 399(a) and (b),  which
    deal  with  parental  relationships  with  a  child  and  a  subsisting
    relationship with a spouse or partner, respectively.  It was  correctly
    concluded that neither of those paragraphs applied  to  the  appellant.
    Paragraph 399(b) contains the more specific requirement that apart from
    establishing a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner,  the
    person has to have lived in the UK with valid leave continuously for at
    least 15 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
    decision.  This is relevant because at [52] of  the  determination  the
    Tribunal stated as follows:

         "We find that the Appellant has  not  been  living  in  the  United
         Kingdom with valid leave continuously  for  at  least  the  fifteen
         years immediately preceding the date of  the  immigration  decision
         (discounting any  periods  of  imprisonment).   We  find  that  the
         Appellant has not established that  he  falls  to  be  regarded  as
         exempt from deportation under paragraph 399(b) of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

14. It is evident that in  this  respect  the  Tribunal  fell  into  error.
    Paragraph 399(b) had no application to this appellant, as the  Tribunal
    appeared to have recognised at [47] of the determination.   It  is  not
    clear why at [52] the Tribunal considered that it was required to  make
    the assessment that it did.

15. At [48] it is noted that in the decision letter the respondent accepted
    that the appellant had  spent  at  least  half  his  life  in  the  UK,
    immediately preceding the date of the immigration  decision.   In  that
    same paragraph part of the decision letter is quoted in  terms  of  the
    appellant's exposure to Nigerian culture, the formative  years  of  his
    life having been spent there and  with  reference  to  the  appellant's
    knowledge of the language and  culture  which  would  assist  with  his
    resettlement there.  In succeeding paragraphs  other  passages  of  the
    decision letter are quoted.  At [51] the Panel stated as follows:

         "We agree with the Respondent's submissions and adopt those as part
         of our findings."

16. There then followed the conclusion at [52], to which we have  referred.
    Aside from the inapplicability of paragraph 399(b), [52]  does  not  in
    any event follow from the preceding paragraphs.

17. At [59] the Tribunal referred to the appellant's family as  being  from
    Nigeria and that he has given information as to his father, mother, two
    sisters and a half brother there.  It was concluded that there appeared
    to be family to which the appellant "may have access" on his return  to
    Nigeria.  However, the appellant's grounds argue that this  appears  to
    be information taken from the  screening  interview  completed  on  the
    appellant's behalf when he claimed asylum as  a  minor  when  he  first
    entered the care system. Furthermore, the  appellant's  oral  evidence,
    recorded at [5]-[7] of the determination as to his lack of contact with
    family in Nigeria does not appear to have been taken  into  account  by
    the Tribunal in its conclusions at [59].

18. The tribunal was required to make a distinct assessment of whether  the
    appellant had 'no ties' to Nigeria.  Such a distinct assessment is  not
    evident in the determination with reference to any structured  analysis
    of paragraph 399A(b). Whilst we do  not  necessarily  suggest  that  an
    analysis of the expression 'no ties' was necessary, with reference  for
    example to the decision in Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC), we  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal
    applied itself correctly to a fundamental issue that it was required to
    determine, namely whether the appellant had established that he had 'no
    ties' to Nigeria.  Aside from the misapplication of the Rules at  [52],
    the reasoning on this issue we consider to be inadequate  and  divorced
    from any focused or structured assessment.

19. We are satisfied that in these respects the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law.

20. We also consider that there is merit in the argument in relation to the
    Tribunal's failure to have  engaged  with  evidence  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his foster family.  The determination  at
    [51] simply adopted what was said  in  the  refusal  letter  about  the
    respondent's assessment of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  those
    foster parents as not amounting to family life.  There is  no  reasoned
    analysis on the part of the Tribunal.

21. Whilst it may sometimes be permissible simply to adopt an aspect  of  a
    decision letter which is either uncontroversial or is not  contradicted
    by other evidence, in this case there was evidence advanced  on  behalf
    of the appellant which it was argued established  family  life  between
    the appellant and his foster parents.  Thus, one sees  in  the  witness
    statements in the appellant's bundle, both from the appellant  and  his
    foster parents, evidence as to their relationship.  We  also  note  the
    appellant's evidence, in particular from his witness statements, of his
    background and his circumstances on arrival in the UK.  These, it seems
    to us, are potentially relevant as regards his  relationship  with  his
    foster  parents.   None  of  this  evidence  was  the  subject  of  any
    assessment by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. We do not express any view in relation to whether the evidence does  or
    does not establish a relationship between the appellant and his  foster
    family which extends beyond ordinary emotional ties.   We  do  however,
    consider that the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of  this  issue  was
    inadequate.  It was not sufficient for the  Tribunal  simply  to  adopt
    what was said in the refusal letter, without any independent assessment
    of its own of the evidence advanced on behalf of the appellant on  this
    issue.  In this respect we  are  also  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.

23. We do not accept the submissions made on behalf of the respondent  with
    reference to the error in terms of the Immigration Rules, to the effect
    that the error is not material because an assessment under the Rules as
    they now apply would not  result  in  a  decision  in  the  appellant's
    favour.  Apart from anything else, we have already  indicated  that  in
    our judgment  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  make  an  adequate
    assessment of the issue of 'no ties'.  The findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot be used to support the conclusion  that  the  appellant
    had not established that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into Ghana.

24. Without a reasoned analysis, we do not consider that it could  be  said
    at this stage that  the  appellant  is  not  able  to  establish  'very
    significant obstacles'.

25. That is aside from the  fact  that  we  consider  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal also erred in law in  its  assessment  of  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his foster family.

26. In these circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  to
    be set aside.  We canvassed the views of the parties as to whether,  if
    we set aside the decision, the appeal should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal or retained for re-making in the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Hart
    expressed a preference for the former, Mr Clark  for  the  latter.   Mr
    Clark highlighted the fact that the appellant was in detention and that
    that detention would be prolonged in the case of a listing delay of the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal.   He  also  suggested  that  if  the
    appellant was released on bail, he might be at risk of absconsion.

27. Ultimately, this is a matter for our discretion.  In the light  of  the
    errors of law we have identified, and the fact that  significant  fact-
    finding is required, we consider it appropriate for the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to paragraph 7.2. of  the
    Practice Statement.

28. The appeal is therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard
    by a panel other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer  and  Mr  G.  F.
    Sandall.

29. Except as agreed between the parties, no findings of  fact  are  to  be
    preserved.  The hearing is to be a hearing de novo.

    Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  20 August 2015
