
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00906/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th August 2013                           |On 6th September 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Muktar Noor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lay, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant, a citizen of Somalia born on 27th April 1980, was  around
    11 years old when in 1991 his mother took him and his siblings to claim
    asylum, as a family, at the Secretary of State's public enquiry  office
    in the United Kingdom.  Although unsuccessful in their  asylum  claims,
    the appellant, his mother and siblings were granted indefinite leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom  in  January  2000.   In  March  2006  the
    claimant was convicted of offering to supply Class A drugs,  for  which
    he was sentenced to 20 months imprisonment.

2.   That sentence led to the  Secretary  of  State  making  a  decision  to
    deport the claimant.  The claimant did not appeal against that decision
    and a deportation order was, accordingly, signed on 17th October  2006.
    The order stated that the claimant was to  be  removed  to  Somaliland.
    The claimant lodged  an  out-of-time  appeal  against  the  deportation
    decision;  but  the  ensuing  appeal  was  unsuccessful,  as  was   the
    claimant's attempt to obtain a High Court  review  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal's decision.  Removal decisions were then  set  for
    May 2008 but were cancelled when the claimant obtained a rule  39  stay
    from the European Court of Human  Rights,  effectively  preventing  his
    removal from the United Kingdom.

3.   While serving his custodial sentence, the claimant assaulted  a  prison
    officer and, following conviction in May 2009  for  that  offence,  was
    sentenced to six months imprisonment, together  with  a  recommendation
    for deportation.

4.   On 19th April 2012 the European Court of Human Rights lifted  the  rule
    39 stay and on 10th October 2012 the Secretary of State made a decision
    to refuse to revoke the claimant's deportation order.

5.   The claimant appealed against that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Tribunal Judge Shepherd and Mrs E Morton), which  by  a  determination
    dismissed the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds and Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.  The appeal was, however, allowed on Article 3 grounds and  under
    Article  15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  (the  Qualification
    Directive).

6.   Permission to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    was sought by the Secretary of State and granted by a Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal on 5th July 2013.  The  Secretary  of  State
    complains  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the  evidence
    concerning the way in which the claimant would  be  returned  from  the
    United Kingdom to Somaliland.   The  manner  and  route  by  which  the
    Secretary of State intends to remove a particular individual  from  the
    United Kingdom to his or her home  country  is  capable  of  playing  a
    significant (indeed, crucial) role in deciding whether the  removal  of
    that  individual  would  violate  the  United  Kingdom's  international
    protection obligations.  So much is plain from  the  judgments  of  the
    Court of  Appeal  in  HH  and  Others  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426  and  the
    determination of this chamber of the Upper Tribunal in AMM  and  Others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 (IAC).  This important fact was fully appreciated by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in the present case.  That is why  there  were  no  fewer
    than three Case Management Hearings involving judges of that  Tribunal,
    before the matter reached Judge Shepherd and Mrs Morton on  18th  April
    2013.  It appears to have only been with some difficulty that the First-
    tier Tribunal was able to ascertain from the Secretary  of  State  that
    she intended to return the  claimant  to  Mogadishu  by  air  and  then
    overland  across  southern  and  central  Somalia,  to  Somaliland.   A
    proposed land journey from Mogadishu to the border of Somaliland  would
    involve travelling across areas of Somalia, which the Tribunal  in  AMM
    had found posed real risks for returnees without recent  experience  of
    living in Somalia (see [4] to [8] and [12] of the country  guidance  in
    that case).

7.   On the day of the substantive hearing, however, the Secretary of  State
    revealed  that  her  proposed  means  of  returning  the  claimant   to
    Somaliland had radically changed.  Whilst an email exchange in February
    2012 had recorded that "all returns are currently to Mogadishu and then
    overland", the Presenting Officer, Ms Pleming, presented  the  Tribunal
    with an email from Anne Scruton of 17th  April  2013,  which  indicated
    that there would, in fact, be no overland travel.  Ms Scruton stated:-

         "Removals are either via Nairobi or Dubai.  There are  difficulties
         with the  present  route  due  to  insufficient  transit  times  in
         Nairobi.  CROS Ops  are  looking  at  alternative  routes  and  one
         suggestion is via Royal  Brunei,  but  this  is  subject  to  their
         agreement.  A meeting is planned.


         ...


         2.   Whether the appellant will need to disembark in  Mogadishu  en
             route to Somaliland.

         If via Nairobi then the flight goes via Mogadishu but  the  subject
         would not need to disembark."

8.   For the purposes of the substantive hearing,  the  claimant's  advisors
    had obtained an expert report from Markus Hoehne, a Somali expert  with
    the Max Planck Institute in Germany.  Dr Hoehne's credentials to be  an
    expert are amply set in Annex 1 to  his  report.   His  anthropological
    studies in the  area  have,  amongst  other  things,  required  him  to
    undertake frequent field work in Somaliland.  Crucially for this  case,
    Dr Hoehne's report contained  the  following  evidence  concerning  the
    possibility of the appellant being able to travel for Mogadishu Airport
    (found  in  AMM  to  be  sufficiently  safe)  by  air  to  Hargeysa  in
    Somaliland:-

         "14.     It is proposed that Mr Noor is returned to Somaliland  via
             Mogadishu.   This  means  that  he  would  have  to  fly  into
             Mogadishu international airport, and then would have to get  a
             connection flight, e.g.  with  Jubba  Airlines,  to  Hargeysa.
             While such flights to Hargeysa exist and Jubba flies at  least
             two times per week from  Mogadishu  to  Hargeysa,  it  is  not
             probable that Mr Noor would be able to directly  connect  from
             Mogadishu to Hargeysa.  Most probably he would have to stay  a
             few days or  even  longer  in  Mogadishu  for  organising  his
             connection flight.  Thus, while Mr Noor would  in  general  be
             able to  fly  to  Hargeysa  and  cross  into  Somaliland,  the
             specific details must be assessed in order to  understand  the
             potential risks this involved for Mr Noor.  This is done below
             (paragraph 17 and 18).
         15.  As mentioned in  the  introduction  above,  the  situation  in
             Mogadishu and its surroundings, as well as in other  parts  of
             south-central Somalia is  still  volatile.   Several  regions,
             particularly Hiiraan and Galguduud,  Geedo,  Bay,  Bakool  and
             Lower Jubba, are still affected by  ongoing  fighting  between
             remaining Al Shabaab forces and Somali government  forces  and
             their allies.  Insecurity prevails in  many  areas  of  south-
             central Somalia, and particularly in Mogadishu, where a number
             of assassinations and attacks against officials and  civilians
             happened until early April 2013, most of which  were  ascribed
             to A Shabaab, some of which, however, were also  conducted  by
             ordinary gangsters and undisciplined  government  forces  (see
             particularly paragraphs 5, 6 and 8).


         16.  Flights from Mogadishu to Hargeysa are operated, e.g. by Jubba
             Airlines.  The machines usually come from Nairobi, stopover in
             Mogadishu International Airport,  and  continue  to  Hargeysa.
             This route was flown at least twice a week as recently as mid-
             March 2013, when I investigated  into  these  connections  for
             planning my own travels in  the  region.   I  confirm  that  I
             recently, in December  2012,  had  a  stop-over  in  Mogadishu
             myself and that the security at the airport is fine.  This  is
             also where AMISOM has many barracks and its headquarter.  Also
             the UN and several international NGOs have offices and  houses
             at Mogadishu International Airport.  The airport is  a  highly
             securitized area and it is in general not  easy  for  ordinary
             Somalis to enter it.  Staying  overnight  at  the  airport  is
             extremely expensive.  One night costs several hundred US$  (up
             to 300$), as far as I heard recently from a French  colleague.
             Ordinary Somalis do not stay over night there.


         17.  Upon arrival in Mogadishu International Airport Mr Muktar Noor
             would most probably have to enter Mogadishu city  to  organise
             his connection flight to Hargeysa.  Usually these flights  are
             quite busy and often booked.  Moreover, since the main airline
             (Jubba) flies only twice a week, Mr Noor most  probably  would
             have to wait a few days before he could continue.  This  means
             that he would have to 'find his ways around' in Mogadishu  and
             spend time in town.  Against the background  of  his  a)  long
             absence from Somalia as a whole, b) lack  of  knowledge  about
             the current situation in Somalia in general and  Mogadishu  in
             particular, c) limited ability to speak  Somali  language,  d)
             distance to Islamic faith  and  religious  practices  such  as
             regular praying, and e) generally  westernized  lifestyle  and
             behaviour Mr Noor would most probably run a very high risk  to
             get into serious trouble while in Mogadishu trying to organise
             his connection flight.  As outlined  in  the  introduction  of
             this report, the security situation in Mogadishu is not stable
             and Al Shabaab, criminal groups and  undisciplined  government
             forces operate there.  The government under President Mahamoud
             Sheikh Hassan has not yet the ability to guarantee the  safety
             of  the  local  population.   Officials  and  other  prominent
             persons need  guards.   Those  who  cannot  afford  any  would
             minimise their movements in town and avoid certain areas.   Mr
             Noor does not have the relevant local knowledge  to  find  his
             ways around quickly and effectively and to be  able  to  avoid
             risky areas and situations.   Given  his  inability  to  speak
             proper Somali and his difference in style and  appearance,  Mr
             Noor would be quickly identified  as  a  'newcomer'  by  local
             actors including criminals or extremists.  This would make him
             highly vulnerable to attacks, including robbery  by  criminals
             or  undisciplined   soldiers   or   policemen,   beatings   by
             fundamentalist  Muslims  or   attempts   to   recruitment   by
             clandestinely operating Al Shabaab networks."


9.   At [77] and [78] of its determination, the Tribunal said this:-

         "77. It is fair to  say  that  the  respondent's  position  of  the
             proposed manner  of  return  of  a  failed  asylum  seeker  to
             Somaliland does not appear to be settled.  We do note that, as
             Mr Eaton pointed out, the respondent herself in her letter  of
             rejection specifically accepted that it is not currently  safe
             or  practicable  to  transport  overland  from  Mogadishu   to
             Somaliland (page 5).  This nullified the later statement  made
             in response to a court direction made in the appeal that (Paul
             Whitehead email  6th  February  2013)  that  all  returns  are
             currently  to  Mogadishu  and  then  overland.    Despite   Ms
             Pleming's efforts to obtain a more plausible  return  strategy
             from the Africa desk, what emerged was the statement  by  Anne
             Scruton that the subject would not need to  disembark  from  a
             flight to Mogadishu, before onward travel to Hargeisa by air.


         78.  There was no evidence before us to demonstrate the accuracy of
             that final statement, and as  the  information  was  submitted
             during the hearing itself, with no time for the  appellant  or
             anyone else to verify the claim, we are inclined  to  give  it
             less weight than might otherwise be the case."

10.  At [80] the Tribunal noted that the evidence of Dr Hoehne:-

         "80. ... is in direct contradiction  of  Anne  Scruton's  statement
             that he would not need  to  disembark".   Hoehne  goes  on  to
             describe the difficulties inherent in trying to  organise  the
             connecting flight, and that the likelihood is that this  would
             involve a wait of perhaps a few days and the need to  organise
             a ticket.  Once again, as with the need  to  obtain  a  travel
             document identified in AMM, the real  risk  is  a  significant
             amount of time in Mogadishu itself, outside the safety of  the
             airport, and of falling into  the  hands  of  the  Al  Shabaab
             insurgents currently gaining ground around and in the  fringes
             of Mogadishu (Hoehne paragraphs 3 to 10).


         81.  In summary, the respondent's position is not settled,  and  as
             to the manner of return it appears highly  unlikely  that  the
             appellant  could  be  returned  by  air  without   having   to
             disembark, and that he would have to  enter  Mogadishu  itself
             and spend  some  time  there.   Any  suggestion  of  a  return
             overland must on current evidence be rejected, as  this  would
             be 'fraught with dangers' AMM paragraph 643."


11.  This led to the following conclusions:-

         "84. We do conclude however, following  AMM,  that  the  appellant,
             being  in  the  position  of  someone  having  to  return   to
             Mogadishu, albeit briefly, after spending 22 years in the  UK,
             and with no clan connection, or indeed any connection to  rely
             upon, would be at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.


         85.  We conclude that a journey overland from Mogadishu to Hargeisa
             could not be accomplished without a real risk of serious  harm
             in either the obtaining of the unofficial travel  document  or
             the journey itself, or both."


12.  The Secretary of State's  grounds  of  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal assert that:-

         "It is unclear from the evidence of Mr Hoehne what expertise he has
         on the processes of the Secretary of  State  when  making  enforced
         returns, and how he could conclude  that  the  Secretary  of  State
         would leave an appellant in a country which was not his country  of
         Nationality, and not the country to  which  he  is  being  forcible
         (sic) returned, to obtain his own flight ticket."

13.  I do not consider  there  to  be  any  merit  in  this  ground  of  the
    Secretary  of  State.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  faced  with   a
    divergence in the evidence of, respectively, Dr Hoehne and Ms  Scruton.
    The Tribunal's decision to prefer the evidence of  Dr  Hoehne  on  this
    issue is sufficiently reasoned.  It cannot in any sense be  categorised
    as irrational.  Dr Hoehne had recent direct experience of  arrangements
    for  connecting  flights  at  Mogadishu  international   airport.    By
    contrast, the evidence in the email of Ms Scruton is exiguous and fails
    to inform the reader how she knows there would be no need to disembark.

14.  The somewhat rhetorical question in the Secretary of  State's  grounds,
    asking how Dr Hoehne could conclude that the Secretary of  State  would
    leave a person in the claimant's position with the  task  of  obtaining
    his own flight ticket, sits  badly  with  what  was  the  Secretary  of
    State's practice, concerning returns to Somaliland, as set out in  AMM:
    [530], [532], and [544]

         "530. We have to say  that  we  are  at  something  of  a  loss  to
             understand the respondent's position regarding a  person  such
             as appellant ZF or Elmi in Sufi & Elmi. Although the  evidence
             points firmly towards them  having  the  requisite  degree  of
             connection with Somaliland and facing no real risk of  serious
             harm, if returned to that region, the respondent has chosen to
             put her case on the basis that return  will  be  to  Mogadishu
             International Airport. The ECtHR in Sufi & Elmi  thought  that
             this decision might, in fact, point  towards  Elmi  not  being
             able to get into Somaliland. That certainly does not appear to
             be the case with appellant ZF, where the respondent has argued
             forcefully that appellant ZF could  travel  to  Somaliland  by
             land or air. In either case, she would have to do  so  on  her
             own, in the sense that  the  respondent  presumably  considers
             that her obligations regarding return cease when appellant  ZF
             has left Mogadishu International Airport. Given, however, that
             there are flights from Nairobi to Hargeisa, Somaliland (albeit
             stopping at Mogadishu), it is at first sight hard to  see  why
             the respondent could not propose to  return  appellant  ZF  to
             Hargeisa. Mr Burns appeared  to  accept  that  the  Somaliland
             authorities would be prepared to accept a person travelling on
             an EU  travel  document;  but,  because  of  the  respondent's
             stance, we did not hear sufficient evidence or submissions  on
             the matter to make any proper findings on this issue.  In  any
             event, once a case reaches  this  point,  it  is  likely  that
             Article 8(3) of the Qualification Directive becomes  relevant.
             This provides that the power of Member States in Article 8(1),
             to determine that a person is not  in  need  of  international
             protection "if in a part of the country of origin there is  no
             well-founded fear of being  persecuted  or  no  real  risk  of
             suffering serious harm and the applicant can  reasonably  have
             been expected to stay in that part of the country", may  apply
             "notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to the  country
             of origin". In HH & Others the Court of Appeal found  at  [83]
             that the ambit of  Article  8(3)  was  "probably  confined  to
             administrative difficulties such as documentation", as opposed
             to risks to  life  and  limb,  in  getting  to  the  place  in
             question. Thus, it would seem that difficulties regarding  the
             documentation required to satisfy the  Somaliland  authorities
             would not, in such a scenario, entitle a claimant to succeed.


         ...


         532.     It may be that the respondent's stance,  both  as  regards
             Elmi and appellant ZF, is driven by the difficulty of  getting
             the Somaliland authorities to accept the return of anyone from
             the United Kingdom to their area. An insight into the somewhat
             fraught  relationship  between  those  authorities   and   the
             respondent is provided by reading the judgments in R  (on  the
             application of) MH v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1112,  concerning  a
             claim  of  unlawful  detention  brought  by  a   person   from
             Somaliland, whom the respondent had not been  able  to  return
             there. But, as we have indicated, from the point of view of an
             entitlement to  international  protection  under  the  Refugee
             Convention or the Qualification Directive, such problems could
             well be said to be "technical obstacles" within Article 8.


         ...


         544.     But, once we turn from the law to the facts, it is frankly
             surreal of the respondent to expect appellant ZF,  a  67  year
             old woman with no recent experience of living in the  Horn  of
             Africa,  to  disembark  at  Mogadishu  International  Airport,
             travel into the city of Mogadishu to Bakara  Market  (assuming
             it is open), look for an old green passport there,  or  travel
             to a market in the Al-Shabab-controlled Afgoye  Corridor,  if,
             as might be the case,  the  vendors  of  such  passports  have
             relocated  there,  and  then  either   return   to   Mogadishu
             International Airport in order to fly  to  Hargeisa,  or  else
             undertake a journey by land to Somaliland. The respondent  did
             not, in fact, energetically advance the option of  going  back
             to the airport, preferring instead to look in  detail  at  the
             evidence regarding land journeys, including  those  undertaken
             by refugees, moving  in  groups  to  Somaliland,  and  to  the
             evidence of minibuses, which Mr Burns contradicted.  We  shall
             have more to say on this when we look in detail  at  appellant
             ZF's appeal in Part L of  this  determination.  As  a  general
             matter, however, we conclude that, at  the  present  time,  it
             will in most cases be impracticable for  returnees  to  obtain
             old green passports in southern and central Somalia, in  order
             to make the journey to  Somaliland,  because  of  the  dangers
             involved in acquiring such documentation."

15.  If it is the Secretary of State's case  that  she  would  now  forcibly
    return a person to Somaliland by taking them under suitable  escort  to
    Mogadishu Airport, having previously arranged an onward air  ticket  to
    Hargeysa, so that the returnee would not be reasonably likely  to  have
    to enter Mogadishu city in order to await an onward flight to Hargeysa,
    then she could and should have produced satisfactory evidence  to  that
    effect before the First-tier Tribunal; or at least given the Tribunal a
    formal assurance that she would not remove the claimant if there was  a
    real risk that this would happen.  The Secretary of State conspicuously
    failed to do so.  All the Presenting Officer, Ms Pleming, could  do  in
    this regard was to suggest to the First-tier Tribunal that they  "could
    make a  direction  that  [the  claimant]  is  not  to  be  returned  to
    Mogadishu" [56].  One might sympathise with the position  in  which  Ms
    Pleming found herself; but her  suggestion  is  far  from  constituting
    evidence or such an assurance.  Indeed, it has not been  explained  how
    the First-tier Tribunal could lawfully make such a direction.

16.  The Secretary of State has  not  sought  to  challenge  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding  that,  if  the  claimant  were  to  have  to  enter
    Mogadishu city, he would be at real risk of harm  contrary  to  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive; namely a "serious and  individual
    threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence and situations of international or internal  armed  conflict".
    That was the country guidance conclusion in AMM and  both  Dr  Hoehne's
    report and other material put before the First-tier Tribunal  was  more
    than capable of rebutting any submission that the position in Mogadishu
    had materially changed, so as to  require  a  departure  from  the  AMM
    country guidance.

17.  It seems the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided  to  allow  the  claimant's
    appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR, not because of any risk that  might
    be encountered in Mogadishu (which AMM found did not  reach  Article  3
    levels) but because the Secretary of State's stance regarding  proposed
    manner of return was not sufficiently settled,  so  as  to  permit  the
    Tribunal to ignore the risk that the claimant would  be  returned  from
    Mogadishu to Somaliland by an overland route.  Given the unsatisfactory
    way in which the Secretary of State chose  to  approach  the  important
    issue of manner of return, I have some  sympathy  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's view, if that it was.  However, I  find  that,  albeit  only
    during the hearing on 18th April, the Secretary of State's position  on
    this  issue  had  sufficiently  crystallised,  so  as  to  exclude  the
    necessity of considering overland travel.  On this narrow point, I  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination and substitute a decision
    dismissing the claimant's appeal on Article 3 grounds.

18.  The Secretary of State's other ground of challenge is that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was wrong to assume that a second reason why the claimant
    would be reasonably likely to have to enter the city of  Mogadishu  was
    to  obtain  there  a  travel  document  acceptable  to  the  Somaliland
    authorities.  Even if this ground had merit, it would be immaterial  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  The claimant would be entitled  to  succeed
    on the basis of Article 15(c), for the simple reason that,  as  I  have
    said, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to prefer the evidence of Dr
    Hoehne regarding the likelihood of the claimant having to disembark and
    stay in Mogadishu city before making the connecting flight to Hargeysa.



19.  In any event, I do not find that the Secretary of State has  made  good
    this second ground of appeal.  There was  simply  no  evidence  in  the
    email from Ms Scruton that compelled the conclusion that all  necessary
    documentation, acceptable to the Somaliland authorities,  would  be  in
    place, as a result of arrangements made between the Secretary of  State
    and those authorities, before the claimant's removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom was initiated.  Again, if that was  the  proposition  that  was
    being advanced, it represented a significant change from  the  position
    analysed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  AMM  and  needed  to  be  properly
    supported.

20.  Apart, therefore, from the narrow issue regarding  Article  3,  I  find
    that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.  The result is that an
    individual with a history of serious criminal  offending  who,  despite
    his length of time in the United Kingdom and  ties  to  those  in  this
    country, was found by the First-tier Tribunal to be deportable, remains
    here as a result of the Secretary of State's unsatisfactory handling of
    the issue of method of return to Somaliland.  If the Secretary of State
    now finds that she can satisfactorily  address  that  issue,  it  would
    appear to be open to her to make a new decision to deport the claimant.

Decision

21.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law, other than as regards Article 3 (as to which I have set aside a
    part of the decision  and  re-made  it  by  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal).  However, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  stands,  insofar
    as the applicant's appeal was allowed by reference to Article 15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



