
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00065/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 June 2014                                  |On 28th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                               Witness Mahata
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J A Donkersley, South Yorkshire Refuge and
Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Witness Mahata, was born on 25 September 1973 and  is  a
    male citizen of Sri Lanka.  The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Henderson) against a decision of the  respondent  dated
    11 February 2013 to make a deportation order in respect of him  by  the
    provisions of Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act  1971  (as  amended).
    His appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a  determination
    promulgated  on  31  March  2014.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  both  human
    rights (Articles 3 and 8) and asylum grounds.  It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge rejected the appellant's appeal on  asylum
    grounds although her decision is silent as to the  Refugee  Convention.
    In any event, no issue has been taken by the appellant with the judge's
    findings regarding  asylum  or  Article  3  ECHR.   The  focus  in  the
    determination is upon  Article  8  ECHR  and  the  application  of  the
    Immigration Rules (in particular, paragraph 339).

 3. The appellant challenges the First-tier Tribunal determination  on  the
    basis that the judge has failed properly to apply  the  relevant  legal
    principles to the facts as she found them.  We commence  our  analysis,
    therefore, by seeking to identify the facts found by  the  judge.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant had been born in  Zimbabwe  where  he
    had lived there for most of his life.  She accepted  that  he  had  two
    children resident in Zimbabwe who  are  children  by  his  first  wife.
    There was little evidence of the appellant's involvement in the life of
    the Zimbabwean children during the time that he had spent living in the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant claimed to have  married  for  a  second
    time in Zimbabwe and his two  children,  S  and  T,  from  this  second
    relationship are, he claims, living in Huddersfield.  The  judge  found
    that there was some evidence that he is in touch with S but  the  judge
    did not accept that there  was  adequate  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant was the biological father of either S or T.  She did not find
    that the appellant was playing an active role in the  lives  of  either
    child.  The appellant himself  claimed  that  he  had  not  seen  those
    children since 2004, the year in which T  had  been  born.   The  judge
    found that the appellant had lied in  his  asylum  screening  interview
    regarding the identity of the birth mother of T.

 4. The appellant claims to be the father of another child, SH,  who  lives
    in the United Kingdom.  The judge accepted  that  there  was  "adequate
    evidence" that SH is the appellant's child.  The judge found  that  the
    appellant had been involved in SH's upbringing during  the  first  five
    years of her life.  The appellant now has  no  relationship  with  SH's
    mother.

 5. The appellant was convicted of conspiracy to acquire criminal  property
    at Leeds Crown Court and sentenced to two years'  imprisonment.   There
    was no evidence  of  any  other  criminal  offences  committed  by  the
    appellant whilst he has been in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds to a previous  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    rejected in its entirety.  That Tribunal had found that  the  appellant
    had claimed to have four children living in the United Kingdom  because
    he believed that such a false claim might lead  to  his  early  release
    from  detention.   The  Tribunal   has   considered   the   appellant's
    credibility to be "seriously damaged".

 6. It was against  the  background  of  this  factual  matrix  that  Judge
    Henderson began her analysis.  We shall not revisit her  discussion  of
    the evidence  relating  to  asylum/Article  3  ECHR.   At  [50],  Judge
    Henderson  records  briefly  that  "the  appellant  cannot   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 339 or Appendix FM in remaining in the United
    Kingdom "as a parent or a partner".  Notwithstanding the  decisions  in
    Gulshan (Article 8-new rules-correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  the judge
    proceeded immediately [51] to a consideration of Article 8 outside  the
    Rules.  Although she did not  pause  to  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances in the appeal which justified such a course of
    action, the respondent does not suggest that the judge acted wrongly in
    law.   Her  approach  to  the  evidence  is  structured  and  thorough,
    beginning at [52] with a statement of the familiar questions  posed  in
    Razgar 2004 UKHL 27.  At [54], the judge wrote:

         Even though I have concluded that there have been difficulties with
         the appellant's marriages, he has a daughter [SH] who  is  in  this
         country and with whom he  has  enjoyed  a  close  relationship.   I
         accept that he has strong  ties  to  his  daughter  who  he  visits
         regularly.  I do not accept the same ties can be found  in  respect
         of the two sons [S and T] he alleges are resident in this  country.
         There was no doubt that  he  certainly  established  family/private
         life in the  UK  and  that  his  deportation  would  constitute  an
         interference with it.

 7. It is at this point, in her discussion of the relevant public  interest
    concerned with the appellant's deportation, that  matters  become  less
    clear.  At [56], Judge Henderson wrote:

         In this case, the respondent relies upon the legitimate aims  being
         the prevention of disorder and crime, the protection of health  and
         morals and the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.  It
         is permissible for the  respondent  to  rely  upon  more  than  one
         legitimate aim so long as this is made clear when the  decision  is
         taken.  I do not accept the prevention of disorder and crime can be
         stated as a legitimate aim in this appeal given that the  appellant
         was not stated in probation reports to be a danger to the public or
         there was a danger of him reoffending.  He has  not  reoffended  or
         been in danger to the public in the eight years since his  offence.
         I am also unclear as to the issue of health and morals -  this  has
         not been properly argued  by  the  respondent.   I  am  aware  that
         immigration control has been stated to be within the ambit  of  the
         protection of the rights  and  freedoms  of  others  and  therefore
         interference is in pursuance of one of the legitimate aims.

 8. The judge did not err in law by indicating that more  than  one  public
    interest may need to be  considered  in  deportation  cases.   However,
    because she has not dealt in any detail at all with the refusal of  the
    appellant's claim under the  Immigration  Rules,  Judge  Henderson  has
    overlooked the fact that those Rules give a clear indication  of  where
    the public interest lies in the deportation of a foreign criminal.   In
    the refusal letter at [111], reference is made to paragraph 398 of  the
    Immigration Rules:


    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and
    (a) the deportation of the person from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
    they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  4
    years; (b) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
    the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
    which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than
    4 years but at least 12 months; or (c) the deportation  of  the  person
    from the UK is conducive to the public good because, in the view of the
    Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
    a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,


    Importantly, paragraph  398  gives  details  of  the  public  good  (or
    interest). The letter records that the Secretary of State "in assessing
    that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if
    it does not, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    public interest in deportation will be outweighed by other factors".

 9. At [112], the letter goes on:

         The Secretary of  State  in  assessing  your  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraphs 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.

    Again, at [116] the letter records that:

         Paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules  specifies  the  criteria
         which must be satisfied in order for a parental relationship with a
         child to outweigh the public interest in deportation in  line  with
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  The criteria reflect the duty in Section 55
         of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have regard
         to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children  who
         are in the UK as interpreted in recent case law, in particular,  ZH
         (Tanzania).  In view of this consideration has been  given  to  the
         criteria in paragraph 399A  and  we  have  come  to  the  following
         conclusions.

10. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim to be in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with S and T.  Judge Henderson  took  a  rather
    different view, although the extent of the appellant's involvement with
    S and T is not entirely clear from her findings of fact.   The  refusal
    letter [125] also rejected the appellant's claim to be in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with SH  or  that  SH  was,  as  the  appellant
    claimed, a British citizen.  In the light of the Secretary  of  State's
    rejection of the appellant's claimed relationship with these  children,
    any claim to remain under the Immigration  Rules  was  bound  to  fail.
    Although the judge should have applied the principles of Gulshan and MF
    (Nigeria), it does seem clear that she proceeded with an Article 8 ECHR
    assessment outside the Rules because she  found  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his  claimed  children  went  beyond  what  had  been
    addressed in the refusal letter.  What the judge does  appear  to  have
    overlooked, however, was the statement of the public interest concerned
    with the appellant's removal contained in the  Immigration  Rules.   We
    consider that the judge did fall into error by rejecting the prevention
    of crime and disorder as part of the public interest concerned with the
    deportation of a foreign citizen on conducive  grounds;  paragraph  398
    (c) uses different phraseology from Article 8(2) but the references  to
    "serious harm" and "disregard for the law"  align,  in  our  view,  the
    public interest of the Article with that expressed in  the  Immigration
    Rules .  Whether the judge considered that interest was strong or  weak
    in this case was a matter her;  rejecting  a  relevant  aspect  of  the
    public interest altogether was not.  Further, it is  not  clear  to  us
    from the passage at [56] which we have  quoted  above  whether,  having
    found that control of immigration formed part of the legitimate  public
    interest referred to in Article 8(2) ECHR,  the judge proceeded to gave
    any weight to it.

11. The judge's assessment of proportionality at [57] is also  problematic.
    The judge wrote:

         The final and most important issue is therefore an assessment as to
         proportionality.  As a first step I must consider the interests  of
         the appellant's child SH.  I have read carefully through the letter
         provided by her  mother.   While  this  letter  confirms  a  strong
         relationship between the appellant and his daughter I am mindful of
         the fact that the appellant  is  no  longer  living  with  her  and
         although he has regular contact with her she  is  living  with  her
         mother in a separate family unit.  I have no other evidence  except
         a handwritten letter  and  a  letter  from  his  daughter's  former
         nursery relating back to a time prior to starting school.  There is
         no letter from her school confirming his involvement in  her  life.
         I am asked to accept his evidence and the evidence  of  his  former
         partner who was stating that there was a  strong  relationship  was
         not in court.  The appellant has stated this was because he did not
         ask her.  It is not clear why he did not ask her given that  it  is
         so  important  to  his  daughter's  future  that  I  hear  evidence
         regarding his relationship with his child.  I do  not  accept  that
         the appellant has been truthful about whether he asked  his  former
         partner to attend.  It is equally likely that she refused  to  come
         to court.  There is some evidence to show that it would be  in  the
         child's best interests to have contact  with  her  father  in  this
         country.  The strength of that evidence diminishes when taking into
         account the appellant's criminal record in  this  country  and  his
         parental role with his other alleged children.

12. The judge does not identify the "some evidence to show" that SH's  best
    interests would be addressed by her having contact with the  appellant.
    Further, it is difficult to see how the "strength" of evidence might be
    diminished by factors such as the appellant's criminal record  and  his
    "parental role with his  other  alleged  children"  (presumably,  those
    children in Zimbabwe).  If "strength" is intended to  include  veracity
    we cannot see how that might affected by such factors.

13. However, when read as a whole, we consider that  the  determination  is
    marred more by the infelicities of expression than  it  is  by  serious
    errors of law.  It is clear that the judge  found  that,  although  the
    appellant has regular contact and a relationship with SH,  his  closest
    involvement with her took place some years ago  and  he  is  no  longer
    living with SH or her mother.  That state of affairs has, at  least  in
    part,  been  brought  about  by  the  appellant's  criminal  offending.
    Further, whilst it is reasonable to assume that any child would benefit
    from at least having contact with both parents, there was  no  specific
    evidence in this appeal which might give an idea of the effect upon  SH
    of a separation from the appellant.  In addition, it was  open  to  the
    judge [58] to find that S and T had  little  bearing  on  the  analysis
    given that the appellant had not claimed to have  seen  these  children
    since 2004 and had  no  part  in  their  lives  at  the  present  time.
    Finally, at [59] the judge concluded that, "I do not think in  all  the
    circumstances [the appellant] has shown that his  absence  would  be  a
    great detriment to [SH's] future".  She found that it would not "be  in
    the best interests of SH for the appellant to be permitted to remain in
    the UK ..." That seems to us to be an outcome manifestly  available  to
    the judge on the evidence.  The judge's failure to have  proper  regard
    for the public interest particularised in the Immigration Rules was  an
    error which had the potential to  assist  the  appellant  only  in  the
    Article 8 ECHR analysis; had she considered that public  interest,  she
    would have been more, not less, likely to dismiss the appeal.  We  find
    that  any  infelicities  of  language  in  the  determination  are  not
    seriously misleading nor do they render unclear the judge's  reasoning.
    We find that there are no errors of law in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which are so serious that should  lead  us  to  set
    aside the decision.  Consequently, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

14. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 19 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

