
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00270/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               Mr ROBERT BARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S Gillespie, promulgated on 5 September 2017,
    allowing Mr Bari's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to deport him on 2 June 2016.

 2. The appellant was not represented  before  me.   The  appeal  had  been
    previously  adjourned   owing   to   difficulties   in   his   previous
    representatives  getting  instructions  from  him.   Since   then,   it
    transpires from correspondence with the previous solicitors  that  they
    had been unable to get instructions from him, nor  were  they  able  to
    obtain information regarding any continuing  Family  Court  proceedings
    which may be in existence.

 3. Most recently, the representatives requested to be taken off the record
    as they are without instructions from their client.  That  request  was
    granted.

 4. I am satisfied from the file that notice of the hearing was  served  at
    the address most recently given FOR correspondence with  the  appellant
    and that he has therefore been given due notice of the time,  date  and
    venue of the hearing.  I am satisfied that in all the circumstances  of
    this case given prior adjournments in order to seek an  adjournment  to
    allow him to instruct  solicitors  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to
    proceed with the hearing in his absence.

 5. The appellant claims to have arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2010.
    Prior to that he  has  several  convictions  in  the  Slovak  Republic,
    Austria  and  Germany  for  offences  including  robbery,   theft   and
    blackmail.  He has a total of six previous convictions  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  most  serious  of  these   occurred   in   2014.    The
    circumstances of those assaults are set out in the  decision  of  Judge
    Gillespie; they also appear in a decision of the Northern Ireland Court
    of Appeal R v Bari [2015] NICA 74.

 6. The appellant was deported prior to his appeal but was  represented  by
    Ms H Wilson of Counsel.  The judge heard submissions from her and  from
    the Presenting Officer; he also took into account amongst other matters
    a statement from the appellant.

 7. The judge noted [20] that the children are reported not to want to have
    any form of contact with him; it appears also that Freeing Orders  with
    a view to adoption orders being made.  The judge  concluded  [49]  that
    the Secretary of State had not proved that the Regulations of 21(5)  of
    the EEA Regulations were met, there  being  no  basis  [48]  which  the
    Secretary  of  State  could  have  determined  whether  the  period  of
    imprisonment had had any reformative  effect  on  the  appellant.   The
    judge also concluded [50] that the Secretary of  State  emphasised  the
    seriousness of the appellant's past criminal record, this  pointing  to
    the decision being reached on the basis of the criminal convictions  in
    themselves.  He considered also that the appellant's  enforced  absence
    meant that if Freeing Order proceedings were conducted in  his  absence
    he could not be taken into  account  as  an  alternative  carer  or  to
    participate in the making of that  order.   The  judge  concluded  that
    these are all important considerations when taking Regulation 21(6) and
    the Secretary of State had not proved that they were outweighed by  the
    case for deportation.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred:-

      i)  in  attaching  weight  to  an  unsigned  and  unconfirmed  witness
         statement from the appellant;

     ii) in concluding that the decision was unlawful  putting  emphasis  on
         past criminal activity when it was  plain  that  the  Secretary  of
         State relied on a reoffending pattern as clear evidence of  present
         risk and that his approach to the Secretary of State's reliance  on
         material provided from the Prison Service was perverse;

    iii) in approaching the Secretary of State's decision as if  it  were  a
         judicial review rather than making  findings  of  fact  as  he  was
         required to do;

     iv) in failing to take proper account  that  the  Social  Services  and
         Family Courts were content to proceed with their decisions  in  the
         appellant's absence and acting  perversely  in  attaching  material
         weight on the appellant's apparent change of heart  in  respect  of
         his own behaviour and children;

      v) in failing properly to assess proportionality by omitting  to  take
         into account public policy  reasons  for  removing  a  man  who  is
         particularly reprehensible that who in  his  exercise  of  domestic
         violence in front  of  his  children  and  where  there  is  little
         corroborative evidence capable of  showing  a  change  of  attitude
         towards his family and the public in general.

 9. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve
    the making of an error of law for the following reasons.

10. The judge erred fundamentally in, as the grounds aver, approaching  the
    decision of the Secretary of State as if it were a review.  This can be
    seen particularly at [57] and at [48] where the judge held  that  there
    was simply no  basis  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State  could  have
    determined whether the  appellant's  period  of  imprisonment  had  any
    reformative effect upon  him  and  the  conclusion  at  [47]  that  the
    decision of 3 June 2016 did not make a full, adequate assessment of the
    present risk posed by the appellant at the date  of  decision.   At  no
    stage does the judge  properly  set  out  Regulation  21(5)  or  direct
    himself as to whether the personal conduct of the appellant  represents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.

11. The conclusion that the Secretary of State had wrongly  relied  on  the
    seriousness of the past criminal record being prescribed by  Regulation
    21(5)(e) is perverse.  It is manifest from the refusal letter  and  the
    circumstances of the appellant's  offending  that  it  was  treated  as
    evidence for the conclusion that the appellant  represents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat.  Further, it was perverse  for
    the judge to attach weight  to  a  witness  statement  which  had  been
    neither signed nor confirmed by the appellant.  This is  of  particular
    note where, as here, the appellant  appears  to  suggest  that  he  has
    reformed despite a long criminal history of violent  behaviour  towards
    his wife and others.  There is thus no basis on which the  judge  could
    rationally  have  concluded  that  the  appellant   had   reformed   or
    rehabilitated and accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision must be
    set aside.

12. In re-making the decision I note that the appellant  has  continued  to
    disengage with the proceedings.  Despite efforts made on his behalf and
    the fact that he has had some contact with solicitors, he has failed to
    remain in contact and there is  no  indication  that  he  has  kept  in
    contact with  the  courts  charged  with  making  decisions  about  the
    children.

13. It is, in this case, appropriate to have regard to the observations  of
    the Court of Appeal about this appellant in R v Bari

         [2]  On 20 June 2014 Mr William Johnston, a Translink  bus  driver,
         was at work and driving down Beechland Drive  in  Lisburn  when  he
         witnessed the appellant chase his wife, Beta  Barivoa,  across  the
         road. Mrs Bariova was with three of her  and  the  applicant's  six
         children, and they tried to board  the  bus  before  the  appellant
         could catch up with them.


         [3]  The appellant grabbed Mrs Bariova by her hair before she could
         board the bus and slammed her onto the ground. He was  pulling  her
         hair and punched her face about five or  six  times.  The  children
         witnessed this attack and  were  screaming.  Mr Johnston  was  not
         supposed to leave the driver's cab while working, and so was hoping
         someone else would intervene. He shouted at the appellant  to  stop
         and, when it became clear no-one else was going to assist, he  left
         the driver's cab and pulled the appellant off his wife. Mr Johnston
         stated that the appellant then tried to choke  his  wife  with  his
         right hand. Mr Johnston hit the appellant twice on the side of  his
         head in an attempt to defend Mrs Bariova. The appellant then struck
         Mr Johnston on the chin. Once Mrs Bariova and her children  managed
         to get away, the appellant tried to bite Mr  Johnston  on  the  arm
         while he struggled to detain him.


         [4]  Mr Johnston was able to restrain the appellant on  the  ground
         until police arrived and arrested him.  Mrs  Bariova  had  fled  to
         safety and was attended to by police. The triage officer,  Dr  Lee,
         reported that hair had been pulled out from the side  of  her  head
         and that she felt tender over that area.


         [5]  The appellant was interviewed on 20 June 2014. At the start of
         the interview his solicitor read out a prepared  statement  on  his
         behalf:


             "I was in Lisburn today and I met my wife and  three  children
             at a bus stop. We talked about family matters but  then  there
             was an argument. We were both shouting at  each  other  as  we
             both became angry. I was very distressed as I saw my children.
             A man and some others then grabbed me, they pushed me  to  the
             ground. My wife was telling them to stop and that  I  was  her
             husband. They told her to go away. I was held down  until  the
             police arrived. I told the police what happened but I was then
             taken to the police station. I wish to answer  no  comment  to
             police questions otherwise.""


         He suggested at one point that his wife and one  of  the  witnesses
         lived in the same hostel and had concocted the story.  He  was  re-
         interviewed on 7 July 2014. The statements of  the  witnesses  were
         put to him. He said their account was due to the colour of his skin
         and because he was a Catholic and they were  all  Protestants.  The
         police pointed out that the applicant's wife shared his ethnicity.


14. Also of note from the decision of the Court of Appeal is the summary of
    the pre-sentence report.  I notice from the Court of Appeal's  decision
    that the appellant had served eleven years and eight months  in  prison
    outside the United Kingdom; that he  downplayed  his  past  history  of
    alcohol abuse and concerns regarding the level of domestic abuse in his
    relationship seeking to blame his wife; that the six  children  of  the
    family are in care, living separately with foster families.

15. At paragraph 10 the Court of Appeal said of the appellant -

         [10] The report assessed him as a high likelihood of reoffending in
         light of the above factors. The present offence  was  a  concerning
         offence where he exhibited such aggressive behaviour  that  members
         of the public intervened and the appellant's wife and children fled
         the scene in fear of their safety. His actions took  place  in  the
         context of the victim being  a  high  risk  domestic  case  with  a
         significant  history  of  allegations  of  domestic   abuse.   This
         demonstrated the appellant's willingness to cause both physical and
         psychological harm to his wife without any regard for  her  or  his
         children. Real concerns  remain  regarding  the  applicant's  self-
         management and his willingness to employ aggression  and  violence.
         Given the nature of the offence and on-going concerns it  would  be
         pertinent that relevant agencies such  as  Social  Services  remain
         involved. However, in the absence of a confirmed pattern of serious
         violent offending, the applicant was assessed as  not  meeting  the
         threshold for posing a  significant  risk  of  serious  harm.  This
         assessment would be subject to review given any further offending.


16. The Court of  Appeal  concluded  that  the  sentence  was  appropriate,
    stating:-

         [15] First, this attack  upon  the  injured  party  occurred  in  a
         context where the appellant's wife and children had felt  compelled
         to leave home because  of  risks  about  their  safety.  They  were
         plainly, therefore, exceptionally vulnerable and this attack has to
         be seen  as  the  latest  in  a  series  of  incidents  which  must
         inevitably have given rise to further concerns for  the  safety  of
         the injured party. Despite  the  appellant's  conviction  the  pre-
         sentence report shows that he has failed to demonstrate any insight
         into  his  personal  responsibility  for  his  actions   and   more
         worryingly seeks to place blame for the event on the injured party.


         [16] In itself that context shows a high degree of culpability  for
         his conduct but perhaps the most culpable aspect is the  fact  that
         he exposed his three children  to  this  shocking  assault  in  the
         public street upon their mother. Each of us sitting in  this  court
         has considerable experience of work in the Family Division  and  we
         are all too  aware  of  the  long-term  impacts  upon  children  of
         exposure to violence of this nature. In particular  Orders  of  the
         court protecting children need to be observed and those who  commit
         criminal offences in the course of  breaching  such  Orders  should
         expect the court to consider such a breach  a  serious  aggravating
         factor.


         [17] In addition to the  aggravating  factors  in  respect  of  the
         circumstances  of  the  offence  his  record  is  also  a  personal
         aggravating factor. He has a record for serious  offences  such  as
         robbery and a recent incident of multiple assault.  In  a  case  of
         this sort these are significant aggravating considerations. It  was
         submitted that it was necessary for the trial judge to explain  his
         sentence by setting out a starting point before taking into account
         aggravating and mitigating factors and arriving at an  outcome.  We
         would not dissuade  judges  from  carrying  out  that  exercise  in
         appropriate cases but it is important that the process for arriving
         at the right sentence in each case does  not  become  a  matter  of
         mathematics  rather  than  judgment.  We  do  not   consider   that
         transparency of decision making required such an exercise  in  this
         case.


         [18] We see no merit in the submission that  the  appellant  should
         gain some advantage from the way in which the case was  progressed.
         He has continued to  seek  to  avoid  his  responsibility  for  his
         conduct. Instead of recognising the harm that he has caused to  his
         wife he has sought to place the blame for his actions on her.


17. I consider that weight can be attached to the assessment  of  the  risk
    the appellant poses made by the Northern Ireland Prison  Service.   The
    appellant  has  provided  nothing  of  substance  beyond  his  apparent
    attendance at parenting classes; it is not for the Secretary  of  State
    to obtain such documents; it was for him to obtain this evidence and he
    failed to do so even when he had the assistance of solicitors.

18. Viewing the evidence as a whole I am satisfied that the appellant  very
    clearly represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    to society given the attitude he has shown towards violence against his
    wife in public and in the  presence  of  children.  There  is  a  clear
    propensity towards violence  demonstrated  by  that  and  also  by  his
    previous offending.  It is also shown by his willingness to attack  the
    bus driver who came to his  wife's  assistance.  There  is  nothing  of
    substance to suggest he has reformed in any way.

19. In assessing proportionality, I note that the appellant has no  contact
    with his children or his former partner.  There is no evidence  of  any
    work record in the United Kingdom or of any ties  which  he  may  have.
    His age and  health  are  not  raised  as  relevant  matters,  and  his
    residence in the United Kingdom was relatively short.  There is  little
    or no evidence of social integration into the United  Kingdom;  on  the
    contrary, he has shown by his conduct and blatant disregard  for  court
    orders put in place to protect his wife that he has not integrated into
    the United Kingdom.

20. Taking all of these factors into account and viewing them in the round,
    I find the Secretary of State has satisfied me that the  decision  that
    the deportation of the appellant is proportionate and justified.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First- tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7 December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

