
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Da/00061/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd June 2014                                |11th July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                            KETHESWARAN SRITHARAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    Polpitiya and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 4th June  1985.   This
    is an appeal against a determination of the  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  and  Mrs  L  R
    Schmitt (hereinafter referred to as "the panel") who in a determination
    promulgated on 17th March 2014 dismissed the Appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007 applied to the Appellant.

The Background to the Appeal

 2. The background to  the  appeal  can  be  summarised  as  follows.   The
    Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  travelling  on  a  Sri  Lankan
    passport with entry clearance as a visitor on 10th September 2000.  The
    visit visa was valid from 18th August 2000 to 18th February  2001.   On
    26th September 2000 the Appellant's mother lodged an asylum claim  with
    the Appellant as a dependant.  That application for asylum was  refused
    by the Secretary of State and upon exercising her right to appeal  that
    decision, the case came before the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  on
    24th July 2001 sitting at Hatton Cross.  The  Adjudicator,  Mr  R  L  G
    Varcoe  CMG,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  20th  August  2001
    dismissed  her  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.    The
    determination is exhibited at F1 of the Respondent's bundle.

 3. The basis of the claim that she made was that  in  1994  she  had  been
    investigated by the police and accused  of  having  harboured  a  Tamil
    teacher from Batticaloa who turned out  to  be  an  LTTE  member.   The
    teacher would stay with them until his arrest on suspicion of  an  LTTE
    connection.  It was asserted that she herself was held  by  the  police
    overnight and interrogated and was given a warning from the police.  In
    or about March 1999 one of her female  students  was  believed  by  the
    police to have been involved as a suicide bomber in which an  inspector
    was killed and approximately four weeks later  the  police  raided  her
    establishment to check all the students' records.  She  was  questioned
    by the police, and accused of having connections with the Tamil Tigers.
     She was called to the police station for questioning and had to  bribe
    them to stop them from harassing her.  The  reason  why  she  left  Sri
    Lanka, it is  said,  was  that  she  had  received  a  demand  from  an
    underworld group that she should pay money as they knew  that  she  was
    with the LTTE and was wealthy.  After  discussion  with  her  immediate
    family, she agreed to pay by instalments the money  demanded  and  then
    left Sri Lanka.  The judge set out his findings of fact on  credibility
    at [23]-[30] at F5 and F6 of the Respondent's bundle.  He accepted that
    in 1994 she was strongly interrogated by the  police  on  suspicion  of
    having harboured a teacher but that the police were satisfied that  she
    had done nothing wrong  and  the  case  was  closed.   He  reached  the
    conclusion that this could not have been instrumental in any way to her
    eventual decision  to  leave  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  considered  the
    reactions of the police and investigated the background of a  suspected
    Tamil suicide bomber was not unreasonable and justified  and  in  those
    circumstances, the  Appellant  not  being  harmed  or  ill-treated  and
    cooperated with the police that the judge reached the  conclusion  that
    the authorities had no lasting adverse interest in her.  He then turned
    to the findings on the extortion demand but did  not  find  that  there
    would be substantial reasons for believing that on  return  to  Colombo
    now that she would face any further demands or that if she did not  pay
    either she or her son would be harmed.  He made  that  finding  on  the
    basis of the evidence before him and in  the  light  of  the  objective
    material [28].  It is also clear that he had  some  doubts  as  to  the
    truth of that part of the Appellant's evidence which he set out at [23]
    and [28].

 4. Notwithstanding the dismissal of  her  claim  for  asylum,  the  family
    remained in the United Kingdom.  On 18th October 2005  the  Appellant's
    mother lodged  an  application  under  the  Family  Exercise  but  that
    application was rejected on 30th March 2006.

 5. On 2nd  October  2006  at  Isleworth  Crown  Court  the  Appellant  was
    convicted of offences of  kidnapping  and  violent  disorder.   On  8th
    December  2006  he  was  sentenced  to  an  indeterminate  sentence  of
    imprisonment in which the custodial element was set  at  a  minimum  of
    four years and six months' imprisonment  before  being  considered  for
    release.  This sentence was  passed  using  the  sentencing  principles
    under the Criminal Justice Act 2003 relating to dangerous offenders.

 6. The circumstances surrounding the commission of the  offence  were  set
    out and summarised by the First-tier Tribunal by reference to a  parole
    report in the following terms:-

         "You are serving an indeterminate sentence  for  public  protection
         for offences of kidnap and violent disorder. Your minimum  term  of
         imprisonment was set at four and a half years less time remanded in
         custody. This expired in April 2011.


         The victim of the index offence was Mr  Paratharjan  who  was  then
         aged 18. With others you pursued him, assaulted him and forced  him
         into a car. He was then driven  to  another  area  and  during  the
         journey was again physically  assaulted.  Your  co-defendants  took
         turns to use a cigarette lighter to burn  the  victim's  ears.  You
         admitted to the panel that you beat up  the  victim  and  that  you
         continued to punch him when he was in the car. You said that  after
         driving for a while you were dropped  off  at  your  uncle's  house
         where you were residing, as you were subject to  a  family  curfew.
         You had a meal and when your uncle and  aunt  retired  to  bed  you
         telephoned one of your co-defendants who said that they were  still
         holding Mr Paratharjan. They were close by and you left  the  house
         to join them. When asked by the panel why you  did  this  you  said
         that it was as a result of curiosity, thrill seeking and a sense of
         excitement.


         When you arrived you found that there were many other men  present,
         most of whom were older than you. The victim had his hear, face and
         elbows shaved and you say was barely recognisable.  You  said  that
         being shaved in this way is seen as particularly humiliating within
         your culture. Your victim was then subjected to violent attacks  by
         others using knives, an iron bar, an axe  and  cricket  stump.  You
         told the panel that you were shocked. You had intended  the  victim
         to suffer punching and kicking but not the orgy  of  violence  that
         transpired. You said that you lacked the courage  to  intervene  as
         you feared that the perpetrators may have turned on you.


         The sentencing judge referred to this as  a  vicious  and  cowardly
         violence and said that it was fortuitous that none of the  injuries
         incurred proved to be fatal. You told the panel that the motive for
         these offences was revenge and a desire to impress your peer group.
         You said that you were part of a gang of young men  mainly  from  a
         similar ethnic background. You deny that the gang was  involved  in
         criminal activities but said that they  were  genuinely  up  to  no
         good, 'bunking  off  school,  going  clubbing  and  being  verbally
         aggressive to people'. You saw yourselves as  'wannabe'  gangsters.
         Mr Paratharjan was a member of a  rival  gang  who  had  previously
         attacked one of your co-defendants Mr Chandran,  breaking  his  jaw
         and nose. You said that you took the lead in  the  initial  assault
         and kidnap of the victim as you wanted to be seen as a 'macho  type
         person' with members of your peer group. Prior to these convictions
         you had not come to  the  attention  to  the  court.  There  is  no
         evidence that either drugs or alcohol played a significant part  in
         the commission of the index offences. You told the panel  that  you
         had not committed any undetected crimes but accepted that at school
         and college you did become involved in a number of fights  and  did
         break someone's nose. You said that these fights were as  a  result
         of people mocking you because of your poor English. You  said  that
         at the time you could not find the words to talk  yourself  out  of
         trouble so resorted to using fists instead."

 7. The judge's sentencing remarks were set out in the Respondent's  bundle
    and recited at paragraph [6] of the panel's determination.   The  judge
    stated:-

         "This  was  the  action  of  a  coward  attacking  a  helpless  and
         defenceless victim with a weapon to cause  him  unnecessary  injury
         and at the same time, you, Gnanajeyarajah acting in a cowardly  way
         hit him with an iron bar on his other leg and the result is that he
         fell down. It was then, that you,  Chandran  pressed  on  with  the
         joint enterprise  of  criminal  violence  against  a  helpless  and
         defenceless victim by exerting a brutal  and  vicious  attack  with
         your knife, giving him no chance of escaping further injury showing
         no pity.


         You used the knife to slash his face twice, on his back and also on
         the side of his head; once above the left ear and once close to the
         eye. You also slashed him on the upper left  arm  and  we  saw  the
         result of your brutality in the photographs that were exhibited  in
         the case at exhibit 3.


         After Partheepan was slashed with a knife most, if not all of those
         who were present, including the five of you started  to  kick  him.
         Then you, Chandran directed the order for them to leave him. 'He is
         finished'. You all then ran away. All of you must  understand  that
         kidnapping and violence of this nature is simply not acceptable  in
         a civilised society.


         What happened to Partheepan  was  a  blatant  case  of  men  acting
         together in a gang, having a hostile attitude which  culminated  in
         merciless violence, conducted towards a young man who had  done  no
         harm whatsoever to you.


         It was a serious, vicious and deliberate attack upon a man who  was
         taken against his will from one place to  another  and  beaten  and
         subjected to what can only be described as a vicious  and  cowardly
         violence.


         The attacks launched upon your victim were sustained  and  involved
         the use of weapons. This sort of  behaviour  strikes  at  the  very
         heart of law and order and, in my judgement, in each of your cases,
         whatever your circumstances, history or other personal factors,  it
         cannot be overlooked.


         Ordinary people  deserve  the  protection  of  the  courts.  It  is
         impossible to overlook the fact that right thinking members of  the
         public find such offences as those that the jury convicted  you  of
         as nothing less than abhorrent.


         You must be in no doubt that  this  course  of  wholly  unjustified
         cowardly violence by a group of people acting together as a violent
         gang will result in condign punishment. In posing the  sentences  I
         am about to impose upon each of you, I am making it plain that  one
         of the objects of the sentence is to  deter  others  who  might  be
         minded to embark upon this type of activity.


         You were all in it together and there is no reason  to  distinguish
         between you at all a part from the fact of your ages which I  shall
         come to and the fact that once of you, in a very minor way, will be
         given credit for having been acquitted of a Section 18 offence.


         Ketheswaran at the time of this offence you were 20,  you  are  now
         21, having been born on 4 June 1985. You are now  to  be  sentenced
         for the offence of kidnapping, which  is  a  specified  offence  in
         schedule 15 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003.


         Your offence is punishable with a  life  sentence,  but  I  do  not
         consider it sufficiently serious to justify such a sentence.


         In my opinion, there is a significant risk to the public of serious
         personal injury whether it is physical/psychological caused by your
         commission of further offences specified in Schedule 15.


         In reaching this conclusion I have taken into account in the  main,
         the nature or substantially, the nature of and the circumstances of
         your current offence and that does, in my judgement, represent that
         you  are  a  significant  risk  of  causing  serious  harm  by  the
         commission  of  a  further  specified  offence.  In  reaching  that
         conclusion I have  taken  into  account  this  matter  as  well  as
         mitigating factors that have  been  put  before  me  including  the
         letter from you and all what Mr Chan said on your behalf about your
         level of education and how you have wasted your future; it  is  all
         your fault, and you have no previous convictions.


         In these circumstances, I am required by law to impose  a  sentence
         of  detention  in  the  young  offender  institution   for   public
         protection. I am required to specify the minimum  period  you  must
         serve in custody before the parole board may consider your release.


         Had it not  been  appropriate  to  impose  a  sentence  for  public
         protection, I would have passed a sentence of 9 years imprisonment,
         taking into  account  the  seriousness  of  your  offence  and  the
         mitigating factors in your case. Of  that  period  you  would  have
         spent one half in custody and after deducting  the  time  you  have
         spent in custody. After that time the parole board will be entitled
         to consider your release. Only when it is  satisfied  that  you  no
         longer be confined in custody for the protection of the public will
         it be able to direct your release. Until it  is  so  satisfied  you
         will remain in custody.


         If you are released it will be on terms that  you  are  subject  to
         licence for the rest of your life unless  the  Secretary  of  State
         orders that your licence is to end, which he cannot do so until you
         have been on  licence for at least 10  years.  Whilst  you  are  on
         licence you are liable to be recalled to custody at  any  time  for
         your  licence-  if  your  licence  is   revoked   either   on   the
         recommendation of the parole board or if it court expedient in  the
         interest of justice by the Secretary of State."

 8. The  Appellant  was  duly  informed  of  his  liability  for  automatic
    deportation and was served with liability to automatic  deportation  on
    27th February 2009.

 9. On 26th July 2012 the Appellant was served with  notice  informing  him
    that Section  72(2)  of  the  2002  Act  applied.   He  was  given  the
    opportunity to submit a rebuttal case against the presumption  that  he
    had been convicted of a serious offence and that his continued presence
    in the United Kingdom constituted a danger to the community.

The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal Panel:

10. On 18th July 2012 the Appellant claimed  asylum.   The  basis  of  that
    claim is set out in the determination of the panel.

11. It was stated by the Appellant that he had left Sri Lanka in  September
    2000 using his own  passport  and  had  had  no  affiliation  with  any
    political party  in  Sri  Lanka.   He  claimed  that  his  family  were
    considered as sympathisers of the LTTE and his father was taken away by
    the authorities and may have played an active role in  the  support  of
    the LTTE.  His evidence relied  upon  what  his  mother  had  told  him
    concerning links with the Tamil Tigers and he  made  reference  to  his
    mother being arrested and detained for harbouring Tamil Tigers.

12. He further made reference to his kidnap at the age of 13 in 1998  where
    his mother was required to pay a ransom for his  release.   He  claimed
    that he had been detained for a week and had sustained  injuries.   The
    Appellant claims that his kidnappers wanted money and he  thought  that
    it may have to do with his father's role in the LTTE based on the  fact
    that they knew that his family were  financially  well  off  and  could
    afford to pay a ransom.  His mother had told him that she had paid  the
    kidnappers a substantial amount of money and that his  uncle  had  been
    the intermediary of the payment of the money.  He  also  asserted  that
    the police were involved in the kidnapping as they  did  not  take  any
    notice of his mother's complaint.  Subsequently he left  Sri  Lanka  in
    September 2000 but between August 1998 and September 2000 there were no
    further attempts to kidnap him but he did not leave the  house  without
    company.

13. The Respondent dealt with the Appellant's application  for  asylum  and
    its grounds within the reasons for refusal letter.

14. The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  was  advanced  on  two
    particular bases.  Firstly, on the basis of the factual account that he
    had given concerning his past circumstances when living  in  Sri  Lanka
    with his mother and in particular his links to the LTTE and the  kidnap
    in 1998.  Secondly, as the panel noted at [16] it was claimed that as a
    result of his conviction  and  the  circumstances  of  that,  that  his
    profile was such that the Sri Lankan authorities would perceive him  as
    associated with LTTE activity, targeted at  destabilising  the  unitary
    state  of  Sri  Lanka.   This  was  advanced  on  the  basis  that  the
    circumstances of the offence made it plain that he had  been  convicted
    of a gang-related activity and that the expert evidence from  Dr  Chris
    Smith demonstrated that there was a risk on return  by  reason  of  his
    conviction which would be likely to be known to the authorities  if  he
    were returned to Sri Lanka.  The panel also noted that it  was  claimed
    that his absence from Sri Lanka for a considerable period and  that  he
    was coming from the United Kingdom would also create a risk profile for
    him.

15. The findings of fact made by the panel in relation to his asylum  claim
    are set out as follows:-

         "17. In considering the appellant's asylum appeal we bear  in  mind
             that it is for him to establish that  there  is  a  reasonable
             degree of likelihood that he would, if returned to Sri  Lanka,
             be exposed to the real  risk  of  persecution  on  grounds  of
             imputed political opinion. We do not  accept  the  appellant's
             claim  that  he  was  kidnapped  in   1998.   The   tribunal's
             determination  in  relation  to  his  mother's  asylum   claim
             accepted that his mother has paid ransom.  That  determination
             however does not reveal that the appellant's mother  indicated
             at the time that the appellant had been abducted and had  been
             released upon the payment of a ransom by her. We are satisfied
             that if the  appellant  had  been  abducted,  the  appellant's
             mother would not have failed to mention this, as it would have
             been central to her claim for asylum.

         18.  Findings of Fact

             We make the following findings of fact:

               i) The appellant has not had any  personal  involvement  with
                  the LTTE. He has never  previously  come  to  the  adverse
                  attention of  the  authorities  on  account  of  his  LTTE
                  activity.


              ii) The appellant's mother was detained on suspicion  of  LTTE
                  activity  but  released  more  than  a  decade  ago.   She
                  currently  lives  in  Sri  Lanka  and  runs  a  successful
                  business as a tutor. She has not come  under  any  adverse
                  attention since her return  to  Sri  Lanka  in  2005.  The
                  appellant  has  indicated  that  she  would  be  able   to
                  accommodate him in Sri Lanka if he returned there and that
                  she would also be able to assist him if he remained in the
                  United Kingdom. All this indicates that, contrary  to  the
                  appellant's claim, his  mother  has  not  come  under  any
                  adverse attention from the authorities on account  of  her
                  past or her husband's past links with  the  LTTE.  In  our
                  view that the appellant would not  be  regarded  with  any
                  suspicion on account of his family's  alleged  links  with
                  the LTTE. His evidence regarding his father's  involvement
                  in the LTTE is  lacking  in  detail.  If  his  father  was
                  involved in the LTTE and such involvement had  caused  the
                  family to  be  persecuted,  we  have  no  doubt  that  the
                  appellant's mother would have been  able  to  provide  him
                  with further details in this regard. The appellant has not
                  been able to shed any light on the exact extent,  if  any,
                  of his father's involvement in the LTTE, and accordingly I
                  am satisfied that his father had not come to the attention
                  of the authorities on account of his activity, and in  any
                  event, that if he did, it would be more than a decade ago,
                  such that it  is  not  a  significant  factor  that  would
                  constitute a risk to him at present.


             iii)  The  appellant  claims  that  he  has  been  involved  in
                  demonstrations in the United Kingdom but has not  provided
                  any cogent evidence in this  regard.  In  any  event,  his
                  involvement would only be after  August  2013,  after  his
                  release from prison. We are prepared to accept that he may
                  have participated in some anti Sri  Lankan  demonstrations
                  since his release from custody. Whilst we accept that  the
                  appellant may have scarring on  his  person  there  is  no
                  evidence however to  demonstrate  that  this  scarring  is
                  significant."

    In this regard the panel directed themselves to the most recent country
    guidance decision of GJ and Others  (Post  Civil  War:  Returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and set out the head note  to  that  country
    guidance decision.

16. The panel gave express  consideration  to  the  arguments  advanced  on
    behalf of the Appellant concerning the nature of his crime and  whether
    or not this would be known to the authorities  and  would  be  seen  as
    ascribing to him a profile  which  would  be  perceived  as  him  being
    associated with Tamil gangs in the United Kingdom and therefore lead to
    an assumption that he associated  with  the  LTTE  and  would  thus  be
    perceived as a threat to the integrity of  the  unitary  state  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The panel said this:-

         "20. The appellant's counsel submitted  that  the  crime  that  the
             appellant  had  committed  was  likely  to  be  known  by  the
             authorities upon his return. She submitted that his  crime  is
             associated with Tamil gangs in the  United  Kingdom  and  this
             would lead to an assumption that he  is  associated  with  the
             LTTE. On that basis, she submitted that the appellant would be
             perceived as a threat to the integrity of the unitary state in
             Sri Lanka. In reliance on the country guidance case of GJ  the
             skeleton argument advances the contention that:


                  'When the factors highlighted above are viewed together at
                  the very least, it  is  submitted  that  he  is  generally
                  someone who will be perceived to be  associated  with  the
                  diaspora activities in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  very
                  least as an LTTE supporter or at  the  worst  as  an  LTTE
                  cadre. Given that the government's present objective is to
                  identify Tamil activists in the diaspora who  are  working
                  for Tamil separatism and to destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
                  Lankan state, it is submitted that the appellant would  be
                  at risk on return.'

         21.  In advancing the contention the appellant's  conviction  of  a
             gang related crime is reasonably likely to give  rise  to  the
             perception by the Sri Lankan authorities that he  is  involved
             in LTTE activity in the Diaspora and  that  he  constitutes  a
             threat to the integrity of the unitary state in Sri Lanka, the
             appellant's counsel  relied  in  the  main  on  the  following
             extract at paragraph 60 of the expert report:


                  'The Ministry of Defence website has in the past  reported
                  details  of  Tamil  criminal  activity  in  London.   This
                  indicates that they will monitor  criminal  activities  in
                  the  United  Kingdom  in  relation   to   suspected   LTTE
                  connections. (The expert then makes reference to a  report
                  on the Ministry of Defence website, which states  that  an
                  LTTE  suspect  was  arrested  with  cloned  credit   cards
                  unsuspecting card holders in the United Kingdom  that  the
                  police believed that these would later be  transferred  to
                  the LTTE. The report also states that the  Tamil  Diaspora
                  in the United Kingdom is now tapping into the resources of
                  the British public at large  and  committing  credit  card
                  fraud in order to fund the LTTE.)


                  However, on the basis of my past work for the Metropolitan
                  Police Service on precisely this issue, I can confirm that
                  the links between the LTTE and Tamil credit card fraud  in
                  the United Kingdom is  ambiguous.  Nevertheless,  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities tend to automatically  associate  Tamil
                  criminal activity in the  United  Kingdom  with  LTTE.  As
                  such, the Sri Lankan authorities are likely to be aware of
                  the appellant's conviction, as they have been with others.




                  Although the war is over and has been now for four  years,
                  the conflict between the two sides has not  been  resolved
                  and the Sri Lankan authorities remain concerned  over  the
                  possible resurgence of the LTTE.


                  It will be many, many years before the authorities can  be
                  confident that the LTTE has been defeated and this process
                  will require more than draconian security  measures,  such
                  as the Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Tourism
                  Act, of which the latter remains undecided.'

         22.  I am not satisfied that these observations  are sufficient  to
             draw the conclusion that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood that any Tamil returning to Sri Lanka, who has been
             convicted of gang  related  activity  would  be  suspected  of
             having  links  with  Tamil  activity  that  is   directed   at
             destabilising  the  Sri  Lankan  state.  I   find   that   the
             authorities and the sources of Dr Smith's conclusions  do  not
             support his opinion. The extract from the Ministry of  Defence
             website does not go so far as to the say that any gang related
             activity is to be  viewed  as  related  to  diaspora  activity
             directed at destabilising the state. More to the point, is the
             fact that the latest country guidance case makes it very clear
             that the Sri Lankan authorities' approach to the risk posed by
             Tamils in the  diaspora  is  sophisticated,  both  as  to  the
             activities within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  The  country
             guidance case makes clear that, the authorities know that many
             Sri Lankan Tamils travel abroad as economic migrants and  that
             everyone  in  the  Northern  Province  would  have  had   some
             involvement with the LTTE and that in post-conflict Sri Lanka;
             an individual's past history will  be  relevant  only  to  the
             extent that it is perceived by the authorities as indicating a
             present  risk  to  the  unitary  state  of  the   Sri   Lankan
             government. In the circumstances of  this  appellant,  he  has
             never had any involvement in the LTTE; his  family  has  never
             had any significant involvement in the LTTE. The appellant has
             not, save perhaps  for  the  period  after  his  release  from
             custody, been involved in anti  Sri  Lankan  activity  in  the
             United Kingdom. The crime for which he was convicted, although
             gang related, involved no more that the gruesome torture of  a
             fellow Sri Lankan for no apparent reason. It is  difficult  to
             understand how, if the Sri Lankan authorities came to know  of
             the circumstances of this offence which it  is  accepted  they
             would,  they  could  reasonably   construe   the   appellant's
             involvement in this offence as justifying the perception  that
             his activity poses any threat to  the  unitary  state  of  Sri
             Lanka. The fact that he would not have an  identity  document,
             and even the fact that he may have some scarring,   would  not
             in our  view, when considered with the evidence as a whole, be
             sufficient to place this appellant at risk.


         23.  We find therefore that the appellant has failed  to  establish
             that he has a well founded fear of persecution for reasons  of
             imputed political opinion."

17. Thus the panel concluded that the Appellant  had  failed  to  establish
    that he had a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons  of  imputed
    political opinion.

18. The panel then went on to consider the basis of the appeal against  the
    deportation  order,  namely  that  the  Appellant  claimed   that   the
    deportation would breach his right to family life in the United Kingdom
    relying upon his relationship with his partner, a British citizen.  The
    panel set out the Immigration Rules at [24] and  noted  the  concession
    made on behalf of the Appellants at [25] that the Appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements under the Immigration Rules under  paragraph  399
    or 399A.  The panel then referred themselves  to  the  decision  of  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and  it  is  plain  that  later  in  the
    determination they considered the  requisite  Article  8  jurisprudence
    including the Uner criteria which they set out at [29].

19. In making an assessment of proportionality they took into  account  the
    factors that they had identified earlier in the determination and  said
    this at paragraph 30:-

         "30. In assessing proportionality we turn firstly to  consider  the
             personal consequences to the appellant and his family  members
             in the United Kingdom of interference  with  his  private  and
             family life.

               i) It stands in the appellant's  favour,  that  he  has  made
                  significant progress in his path to  rehabilitation.  This
                  is well recognised in the report of the parole board which
                  assesses the risk of reconviction as low. We are satisfied
                  therefore that the appellant does not constitute a present
                  risk of harm to the public in the United Kingdom.


              ii) The appellant was able to complete a bachelor's degree  in
                  accountancy during his time in prison, and the documentary
                  evidence shows that he has now been accepted at the London
                  School of Economics to do a masters degree.


             iii) We bear in  mind the principle enunciated in the  case  of
                  Maslov App no.1683/03 [2008] ECHR  546  .  namely  ,  that
                  regard is to be had to the special situation of aliens who
                  have spent most, if not all, their childhood in  the  host
                  country,  were  brought  up  there  and   received   their
                  education there . The court held that  in  cases  where  a
                  settled migrant has lawfully spent all or the  major  part
                  of his or her childhood and youth in the host country very
                  serious reasons are required to justify expulsion. This is
                  all the more so where the person concerned  committed  the
                  offences underlying the expulsion measure as  a  juvenile.
                  The appellant has established significant private life  in
                  the United Kingdom. He arrived here at the age  of  15  in
                  2000 and therefore has spent most of his  formative  years
                  in Sri Lanka. He does  not  have  settled  status  in  the
                  United Kingdom although he has been here for 14 years  .It
                  is significant though, at least half of his 14 year period
                  of residence has been spent in custody. We accept that  he
                  was a juvenile at the time of the offence.


              iv)  We  find  that  the  appellant  does  retain  significant
                  cultural, family and  social  ties  with  Sri  Lanka.  His
                  mother lives in Sri Lanka and he  is  in  regular  contact
                  with her. We have  no  doubt  that  he  has  other  family
                  members living in Sri Lanka. Furthermore  it  is  apparent
                  from the evidence that the appellant has  retained  strong
                  links with the Sri Lankan community in the United  Kingdom
                  in the period that he has resided here.


               v) We recognise that the appellant's  removal  would  rupture
                  the significant private life ties that he has  established
                  in the United Kingdom. He has nieces and uncles as well as
                  aunts with whom he is in close and regular contact in  the
                  United Kingdom. These ties  would  be  broken  if  he  was
                  deported to Sri Lanka.


              vi) We accept that the appellant is in a genuine  relationship
                  with his partner, who is a second year university student.
                  We accept that she is  pregnant,  although  there  was  no
                  documentary evidence presented to support  this.  We  find
                  that  it  would  not  be  unreasonable   to   expect   the
                  appellant's partner to return to Sri Lanka with  him.  She
                  and the appellant were fully aware at all  material  times
                  that he was facing deportation and that  any  relationship
                  that they would form, would have to  face  this  potential
                  difficulty. We do not accept her evidence that  they  have
                  not discussed what would happen if he is deported  to  Sri
                  Lanka.  The  appellant  has  acquired  a  good  level   of
                  education in the United Kingdom. We do not think  that  it
                  would be disproportionate, if his partner  was  placed  in
                  the difficult position of having to choose whether to join
                  him in Sri Lanka or to remain in the United  Kingdom  with
                  his child. She has been fully aware at all times that  the
                  appellant was facing deportation. She accepts that she met
                  him when he was prison on day  release.   The  appellant's
                  mother is in a relatively stable financial position in Sri
                  Lanka, and would be able to accommodate the appellant  and
                  his partner if she was to accompany him to Sri  Lanka  and
                  to continue family life there. We take into  account  that
                  the appellant has recently  met  his  partner,  they  have
                  never cohabited, and hence, that  the  strength  of  their
                  family life is rather tenuous at this  stage.  We  do  not
                  consider that the best interests of the unborn  child,  if
                  indeed she is pregnant, would  in  any  way  be  adversely
                  affected, were she to  accompany  the  appellant  when  he
                  returns to Sri Lanka.

20. They assessed the main principles from the recent jurisprudence at [31]
    and at [32] identified what they consider to be  the  "public  interest
    considerations that were in support of  the  Appellant's  deportation."
    The panel found that they were identifiable as follows:-

         "32. The  public  interest  considerations  that  support  of  this
             appellant's deportation are the following:

               i) The appellant was convicted of a very serious offence that
                  falls at the upper end of the  range  of  seriousness  for
                  offences involving violence.  The  sentence  received,  an
                  indefinite sentence, adequately reflects  the  seriousness
                  of his offence. The aggravating  circumstances  have  been
                  fully dealt with in the sentencing remarks  of  the  trial
                  judge. The appellant and his  co-defendants  subjected  an
                  innocent person to a  senseless  prolonged  and  sustained
                  ordeal of torture.


              ii) We accept that the appellant does not pose a present  risk
                  to the public. We accept that the appellant's risk of  re-
                  offending has been assessed as low and to that extent,  he
                  does not pose a high risk of harm to  the  public  in  the
                  United  Kingdom.  The  trial  Judge  correctly  identified
                  deterrence as a  significant  factor.  We  find  that  the
                  appellant's deportation would serve a compelling  need  in
                  the public interest to deter  likeminded  foreign  persons
                  from committing offences.


             iii) The appellant's deportation would also serve a  compelling
                  need to express society's condemnation of serious criminal
                  activity and to promote public confidence in the treatment
                  of  foreign  citizens  who  have  committed  them  serious
                  crimes."

21. Having weighed up the evidence that was before them  they  reached  the
    conclusion that the Appellant's removal  would  not  be  in  breach  of
    Article 8 and that the consequences of interference of the  Appellant's
    private and family life would not be sufficiently serious  to  outweigh
    the compelling public interest factors that they had identified in  the
    appeal.  Thus the appeal was dismissed on  asylum  grounds,  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

22. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision of the panel and
    grounds were submitted by Ms Bayatti of Counsel who had appeared before
    the First-tier Tribunal panel.

23. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on  23rd  April
    2014 for the following reasons:-

         "I have carefully considered the determination in relation  to  the
         grounds, settled by Counsel who appeared  before  the  panel.   The
         grounds contend that the panel materially erred in a number of ways
         in its assessment of risk on return as a  Tamil  and  also  in  its
         Article 8 assessment.  In particular, as to the former, it made  no
         reference to and apparently  had  no  regard  to,  further  reports
         submitted with leave after  the  hearing  and  which  lent  further
         support to the proposition put forward in the expert report  of  Dr
         Smith that the Appellant, whose offence of kidnapping was committed
         as the member of a Tamil gang, would be at  risk  because  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities regard such gangs as LTTE gangs and  fronts  for
         the LTTE.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  background  is  certainly
         arguable.  The contention with respect to Article 8 is  less  clear
         cut but it is I think  appropriate  to  grant  permission  on  that
         ground also."

24. Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Appellant  was
    represented by Ms S Iqbal, Counsel  and  Mr  Avery,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer.  At the outset of the hearing we identified the appeal bundles
    before the First-tier Tribunal which consisted of four appeal  bundles.
    Ms Iqbal also sought to  introduce  a  statement  from  Ms  Bayatti  of
    Counsel that made reference to the documentation that  was  sent  post-
    hearing to the panel which it is asserted that the panel did  not  take
    into account when reaching its conclusions.

25. The first issue that is raised in the grounds is that there were  other
    reports submitted to Judge Devittie post-hearing by Ms Bayatti.   Those
    documents were sent by the Appellant's solicitor by  post  and  fax  on
    24th February 2014, the hearing having taken  place  on  20th  February
    2014 at Kingston Crown Court.  Those documents consisted of a BBC  News
    article entitled "Tamil gangs attacked from within" dated 26th February
    2007 and a Defence Lanka article  "LTTE  as  an  international  threat"
    which had been downloaded from  the  internet  last  modified  on  30th
    December 2010 relating to events outside Sri Lanka in  2006  and  2007.
    The grounds submitted that the judge did not consider  those  documents
    despite them being sent.

26. At the outset of the proceedings, I made reference to the Tribunal file
    and informed the parties that the letter from the solicitor was on file
    and therefore I was satisfied that the letter had been  sent  with  the
    enclosures that I have just referred to.  I could find no reference  to
    this in the ROP nor any directions issued by the judge.   It  is  usual
    that if material is to be provided post-hearing, directions  are  given
    as to time of service and indeed service on the other party  as  it  is
    unusual for one party to send information without it being served  upon
    the other.  Nonetheless, Ms Bayatti, who appeared as Counsel before the
    Tribunal has provided a statement confirming that the  information  was
    sent as described above and  I  informed  the  parties  that  in  those
    circumstances I was satisfied that the documents were indeed sent.  The
    parties  therefore  both  confirmed  that  they  would  deal  with  the
    relevance of those documents in their submissions.

27. Ms Iqbal submitted that those documents  were  important  because  they
    corroborated the expert report of Dr Smith in  relation  to  those  who
    were associated with Tamil gangs and as to how they are perceived.  She
    referred the Tribunal to the BBC article dated 26th February 2007  that
    referred to Tamil gangs being involved in confrontation  and  that  the
    Metropolitan Police had sent up a  task  force  to  combat  this.   She
    submitted that the  document  demonstrated  that  criminal  gangs  were
    funding rebel struggles and that credit card fraud carried out  in  the
    United Kingdom by Tamil gangs funded the Tamil Tigers and  referred  to
    Chief Inspector Griffiths.

28. Ms Iqbal also referred the Tribunal to the second  document  which  was
    the Defence Lanka article downloaded from the internet.  That was  last
    modified on 30th December 2010 and referred to incidents  in  2006  and
    2007.  She made reference to May 16th and the "Eastside Boys" who  were
    said to have been paid by an organisation called the  LTTE.   Thus  she
    submitted that those two reports read together with Mr  Smith's  report
    supported the Appellant's account that he would be at risk of  harm  as
    he would be perceived as someone associated with Tamil gangs  who  were
    funding the LTTE.  She submitted that the report at page 61 in which it
    is  said  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  automatically  associate
    criminal activity with the UK supports the view  that  the  authorities
    would take of the Appellant whose conviction was widely  recorded.   In
    this respect she referred the Tribunal to pages 131,  an  article  from
    the Harrow Times dated 11th December 2006, page 134 an article from the
    Free Press dated 6th October 2006 and page 136  This  is  Local  London
    article dated 12th December 2006.  She submitted  that  in  those  news
    articles  that  related  to  the  circumstances  of   the   Appellant's
    conviction the Appellant was named.  In this context she  referred  the
    Tribunal to Dr Smith's report who had  mentioned  the  areas  that  the
    Tamil communities were based and in particular referred to Harrow  (see
    paragraph 38).  She submitted that Tamil communities outside of the  UK
    were being monitored by the authorities and this was accepted in GJ.

29. Ms Iqbal submitted that there had been no consideration  of  the  facts
    surrounding the offence itself which connected to the  Tamil  community
    being mentioned.  She submitted that the incident took place  following
    an altercation after a Tamil event (see page 34 of the bundle) and that
    he was on his way home from a Tamil  festival.   In  this  context  she
    referred the panel to the sentencing remarks  at  H4  that  it  was  an
    annual Hindu Ratha Yelva chariot festival.

30. Ms  Iqbal  referred  the  Tribunal  to  paragraph  22  of  the  panel's
    determination where the panel recorded the skeleton argument which  was
    taken from paragraph 75 of Mr Smith's report.  Therefore she  submitted
    looked at cumulatively the panel did not properly assess  the  risk  on
    return to the Appellant.

31. Turning to Article 8, it is submitted that there  was  evidence  before
    the panel that the Appellant's partner was pregnant.  However the panel
    took no proper consideration of her circumstances at  paragraph  30(vi)
    and there were a number of factors which would demonstrate it would  be
    unreasonable for her to expect the Appellant's partner to return to Sri
    Lanka with him.  She submitted there would be a degree of  hardship  to
    relocate to a country that she had no links with, her family resided in
    the UK and that there were significant security concerns identified  in
    what was  a  vulnerable  state  and  those  issues  were  not  properly
    considered and therefore had an impact on the  proportionality  of  the
    decision.  She submitted that the findings of the  panel  was  that  he
    posed a low risk of re-offending but did not appear to be given  weight
    when carrying out the balance of the  issue  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8.

32. Mr Avery on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  the  following
    submissions.  In respect of the asylum  claim  he  submitted  that  the
    argument advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would consider this Appellant having been part of  a  Tamil
    gang therefore would perceive him as being associated with the LTTE and
    therefore treat him with suspicion, was a flimsy argument and  was  not
    supported by the evidence.  He submitted that there were  a  couple  of
    references to it at paragraphs 61 and 75 in the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Smith and the  evidence  on  which  it  was  based  could  properly  be
    described as thin and therefore the  conclusions  of  the  expert  were
    unsustainable.

33. He submitted that apart from the expert citing that he had  involvement
    with the Metropolitan Police which led to  concerning  links  with  the
    LTTE at paragraph 61 that  is  ambiguous  but  nevertheless  it  is  an
    assertion that has no evidence to back it up.  He submitted  that  even
    from a historical perspective, there has been no case law on the  basis
    of an asylum claim based in the way that this  one  had  been  advanced
    even though this is an issue that goes back to the  year  2000  and  in
    those circumstances he submitted that if there was a risk on return  of
    those convicted of offences in the UK of the  type  the  Appellant  was
    involved in that it is likely that a  risk  category  would  have  been
    identified.

34. Mr Avery made reference to the news article from  the  BBC  dated  2007
    making the point that that was prior to the military defeat of the LTTE
    and therefore how relevant that document was to the situation as it was
    today was debatable.  Furthermore in its contents it is ambiguous about
    the involvement of the LTTE.  It referred to quotes from  Mr  Griffiths
    about money being sent back to Sri Lanka however a couple of paragraphs
    later it is plain that that allegation of sending money back was denied
    vehemently.

35. He made reference to the Defence Lanka website and  their  interest  in
    members of gangs.  He said that this was taken from the website in 2014
    however what was relevant was that the most recent  report  related  to
    2007 and 2006 and if that was the case that the Sri Lankan   government
    maintained an interest in gang-related activity, then it is likely that
    there would be more  recent  evidence.   In  the  case  examples  given
    particular incidents  were  described  and  the  court  concerned  made
    reference to them having alleged LTTE interests and therefore it was  a
    speculative assertion by the expert with no  evidence  to  support  it,
    that the Appellant would be perceived as someone supporting the LTTE by
    reference to his conviction.  The dates of the articles do not assist.

36. He submitted that this was a problem that the panel had  identified  in
    the determination and at paragraph [21] quoted from  the  report.   The
    expert does not say when he did work with the Metropolitan  Police  and
    the link is ambiguous.  At paragraph 22 of the determination the  panel
    were not  satisfied  that  the  observations  made  by  Dr  Smith  were
    sufficient to draw the conclusion that there was a reasonable degree of
    likelihood that any Tamil returning to Sri Lanka who had been convicted
    of gang-related activity would be suspected of having links with  Tamil
    activity that is directed at destabilising the Sri  Lankan  state.   Mr
    Avery submitted that that conclusion was open to the panel  and  was  a
    sustainable conclusion to be reached on the evidence before them.   The
    evidence referred to was  speculative.   There  was  no  evidence  that
    people involved in criminal activity who have been returned  have  been
    targeted  upon  return  therefore  there  was  nothing  wrong  in   the
    conclusions of the panel.  In those circumstances the evidence provided
    subsequently would not have  made  any  material  difference  to  their
    conclusions as it does  not  support  the  contention  of  the  expert.
    Therefore the grounds do not make out any error of law as  asserted  in
    them.

37.  As  to  Article  8,  the  grounds  reveal  a  selective  view  of  the
    consideration of the panel.  Whilst it was said that the panel had  not
    taken into account evidence relating to her pregnancy, it is plain from
    the  determination  that  they  accepted  that  she  was  pregnant  and
    therefore that point has no force.

38. The determination  considers  if  (Mr  Avery's  emphasis)  she  was  to
    accompany her partner that there would be no significant  interference.
    The panel did not say that she had to go with him.  The panel  set  out
    the background of the relationship at [6] and the partner had to face a
    difficult choice to go or to stay and she was fully aware at  the  time
    she met him that he was in prison and  therefore  the  panel  carefully
    weighed all the  factors.   In  particular,  the  panel  as  they  were
    entitled to place significant weight upon  the  public  interest  as  a
    result of the circumstances  of  the  conviction.   The  panel,  having
    considered all the factors made a balance and  reached  the  conclusion
    that even if there was a low risk of re-offending, this was  a  serious
    offence and did not lessen the public interest.  Thus he submitted  the
    decision of the panel should be upheld.

39. Ms Iqbal by way of reply submitted that the evidence did demonstrate an
    historic link as the Metropolitan Police were setting up  an  operation
    relating to Tamil gangs and therefore he would be associated with Tamil
    gangs.

40. Dealing with the  news  articles,  the  second  article  from  2007  is
    collated from various countries Defence Lanka is  a  website  from  the
    Ministry of Defence in Sri Lanka this is  the  article  that  Mr  Smith
    refers to in his report when he refers to the website.  It records that
    the Sri Lankan authorities have records.  This was  important  material
    as it shows that the Sri Lankan government is monitoring  the  diaspora
    in different countries including the  United  Kingdom.   Therefore  she
    submitted that  the  panel  had  not  properly  considered  the  expert
    evidence that demonstrated that he would be at risk on return.

41. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

42. The grounds assert that the panel erred in law in its consideration  of
    the background evidence and the expert report of Dr Smith in  assessing
    whether the appellant was at risk on return to Sri  Lanka.   The  issue
    arises from the criminal conviction of this  Appellant  for  kidnapping
    and  violent  disorder  that  has  been  set  out   earlier   in   this
    determination and it is based  on  the  premise  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government viewed Tamil gangs overseas to  be  "LTTE  gangs"  and  thus
    fronts for the LTTE and that he would therefore fall  within  the  risk
    categories identified by the Upper Tribunal  in  the  country  guidance
    decision of GJ and Others (as cited at paragraph (7(a)) which reads  as
    follows:-

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

43. I have set out the oral submissions made by Ms Iqbal in this regard.

44. The panel gave express consideration to the report of Dr Smith and  the
    background evidence including  that  contained  in  GJ  and  Others  at
    paragraph 19 to 22 of the determination when making  an  assessment  of
    risk.  In this context it is important to take into account the panel's
    earlier findings relating to the basis of the asylum claim made by  him
    and the findings set out at 18(i) - (ii).  There  is  no  challenge  to
    those findings.  Whilst the grounds refer to  material  that  was  sent
    post-hearing to the judge and that it is said the panel had  failed  to
    take them into account, paragraph 22 does refer to the extract from the
    Ministry of Defence website which was one of  the  documents  that  was
    sent to the Tribunal after the hearing and  it  is  therefore  arguable
    that the panel did have regard to this material.  However in any event,
    I have considered the material in the general context and the  findings
    made by the panel concerning their consideration of the expert reported
    and the  issue of risk.

45. After setting out the headnote to GJ the panel set out its  conclusions
    at paragraphs [20] - [22].  The panel said this:-


         "20. The appellant's counsel submitted  that  the  crime  that  the
             appellant  had  committed  was  likely  to  be  known  by  the
             authorities upon his return. She submitted that his  crime  is
             associated with Tamil gangs in the  United  Kingdom  and  this
             would lead to an assumption that he  is  associated  with  the
             LTTE. On that basis, she submitted that the appellant would be
             perceived as a threat to the integrity of the unitary state in
             Sri Lanka. In reliance on the country guidance case of GJ  the
             skeleton argument advances the contention that:


                  'When the factors highlighted above are viewed together at
                  the very least, it  is  submitted  that  he  is  generally
                  someone who will be perceived to be  associated  with  the
                  diaspora activities in the  United  Kingdom  at  the  very
                  least as an LTTE supporter or at  the  worst  as  an  LTTE
                  cadre. Given that the government's present objective is to
                  identify Tamil activists in the diaspora who  are  working
                  for Tamil separatism and to destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
                  Lankan state, it is submitted that the appellant would  be
                  at risk on return.'

         21.  In advancing the contention the appellant's  conviction  of  a
             gang related crime is reasonably likely to give  rise  to  the
             perception by the Sri Lankan authorities that he  is  involved
             in LTTE activity in the Diaspora and  that  he  constitutes  a
             threat to the integrity of the unitary state in Sri Lanka, the
             appellant's counsel  relied  in  the  main  on  the  following
             extract at paragraph 60 of the expert report:


                  'The Ministry of Defence website has in the past  reported
                  details  of  Tamil  criminal  activity  in  London.   This
                  indicates that they will monitor  criminal  activities  in
                  the  United  Kingdom  in  relation   to   suspected   LTTE
                  connections. (The expert then makes reference to a  report
                  on the Ministry of Defence website, which states  that  an
                  LTTE  suspect  was  arrested  with  cloned  credit   cards
                  unsuspecting card holders in the United Kingdom  that  the
                  police believed that these would later be  transferred  to
                  the LTTE. The report also states that the  Tamil  Diaspora
                  in the United Kingdom is now tapping into the resources of
                  the British public at large  and  committing  credit  card
                  fraud in order to fund the LTTE.)


                  However, on the basis of my past work for the Metropolitan
                  Police Service on precisely this issue, I can confirm that
                  the links between the LTTE and Tamil credit card fraud  in
                  the United Kingdom is  ambiguous.  Nevertheless,  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities tend to automatically  associate  Tamil
                  criminal activity in the  United  Kingdom  with  LTTE.  As
                  such, the Sri Lankan authorities are likely to be aware of
                  the appellant's conviction, as they have been with others.




                  Although the war is over and has been now for four  years,
                  the conflict between the two sides has not  been  resolved
                  and the Sri Lankan authorities remain concerned  over  the
                  possible resurgence of the LTTE.


                  It will be many, many years before the authorities can  be
                  confident that the LTTE has been defeated and this process
                  will require more than draconian security  measures,  such
                  as the Emergency Regulations and the Prevention of Tourism
                  Act, of which the latter remains undecided.'


         22.  I am not satisfied that these observations  are sufficient  to
             draw the conclusion that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood that any Tamil returning to Sri Lanka, who has been
             convicted of gang  related  activity  would  be  suspected  of
             having  links  with  Tamil  activity  that  is   directed   at
             destabilising  the  Sri  Lankan  state.  I   find   that   the
             authorities and the sources of Dr Smith's conclusions  do  not
             support his opinion. The extract from the Ministry of  Defence
             website does not go so far as to the say that any gang related
             activity is to be  viewed  as  related  to  diaspora  activity
             directed at destabilising the state. More to the point, is the
             fact that the latest country guidance case makes it very clear
             that the Sri Lankan authorities' approach to the risk posed by
             Tamils in the  diaspora  is  sophisticated,  both  as  to  the
             activities within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  The  country
             guidance case makes clear that, the authorities know that many
             Sri Lankan Tamils travel abroad as economic migrants and  that
             everyone  in  the  Northern  Province  would  have  had   some
             involvement with the LTTE and that in post-conflict Sri Lanka;
             an individual's past history will  be  relevant  only  to  the
             extent that it is perceived by the authorities as indicating a
             present  risk  to  the  unitary  state  of  the   Sri   Lankan
             government. In the circumstances of  this  appellant,  he  has
             never had any involvement in the LTTE; his  family  has  never
             had any significant involvement in the LTTE. The appellant has
             not, save perhaps  for  the  period  after  his  release  from
             custody, been involved in anti  Sri  Lankan  activity  in  the
             United Kingdom. The crime for which he was convicted, although
             gang related, involved no more that the gruesome torture of  a
             fellow Sri Lankan for no apparent reason. It is  difficult  to
             understand how, if the Sri Lankan authorities came to know  of
             the circumstances of this offence which it  is  accepted  they
             would,  they  could  reasonably   construe   the   appellant's
             involvement in this offence as justifying the perception  that
             his activity poses any threat to  the  unitary  state  of  Sri
             Lanka. The fact that he would not have an  identity  document,
             and even the fact that he may have some scarring,   would  not
             in our  view, when considered with the evidence as a whole, be
             sufficient to place this appellant at risk."

46. Dr Smith was instructed to deal with  a  number  of  questions  and  in
    particular was asked to consider the likelihood  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would be aware of the Appellant's conviction in  the  light
    of the details accessible on  the  internet.   The  references  in  the
    report that Ms Iqbal has invited the Tribunal to consider are  set  out
    at paragraphs [60], [61] and [75].  It is  these  paragraphs  that  are
    relevant to the issue where it is contended that  the  Appellant  falls
    into the risk category identified in GJ at  paragraphs  (7)(a).   Those
    paragraphs read as follows:-

         "60. The Ministry of Defence  website  has  in  the  past  reported
             details of Tamil criminal activity in London.  This  indicates
             that they will  monitor  criminal  activities  in  the  UK  in
             relation to suspected LTTE connections.  For example,

                  'The suspect Anandan, alias Meshanadan  Muruganandan,  was
                  in a super luxury apartment in Wellawatta at the  time  he
                  was arrested by the special police team, sources said.  He
                  had a large  number  of  personal  identification  numbers
                  (PIN) and bank receipts issued by both local  and  foreign
                  banks,  amounting  to  a  massive  sum  of   money,   over
                  Rs100,000,000, in his possession when he was arrested.  He
                  had  cloned  credit  cards  using  PIN  and  card  numbers
                  obtained from unsuspecting  card  holders  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, a police official said  adding  that  these  were
                  later believed transferred to the  LTTE.   Unlike  in  the
                  past where the LTTE was mainly extracting funds  from  the
                  Tamil diaspora in the UK, it is  now  tapping  in  to  the
                  resources  of  the  British  public  at  large   who   are
                  unknowingly funding the LTTE, he further asserted speaking
                  to the defence LK.'

         61.  However, on the basis of my past work  with  the  Metropolitan
             Police Service on precisely this issue, I can confirm that the
             links between the LTTE and Tamil credit card fraud in  the  UK
             is ambiguous.  Nevertheless the Sri Lankan authorities tend to
             automatically associate criminal activity in the UK  with  the
             LTTE.  As such, the Sri Lankan authorities are  likely  to  be
             aware of the Appellant's conviction, as they  have  been  with
             others."

         .....

         "75. The Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  seem  to  monitor  events
             relating to the diaspora, principally  for  evidence  of  LTTE
             activity,  especially  in  relation  to  resurgents.    Anyone
             convicted of an offence linked to a Tamil gang in the UK  will
             be assumed to be, at the very least, a supporter of  the  LTTE
             and, at worse, an LTTE cadre.  The names relating  to  similar
             convictions have appeared before on  the  MOD  website,  which
             would strongly imply adverse  interest  on  the  part  of  the
             authorities.

47. The panel expressly considered those paragraphs and at [22] reached the
    conclusion  that  the  authorities  and  the  sources  of  Dr   Smith's
    conclusions did not support the opinion and in particular  the  extract
    from the Ministry of Defence website did not go as far as to  say  that
    any "gang related activities to  be  viewed  as  relating  to  diaspora
    activity directed at destabilising the state."   It  was  open  to  the
    panel to reach that conclusion on the evidence  provided  before  them.
    At paragraph 60, Dr Smith made reference to  the  Ministry  of  Defence
    website and reached a conclusion that  it  indicated  that  "they  will
    monitor the criminal activities in the UK in relation to suspected LTTE
    connections".  The report did not provide any source material  and  the
    footnote at 27 referred to a mastermind behind  the  LTTE  credit  card
    fraud who was arrested on 30th December 2010.  That article itself  was
    not provided before the panel  who were not able to view  that  article
    and the context in which it was given.  The extract  from  the  Defence
    Lanka website subsequently provided could not be said to be support for
    the claim that "they will monitor the criminal activities in the UK  as
    there is no recognition in the report of Dr Smith of the fact that  the
    Defence Lanka website has not been modified since  30th  December  2010
    and the incidents that are set out on that website refer  to  2006  and
    2007 thus there is no recent evidence of any monitoring  of  activities
    criminal or otherwise in the UK.  Furthermore, the example mentioned in
    Dr Smith's report at [60] is not referred to on the website or at least
    in the extract provided in support of the Appellant subsequently. As Mr
    Avery submitted,  a  careful  consideration  of  the  contents  of  the
    document provided on behalf of the Appellant, gave  examples  of  those
    who were suspected of LTTE involvement and made specific  reference  to
    such involvement and LTTE links.

48. Dr Smith also cites at [61] his past work for the  Metropolitan  Police
    on this issue and confirms that links between the LTTE and credit  card
    fraud is ambiguous.   Therefore  Dr  Smith  could  not  say  there  was
    evidence of any cogency that gang  related  activity  was  funding  the
    LTTE.  In any event, the gang related activity as the panel set out  in
    the determination was described as "violent behaviour which  could  not
    be said to have anything to do  with  links  to  the  LTTE".   In  this
    context the second Article produced on behalf of the Appellant which is
    a BBC News article from 26th February 2007 also  arguably  provides  no
    evidence to support the belief that credit card fraud in the  UK  funds
    the LTTE.  This is a report entitled "Tamil gangs tackled from  within"
    dated 26th February 2007.  It is a BBC  News  article  relating  to  an
    interview with 26 year old Abyha and describes the confrontation with a
    rival gang at a  wedding  in  2005  in  Ilford  identifying  those  who
    attacked the complainant as members of a Tamil gang.  The article  goes
    on to say "since 2000 Tamil gangs in London have been involved in  many
    gory confrontations, which have resulted in  ten  deaths  spurring  the
    Metropolitan police to set up a special task force, Operation Enver  to
    tackle gang related incidents."   The  article  names  Chief  Inspector
    Griffiths involved with the task force and identified five main  Tamils
    gangs in London namely East Ham and Walthamstow,  Wembley,  Merton  and
    Croydon and East Ham being the biggest with 30 members.  This refers to
    the CCTV driving gangs into hiding and refers to a relatively quiet two
    years.  Under the hearing "funding rebel struggle" it  is  stated  that
    most of the violence resulted  in  inter  gang  rivalries  and  revenge
    attacks stemming from territorial control and historically involved  in
    credit card fraud and extortion from local businesses.  It is  recorded
    that Mr Griffith added "and the money is sent to Sri Lanka to fund  the
    struggle by the Tamil Tiger rebels.  There is a photo with the  caption
    underneath stating 'Mr Griffiths believed the money extorted  by  gangs
    is laundered to Sri Lanka'".

49. It is asserted that the panel did not take this into account and it was
    material evidence in support of Dr Smith's conclusions.   However,  the
    panel's view of the evidence at [22] was that the expert report  of  Dr
    Smith did not support the view that any gang related activity was to be
    viewed as related to diaspora activity and whilst Dr Smith's opinion is
    that the Sri Lankan authorities associate criminal activity in  the  UK
    with the LTTE, no reason is given from  the  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion.  The evidence from the website that  has  subsequently  been
    produced could not properly be said to support this assertion.  As  can
    be seen by the date of the article the most  recent  example  was  2007
    which was before the military defeat of the LTTE.  As to "funding rebel
    struggles" the evidence contained in it comes  from  a  quote  from  Mr
    Griffiths and the caption underneath his photograph in which it is said
    he "believes the money extorted by gangs is  laundered  in  Sri  Lanka"
    gives no reference for the source material for this belief and this  is
    no doubt why Dr Smith refers to the evidence in support as "ambiguous".
     The article  further  makes  it  clear  that  it  was  repeatedly  and
    vehemently denied by community leaders that this was the case and cited
    a councillor in Newham that  the  behaviour  had  been  "damaging  race
    relations and spoiling the image of the community,  but  it  is  mostly
    territorial confrontation with the boys.  They have nothing to do  with
    the fighting in Sri Lanka".  Furthermore as Mr Avery pointed  out,  the
    article refers to this being a problem since the year 2000 but  from  a
    historical perspective no case has been advanced on behalf of an asylum
    claim or a deportation claim where this has been an issue.  The article
    refers to deportation  and  24  names  having  been  submitted  to  the
    Secretary of State.

50. At [75] the opinion of Dr  Smith  was  that  "anyone  convicted  of  an
    offence linked to a Tamil gang in the UK will assume to be, at the very
    least a supporter of the LTTE and,  at  worst  an  LTTE  cadre".   This
    relies on the claim that "the name relating to similar convictions that
    appeared before on the MOD website which would strongly  imply  adverse
    interests on the part of the authorities."  As such Dr Smith  does  not
    identify any article on the MOD website (and I presume he refers to the
    Defence Lanka website extract that was produced post-hearing) and there
    was no footnote source that accompanies paragraph 75.  As can  be  seen
    above, the most recent report relates to 2007.  Thus I consider it  was
    open to the panel to reach the conclusion at [22] that the  sources  to
    Dr Smith's conclusions did not support his opinion.

51. Furthermore, Dr Smith took as a starting point that this  Appellant  or
    anyone convicted of  an  offence  linked  to  a  Tamil  gang  would  be
    perceived as linked to the LTTE and in this context  Ms  Iqbal  submits
    that the circumstances of the Appellant's offence lent support to  this
    because it occurred following an altercation after a  Tamil  event  and
    the panel did not take this into account when reaching its  conclusions
    at [22].  I do not find  that  that  is  demonstrated  by  the  panel's
    consideration or supported by the evidence before the Tribunal  itself.
    The panel had before it articles from the internet taken from the press
    coverage at the time of the Appellant's conviction.  Page 134 describes
    the victim or complainant of the event on his way home from a  festival
    in Wembley.  It does not characterise  this  as  a  Tamil  festival  or
    event.  At page 136 it was referred to as a "chariot  festival".   Only
    the sentencing remarks from the transcript which would not be available
    to the Sri Lankan authorities refer  to  it  as  a  Hindu  Ratha  Yatra
    Chariot festival and there is no reference to this being in the context
    of a Tamil festival or an LTTE event anywhere or any reference to  fund
    raising could possibly be said to be inferred from that.

52. As to the circumstances of the offence it was open  for  the  panel  to
    find at [22] that the crime for which he was convicted,  although  gang
    related, involved no more than the "gruesome torture of  a  fellow  Sri
    Lankan for no apparent reason" and that if the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    did get to know about his conviction they could not reasonably construe
    the Appellant's involvement in the offence as to justify the perception
    that his activity posed any threat to the unitary state of  Sri  Lanka.
    Consequently it was open to the panel  to  reach  the  conclusion  that
    notwithstanding the lack of an identification document and the presence
    of scarring, they found that he would not be at risk on return  to  Sri
    Lanka.

53. I am satisfied that was a conclusion that  was  entirely  open  to  the
    panel to reach on the evidence before  them.   The  sentencing  remarks
    themselves and also the press coverage refers to  the  complainant  and
    the Appellant and his associates having seen each other  prior  to  the
    assault and also refers to others who were not  of  Sri  Lankan  origin
    being involved [see H6  of  the  bundle]  and  whilst  the  judge  made
    reference to them as acting as a  gang  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    Appellant was part of an identifiable Tamil gang as identified  in  the
    Sri Lanka website.  Furthermore, there was nothing in  the  reports  of
    the Appellant's conviction that make reference to  money,  credit  card
    fraud or extortion and as the panel properly characterised  it  it  was
    "no more than mindless and serious violence".

54. I consider the point made by Mr Avery has force that if it is the  case
    that this had been an identified problem since the year 2000,  that  it
    has not been advanced in any previous case  of  deportation  or  asylum
    that a conviction would lead to  such  perception  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in the last fourteen years and there was no evidence placed
    before the panel that any returnees involved in criminal  activity  had
    been targeted upon return by reason of such a  perception  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  The panel  therefore  properly  characterised  the
    report's contents in respect of this question as  speculative  and  not
    based on any cogent evidence.

55. I therefore find that the panel were entitled to reach  the  conclusion
    that they did at [21] and [22] and that their  conclusions  are  firmly
    evidence based and are sustainable findings.  The Appellant  had  never
    had any significant involvement with the LTTE, and his crime,  although
    gang related could not be said to have been in the category of a  crime
    that was related to any monetary extortion but was a crime of violence.
     Whilst the grounds challenge to some extent the panel's  finding  that
    he had not taken part in any activities  in  the  UK,  the  finding  at
    18[iii] of the panel was that whilst the Appellant had claimed  he  had
    been involved in demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  did  not
    provide any cogent evidence in this regard.  As the panel noted in  any
    event, such involvement would only have been after  August  2013  after
    his release  and  they  were  prepared  to  accept  that  he  may  have
    participated in some anti-Sri Lankan demonstrations since  his  release
    in  custody  however  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  panel   to
    demonstrate that his attendance at such demonstrations would  be  known
    to the authorities.

56. The panel made the point at [22] relying on the country  guidance  case
    of GJ that the Sri Lankan authorities approach to  the  risk  posed  by
    Tamils in the diaspora is sophisticated,  both  as  to  the  activities
    within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  That is supported  by  paragraph
    354 in GJ.  That country guidance decision identified the categories of
    person at risk on return to Sri  Lanka  at  sub-paragraph  [7]  of  the
    guidance.  The thrust of the guidance set out in GJ was that there  had
    been a significant change in the approach of the Sri Lankan authorities
    since 2007 and the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities was  focussed
    on the present diaspora  activities  and  in  particular,  attempts  to
    revive and or refinance the separatist conflict in Sri Lanka,  together
    with persons in specific categories.  It was open to the panel to reach
    the conclusion that on the findings of fact made,  that  the  Appellant
    could not reasonably be considered, even in the present climate,  as  a
    potential source of finance for those wishing to revive  the  conflict.
    As GJ set out at  paragraph  356  that  the  question  of  whether  the
    authorities regard an individual of interest "will  be  a  question  of
    fact in each case dependent on any diaspora activities carried  out  by
    such an individual".  That was what the panel did consider in  relation
    to this Appellant and I do  not  consider  that  the  grounds  in  this
    respect are made out.

57. Turning to Article 8, the grounds advanced on behalf of  the  Appellant
    submit that the panel did not  properly  consider  the  proportionality
    balance under Article 8 and in particular, failed to give weight  to  a
    number of  factors  in  which  it  is  said  demonstrate  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant's partner to relocate with him  to
    Sri Lanka.

58. I have considered with care the submissions made in this regard  but  I
    find that this ground has  no  merit.   As  set  out  earlier  in  this
    determination the panel set out the relevant law under  paragraph  398,
    399 and 399A noting that it was not contended behalf of  the  Appellant
    that he could meet the Rules  (see  [25]).   They  cited  the  relevant
    authorities at [24] - [29] including MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,
    R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWCH 720 (Admin), Razgar  and  Maslov  and  the
    criteria in Uner.  Their assessment of proportionality is  set  out  at
    paragraphs 30(i) - (vi), [31], [32].  They have been set  out  in  full
    earlier in the determination.

59. In my judgment they demonstrate  that  the  panel  had  regard  to  the
    material  considerations  and  factors  when  carrying  out  the  wider
    weighing process under proportionality.  Such  considerations  included
    his relationship with his current partner.  Whilst the grounds refer to
    the panel being in error concerning  evidence  of  pregnancy,  that  is
    wholly immaterial as the panel proceeded on  the  basis  that  she  was
    indeed pregnant.  However, whilst they accepted that and also that  she
    was in a genuine relationship with the Appellant, they did not find  it
    unreasonable to expect her to return with him to  Sri  Lanka.   It  was
    entirely open to the panel to take into account and place weight on the
    fact that both she and the Appellant were fully aware when embarking on
    their  relationship  that  he  was  facing  deportation  and  that  any
    relationship that they would form would be against such a backdrop.  As
    the panel noted, she met the Appellant when he was  in  prison  on  day
    release and the panel expressly rejected her evidence that they had not
    discussed what would happen if he were to be deported to Sri Lanka (see
    paragraph [30(iv)]).  The panel also found that this was  a  relatively
    recent relationship, they had never cohabited and thus family life  was
    characterised as "tenuous".  Contrary to the  grounds,  the  panel  was
    stating that she was not required to go to Sri Lanka but  that  it  was
    open to her by choice to join him in Sri Lanka or remain in the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst Ms Iqbal states that no consideration was given to the
    circumstances that she would face in Sri Lanka, it is  plain  from  the
    findings of fact made that the Appellant's mother was resident  in  Sri
    Lanka and the panel  found  that  she  was  "in  a  relatively  stable,
    financial position in Sri Lanka" and would be able to accommodate  both
    the Appellant and his partner, if indeed she did accompany him there.

60. Contrary to the grounds,  the  panel  did  take  into  account  in  the
    balancing exercise the Appellant's rehabilitation  at  [30(i)  -  (ii)]
    where they expressly took into account that  he  had  made  significant
    progress on his path to rehabilitation, namely  that  he  was  able  to
    complete a degree in accountancy and had been accepted  for  a  masters
    degree at the LSE and that the risk of reconviction was  low.   However
    they gave regard and weight to the public interest considerations which
    they set out at  [32]  and  the  public  policy  of  deporting  foreign
    criminals and the  importance  of  that  object.   The  panel  properly
    directed themselves to this at [32] to the weight of the object in  the
    light of the criminality of the Appellant which they found to be a very
    serious offence at "the upper end  of  the  range  of  seriousness  for
    offences involving violence", this having been a sentence passed  under
    the provisions of the Criminal  Justice  Act  2003  for  an  indefinite
    sentence of imprisonment and the  panel  also  took  into  account  the
    aggravating circumstances.  Thus in my judgment  it  was  open  to  the
    panel to reach the conclusion on the facts that were before them and on
    balancing the factors in favour of the  Appellant  that  they  did  not
    outweigh "the compelling public interest factors"  identified  in  this
    appeal.  For those reasons, the decision of the panel was a sustainable
    one and it could not be said that the proportionality balance  did  not
    take into account the material factors as set out in the grounds.

Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  panel  does  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  The decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


