

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00590/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision and Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 12 January 2016                       |             On 20 January 2016       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR JAVAD CHAUDHURI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms King, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made. I
have however referred to the Respondent's children by initials to protect
their identity.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Secretary of State  appeals  against  a
       decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 17  April
       2015 ("the Decision") allowing the Appellant's  appeal  against  the
       Secretary of State's decision dated 31 March 2014 that section 32 UK
       Borders Act 2007 applies and making a deportation order against  him
       dated 27 March 2014.


    2. The Appellant who is a national of Bangladesh arrived in the UK with
       his mother, father and siblings originally in 1974 aged eight years.
        The Appellant says that he arrived as a dependent on  his  father's
       investor visa.  The Judge in the Decision says that  he  came  as  a
       visitor.  Whatever the  position  at  the  outset,  he  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain on 15 November 1983.   Between  1985  and
       2007,  the  Appellant  received  ten  convictions   for   twenty-six
       offences.  Those offences ranged from driving under the influence of
       alcohol and without insurance  to  offences  of  violence  including
       attempting to wound with intent and threats to  kill.   On  13  June
       2013, the Appellant was convicted of  two  counts  of  theft  by  an
       employee.  Those latest convictions concerned offences of  deception
       namely the theft of deposits for the  letting  of  property  by  the
       Appellant in his position as the owner of his own  property  letting
       agency.  He was sentenced to two concurrent terms of sixteen months.
        He pleaded guilty to those  offences  and  sought  to  mitigate  by
       saying that he had intended to repay the  money  but  had  not  been
       given time to  do  so  by  the  victims.    It  is  clear  from  the
       sentencing  Judge's  remarks  that  he  was   unimpressed   by   the
       Appellant's explanation.  The Appellant  relies  in  evidence  on  a
       report of a  Thinking  Skills  Programme  which  the  Judge  in  the
       Decision said showed that the Appellant had addressed  some  of  the
       issue of his prior offending but also accepted showed that at  times
       the Appellant provided "textbook answers" to  scenarios  which  cast
       some doubt  on  whether  he  displayed  a  real  insight  into  that
       offending.


    3. The Appellant is in a relationship with Ms R J, a relationship which
       he entered into  in  1993.   They  were  not  at  the  date  of  the
       Respondent's decision married as both the Appellant  and  Ms  J  had
       been married before  and  their  previous  marriages  had  not  been
       dissolved.  Since they did not live together,  the  Respondent  took
       issue with whether that relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting.
       The Appellant and  Ms  J  married  on  16  January  2015  and  their
       relationship  was  accepted  by  the  Judge  as  being  genuine  and
       subsisting.  That finding is  not  challenged.  Ms  J's  family  was
       originally from Pakistan but settled in Tanzania.  She was  born  in
       the UK in 1969 and lived for a time in Tanzania but came to  the  UK
       in 1976 with her family and settled here.  She has a  son  from  her
       previous marriage who is aged twenty-three and is now at  university
       but continues to live with her. The Appellant does not live with his
       wife because she looks after her mother and he looks after and lives
       with his elderly mother.  He stays over some nights  with  his  wife
       and children but the evidence is that  he  maintains  daily  contact
       with his wife and children even when he  is  not  staying  at  their
       home.


    4. The Appellant's previous marriage produced two children who remained
       with their mother and are now adults.  The Appellant has  maintained
       contact with them.  The Appellant and Ms J have  two  children  from
       their relationship, FC who is now aged thirteen years and JC who  is
       now aged eight  years.   They  were  aged  twelve  and  seven  years
       respectively at the date of the Decision.

    5. The Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights  grounds,
       finding that the effect of deportation of  the  Appellant  would  be
       unduly harsh for his minor children (but  not  his  wife)  and  that
       there were very significant obstacles to the Appellant reintegrating
       in Bangladesh.  Accordingly the Appellant succeeded under paragraphs
       399(a) and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

    6. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Frankish in a decision dated 13 May 2015 on the following basis:-
           "Aside from absences through custodial sentences, the  appellant
           is an absentee father of a 7 and a 12 year old.   Arguably,  the
           consequences of separation after 26 offences in addition to  the
           present theft from employer offences lacks the balance  required
           by AJ"


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Judge made an error
       of law in the Decision.


    Grounds of appeal and submissions


    8. The Respondent challenges the Decision on three grounds.  Ground one
       submits  that  the  Judge  failed  to   properly   apply   paragraph
       399(a)(ii)(a) of the Immigration Rules when considering  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh for the minor children to live  in  Bangladesh
       with the Appellant and his wife.  Ground two submits that the  Judge
       has  failed  to  properly   apply   paragraph   399(a)(ii)(b)   when
       considering whether it would be unduly harsh for the minor  children
       to remain in the UK with the Appellant's wife if he were deported to
       Bangladesh.  Ground three submits that the Judge failed  to  provide
       adequate reasons for  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
       requirements  of  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  when
       considering whether there would be very significant obstacles to the
       Appellant's reintegration in Bangladesh.


    9. The Respondent relies  in  her  written  grounds  on  the  cases  of
       Secretary of State v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 in relation to
       grounds one and two. At the hearing, Mr Melvin referred additionally
       to the cases of Secretary of State  v  KMO  (section  117  -  unduly
       harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC), Secretary  of  State  v  MAB
       (paragraph 399; "unduly harsh") USA  [2015]  UKUT  00435  (IAC)  and
       Secretary of State v AB  (para  399(a))  Algeria   [2015]  UKUT  657
       (IAC).  Mr Melvin  naturally  relied  on  KMO  in  relation  to  the
       conflicting decisions of that and MAB but for reasons I explain when
       I come to my decision below, I do not need to resolve that  conflict
       in this case.  Mr Melvin submitted that the Judge failed to  explain
       her reasons for the findings in relation to why the  effect  of  the
       Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on  the  children  and
       why  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
       reintegration in Bangladesh.

   10. Mr Melvin argued that the Judge had failed to have proper regard  to
       the public interest.  There was what he described  as  a  "throwaway
       paragraph" considering  section  117  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117") at [52]  of  the  Decision  but  the
       Judge had, he said, completely failed to have regard  to  the  wider
       public interest as regards  for  example  the  deterrent  effect  of
       deportation.  He pointed out that the children in KMO were similarly
       British citizens and the sentence in that case was  similar  to  the
       index offence here.  In that case, the Judge noted the  considerable
       public interest in deportation.  He accepted the tragic consequences
       of deportation but pointed out as Sedley LJ said in Lee [2011]  EWCA
       Civ 348 that this was the natural consequence  of  deportation.   Mr
       Melvin accepted that much of the Appellant's offending occurred when
       he was younger but some offences  were  committed  when  he  was  no
       longer a youth.   A proper  consideration  of  the  public  interest
       reveals he said that the findings made by the Judge in the  Decision
       were not open to her.

   11. Mr Melvin also pointed to the Judge's recitation of the headnote  in
       Ogundimo (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013] UKUT  00060  at  [36].   He
       submitted that, since that was a case considering the Rules as  they
       existed prior to 28 July 2014, this amounted to a mis-direction.  He
       referred in that regard to what was said in AB.

   12. Mr Melvin submitted that  it  was  clear  from  the  Decision  that,
       although the Judge set out the correct version  of  the  Rules,  she
       failed to make adequate findings in relation to whether  the  effect
       of deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  or  that  there  were  very
       significant  obstacles   to   the   Appellant's   reintegration   in
       Bangladesh.  He submitted in relation to the former that, as KMO and
       MAB  both make clear the threshold for what would be unduly harsh is
       a very high one involving consequences which would  be  "severe"  or
       "bleak".  There is nothing which discloses such consequences in this
       case.  Indeed, the  Appellant  does  not  live  with  his  wife  and
       children on a permanent basis.  He noted that  the  Judge  found  at
       [48] that it would be in the best interests of the children for them
       to remain in the UK with both parents but that should not be the end
       of the consideration.  He submitted that the Judge appeared to  have
       substituted a reasonableness test for the unduly  harsh  test  which
       applies.    In  relation  to  paragraph  399A,  there  are  no  very
       significant obstacles to the Appellant's return and  the  Judge  was
       wrong to decide that there are.  The Appellant does not require  the
       support of family as he is an adult.  He has no health issues.


   13. Ms King relied on the Appellant's Rule 24 statement.   She  accepted
       that [10] of that statement where it was said that the  Judge  found
       that "the  children's  health,  welfare  and  development  would  be
       seriously impaired if the Appellant were to be deported"  overstates
       the  Judge's  findings.   However,  she  submitted  that  the  Judge
       properly directed herself and her findings were open  to  her.   She
       submitted that the grounds were no more than a disagreement with the
       conclusions which the Judge reached.

   14. She argued that Mr Melvin's submissions in relation to consideration
       of the public interest were an impermissible attempt  to  expand  on
       the Respondent's grounds.  I pointed out that consideration  of  the
       public interest, if KMO  is rightly decided, would form part  of  my
       analysis whether the Judge properly considered if deportation  would
       have an unduly harsh effect on the children.  Ms  King  very  fairly
       submitted that  KMO  was  rightly  decided  as  she  considered  the
       analysis in that case to be correct. She submitted however that  the
       Judge did properly  consider  the  public  interest  throughout  the
       Decision.  She referred me to the references to case law at [34]  to
       [39] particularly the reference to McLarty at [34].   She  submitted
       that the Judge properly considered the facts  and  circumstances  of
       the Appellant's offending at [42] and [43]  of  the  Decision.   The
       analysis of the future risk posed  by  the  Appellant  was  properly
       considered at [43] which paragraph also referred to the  Appellant's
       pattern of previous offending.  The Judge made findings in  relation
       to that offending history at [48].  Ms King fairly accepted that the
       Judge did not explicitly refer herself to the  deterrent  impact  of
       deportation but she did consider the wider impact of the Appellant's
       offending.   Although  the  balancing  of  the  public  interest  by
       reference to section 117 comes at  the  end  of  the  Decision,  she
       submitted it was clear that the Judge considered this properly.


   15. In relation to the factors taken into account in  the  consideration
       of whether the effect of  deportation  was  unduly  harsh,  Ms  King
       referred me  to  the  section  of  the  Decision  dealing  with  the
       evidence.  She fairly accepted in response to  a  question  from  me
       that the Judge did not refer  to  what  she  considered  to  be  the
       threshold for what would be unduly harsh but she said that this  was
       not necessary.  Even if this amounted to an error of law, it was not
       a material one.  The factors to which  the  Judge  gave  weight  are
       those set out at [50] of the Decision but those factors  had  to  be
       read with the account of the evidence which the Judge received. As I
       note above, Ms King accepted that  KMO  was  correctly  decided  but
       submitted that the Judge in fact took the Appellant's offending into
       account at [48] before  reaching  her  conclusions  under  paragraph
       399(a) at [50].

   16. In relation to whether there are very significant obstacles  to  the
       Appellant's  reintegration  in  Bangladesh,  she   submitted   that,
       although the Respondent took issue  with  the  Judge's  findings  in
       relation to the Appellant's  employment  history,  there  was  ample
       evidence  of  his  social  and  cultural  integration  in  the   UK,
       particularly in light of the age the Appellant  was  when  he  first
       came to the UK.  Particularly given his  young  age  at  that  time,
       there was no error by the Judge in her findings that  the  Appellant
       lacks any identification with Bangladesh.  He  has  no  family  ties
       there.  Although he may receive support from family in the UK,  that
       would be financial and would not be sufficient to overcome the  very
       significant obstacles.  I pointed out to Ms King that at [51]  where
       the Judge considers the Appellant's reintegration in Bangladesh, the
       Judge refers only to "significant  obstacles".   Ms  King  submitted
       that there was no error - this is a matter of legal semantics.   The
       Judge set out the relevant Rules at [28] to [31] of the Decision and
       was clearly aware of the appropriate test.

   17. In relation to the Respondent's reliance on  AJ  (Angola)   Ms  King
       pointed to the fact that both cases referred  to  in  that  judgment
       were cases where the criminal  sentences  exceeded  four  years  and
       therefore the Court of Appeal was there  considering  whether  there
       were exceptional circumstances over and above  those  in  paragraphs
       399 and 399A.  As such, she submitted that the case had  no  bearing
       on the present appeal.  In relation  to  the  Judge's  reference  to
       Ogundimu she submitted that it was clear that the Judge  had  regard
       to the right Rules and there was nothing to suggest that  the  Judge
       erred by considering the wrong  set  of  Rules  or  had  misdirected
       herself by reference to that case.


    Decision and Reasons


    Very Significant Obstacles to reintegration


   18. I start by considering the  Judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the
       Appellant's case under paragraph 399A.  Obviously, if the Judge  has
       not erred in law in relation to whether the  Appellant  can  himself
       return to Bangladesh, there is no need for me to go on  to  consider
       whether his deportation would be unduly harsh for his children.


   19. The evidence and submissions before the Judge are set out at [9]  to
       [26] of the Decision.  The reasoning of the Judge in relation to the
       Appellant's case under paragraph 399A is at  [51]  of  the  Decision
       which I set out in full below:-
           "I have  also  considered  whether  the  Appellant  fulfils  the
           requirements of Paragraph 399A of the  Immigration  Rules.   The
           Appellant arrived in the UK when he was 8  years  old.   He  has
           spent little time in Bangladesh since then and states that he no
           longer speaks Bengali.  The Appellant said that he had no family
           in Bangladesh.  It is very difficult to verify this one  way  or
           the other but the Appellant does have a number of family members
           in the UK including his mother.  The Appellant has lived in  the
           UK for over 38 years.  He has gained  skills  in  the  UK  which
           would assist him in Bangladesh.  I find it hard to believe  that
           the Appellant speaks no Bengali at all given that he was 8  when
           he arrived and this would have been his first  language  and  it
           seems likely that his mother would  have  continued  using  this
           language to some extent even  if  only  in  the  home.   I  find
           therefore that it is  likely  that  the  Appellant  speaks  some
           Bengali even though I accept that he  is  likely  to  feel  more
           comfortable speaking English and this is likely to be his  first
           language now given that his partner does not speak  Bengali  and
           his  children  are  unlikely  to  speak  Bengali  either.    The
           Appellant has very few ties  to  Bangladesh.   He  has  numerous
           family members in the UK who  provided  witness  statements  and
           attended the hearing.  He clearly has a good support network  in
           the UK and they may be able to provide some support to him if he
           is deported to Bangladesh but this would be likely to be  mainly
           financial  and  will  not  assist  in  the  inevitable  cultural
           reintegration that the Appellant would have  to  undergo  if  he
           were deported to Bangladesh.  The Appellant has spent many years
           in the UK and it is inevitable that he would consider himself to
           be British now rather than  Bangladeshi.   This  mind  set  will
           cause some problems to the Appellant in itself  but  it  is  the
           Appellant's lack of identification with  Bangladesh  which  will
           cause problems if he  is  deported.   The  Appellant  has  lived
           lawfully in the UK for well in excess of 20  years  and  I  find
           that he is socially and culturally integrated into UK  life.   I
           further find that there will be  significant  obstacles  in  the
           Appellant reintegrating into life in Bangladesh given  his  lack
           of  family  and  the  length  of  time  he  has  spent   outside
           Bangladesh"


   20.  The Appellant  meets  paragraph  399A  so  far  as  his  length  of
       residence in the UK is concerned.  He has lived here for most of his
       life.  That though is but one factor to be considered when assessing
       whether the Appellant can be deported.  I accept also in  this  case
       that the Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK
       due to  his  length  of  residence,  family  ties,  friendships  and
       employment in the UK.   The crux of this case however is whether the
       Judge erred in finding that there were very significant obstacles to
       the Appellant's reintegration in Bangladesh.


   21. The Judge sets out the correct version of the relevant Rule at [31].
        Although the Judge has referred at [36] to the headnote of Ogundimo
       which includes the "no ties" test and there  are  some  comments  in
       [51] which might suggest that the Judge had that "old" test in mind,
       overall I am satisfied that the Judge did have the new Rule in mind.
       However, I am satisfied that in applying that test,  the  Judge  has
       lost sight of the level of interference which is  required  for  the
       Appellant to satisfy the  test  under  paragraph  399A.   The  Judge
       refers at [51] only to  "significant"  and  not  "very  significant"
       obstacles.  If it were clear from the context of that  finding  that
       there were indeed very significant obstacles, then I would accept Ms
       King's  submission  that  this  is  merely  an  exercise  in   legal
       semantics.  However, in this case there  is  no  reflection  of  the
       level of that test in the surrounding findings.  The  Judge  accepts
       that the Appellant can speak the language  of  his  native  country,
       albeit he may no longer view this as  his  first  language.   It  is
       clear that since he is socially and culturally integrated in the  UK
       he will identify himself as British and not Bangladeshi.   The Judge
       says that the Appellant will have "problems" because of his lack  of
       identification with Bangladesh but "problems"  do  not  equate  with
       "very significant obstacles". The Judge  expressly  finds  that  the
       Appellant has skills which  he  could  put  to  use  in  Bangladesh.
       Although all his family are in the UK and he says he has  no  family
       in Bangladesh (although it is not  entirely  clear  that  the  Judge
       accepted  that)  that  could  not  without  more  amount   to   very
       significant obstacles for a man approaching fifty years old.  He has
       been resident in the UK for a significant period but that is already
       reflected in paragraph 399A(a).   I note also that the Appellant has
       returned to Bangladesh albeit some ten years ago for  a  visit  (see
       [11])  which  finding  does  not  find  its  way  into  the  Judge's
       consideration.


   22. It is of course a matter for the Judge to  assess  on  the  evidence
       whether there are very significant obstacles and it  is  only  where
       there has been some misdirection or inadequacy of reasoning  that  I
       should interfere with her finding that there are.  However, in  this
       case, I am quite unable to ascertain from [51] of the Decision  what
       the Judge identifies as very significant obstacles  or  whether  she
       did indeed consider that those obstacles had to be very  significant
       and not merely significant.

    Unduly harsh effect of deportation


   23.  I turn then to the Judge's reasoning in  relation  to  whether  the
       effect of deportation on the Appellant's children  would  be  unduly
       harsh (the Judge accepted at [44] and [45] that the effect would not
       be unduly harsh on the Appellant's wife).  In  relation  to  whether
       the effect would be unduly harsh if the children were to  return  to
       Bangladesh with him,  the Judge deals with that at [49] as follows:-
           "The Appellant's younger  children  are  7  and  12  years  old.
           Whilst it would be easier for the  Appellant's  7  year  old  to
           adapt to life in Bangladesh there  would  still  be  significant
           difficulties given that the Appellant has not lived there  since
           he was 8 years old and the Appellant's partner has no connection
           with Bangladesh.   It is likely  that  they  would  struggle  in
           establishing themselves in Bangladesh and  this  would  have  an
           inevitable adverse impact on the 7 year old.  This would also be
           the case for the 12 year old but there  would  be  added  issues
           with regard to the fact that he has now been in the UK education
           for 7 years and has established his own life in the UK including
           forming friendships and networks outside the family.  It was not
           suggested that either child spoke Bengali and whilst they  could
           learn this language it would take some time and  would  have  an
           adverse impact on their education  in  Bangladesh.   They  would
           also be leaving all their relationships in the UK and would lose
           the benefits given to them by British nationality including free
           education and free healthcare.  I find that it would  be  unduly
           harsh for  the  Appellant's  younger  children  to  relocate  to
           Bangladesh to live with the Appellant if he were  deported  from
           the UK."


   24. In relation to whether it would be unduly harsh for the  Appellant's
       children to remain in the UK without him, that is dealt with at [50]
       as follows:-
           "I therefore consider whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the
           children to remain in the UK without the Appellant.  They have a
           strong relationship with their  mother  who  provides  for  them
           emotionally and financially.  However they also  have  a  strong
           relationship with the Appellant who has always been  a  constant
           figure in their lives and who has continued to have contact with
           them during his time in prison.  The Appellant's 12 year old  is
           particularly aware of all the circumstances and recognises  that
           he may lose his father in terms  of  having  a  normal  everyday
           parental  relationship  with  him.   The  Appellant's  partner's
           evidence was that the 12 year old had been particularly affected
           and had withdrawn into himself.  It is likely that this would be
           exacerbated if the Appellant were deported  from  the  UK.   The
           Appellant's 12 year old is at a particularly pivotal time in his
           life when he is becoming a teenager and is in need  of  parental
           guidance from both parents.  A relationship with his father will
           be of particular importance to a male child at this stage in his
           life where that relationship is a good relationship and there is
           no evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  it  is  not  a  good
           relationship.  I find that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
           Appellant's children to remain in the UK without the Appellant."


   25. I asked Ms King in the course of her submissions  to  direct  me  to
       where the Judge had considered what the threshold of "unduly  harsh"
       entails.  She accepted that the Judge  has  not  set  this  out.   I
       accept of course that the decisions in MAB  and  KMO  post-date  the
       Decision.  However, if the test is not expressed in terms, it  ought
       to be clear on what factors the Judge has based her conclusions that
       the effect on the children would be unduly harsh.


   26. Assuming for the moment that MAB is rightly decided and the issue is
       therefore one of threshold, I accept that there is (just) sufficient
       reasoning to make out the conclusion at [49] that it would be unduly
       harsh to expect  the  Appellant's   children  to  accompany  him  to
       Bangladesh if he is deported.  The fact that the Appellant's wife is
       not from Bangladesh and that the Appellant  left  Bangladesh  at  an
       early age would lead to significant  difficulties  in  the  children
       establishing themselves in a country they have never visited.   They
       do not speak the language. Their education would be disrupted.   The
       twelve year  old  in  particular  is  at  a  crucial  point  in  his
       education.  Those factors are taken into account by the Judge.   She
       was entitled to do so.  If the question is one of threshold and  not
       proportionality, the Judge's reasoning is adequate and  there  would
       be no error of law.


   27. In relation to whether it would be unduly harsh for the children  to
       remain in the UK with the Appellant's wife were he  to  be  deported
       though, I am satisfied that the Judge's conclusion is in error.   As
       noted  in  MAB,  if  the  issue  is  one  of  threshold  alone   the
       consequences must be "inordinately"  or  "excessively"  "severe"  or
       "bleak".  Whilst I do not downplay the  impact  of  the  Appellant's
       deportation on the minor children, particularly the twelve year  old
       who was affected by his father's imprisonment, I am quite unable  to
       discern on what factors the Judge based her  conclusion.   The  fact
       that the children may lose daily contact with their father (who does
       not presently live with them permanently and does not see them every
       day),  that  the  twelve  year  old  in  particular  will  lose  the
       opportunity to do things with his father and that a "good"  or  even
       "strong" relationship between the Appellant and his children will be
       disrupted cannot  on  any  view  be  described  as  inordinately  or
       excessively severe or bleak in terms of  the  consequences  for  the
       Appellant or his children. The evidence as  to  the  impact  on  the
       twelve year old child who was affected by his father's  imprisonment
       is that  he  became  withdrawn.   That  evidence  is  based  on  the
       Appellant's partner's evidence and a short letter  from  the  child.
       There is no independent evidence relied on from,  for  example,  the
       child's teachers or a social worker; nor is there any evidence  that
       his health was affected.  I am quite unable to accept the  assertion
       made in the Appellant's Rule 24 statement that the Judge found  that
       the children's health, welfare and development  would  be  seriously
       impaired (and as I have already noted, Ms King did not invite me  to
       do so).


   28. Although I have  based  my  decision  on  MAB,  I  agree  with  both
       representatives that KMO is the more persuasive authority.   If  the
       test in that case is applied, the error made by the  Judge  is  even
       starker and her conclusions in  relation  to  whether  it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the children  to  return  to  Bangladesh  with  the
       Appellant are also then legally unsustainable.  Although section 117
       is set out at [32] and [33] and the Judge says that she  has  regard
       to those considerations at [52], her reasoning there is superficial.
        She starts by giving the Appellant credit  for  the  fact  that  he
       speaks English and is financially independent (via support from  his
       family). That is itself legally unsustainable following  AM  (S117B)
       Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  although  such  error  might  not  be
       material if there were not other errors.  Although she  goes  on  to
       say that she recognises the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting
       foreign criminals, she does not consider  the  deterrent  effect  of
       deportation.  I accept Ms  King's  submission  that  the  Judge  has
       considered within [43] the risk posed by the Appellant but  I  pause
       there to note that the Judge takes into account that  the  Appellant
       committed most of his offences when he was young  whereas  at  least
       one further offence was in 2007 when he was in  his  thirties.   The
       Judge also notes at [48]  that  the  Appellant's  wife  has  been  a
       steadying influence on his life whereas it  is  the  case  that  his
       relationship with her appears to have begun in 1993 prior to the end
       of his main period of offending in 1995  and  certainly  before  the
       further  offences  in  2007  and  2013.   There   is   no   reasoned
       consideration at [52] of the Appellant's pattern of offending.


   29. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Judge made  an  error
       of law in her findings both in  relation  to  paragraph  399(a)  and
       paragraph 399A due to her failure to provide  adequate  reasons  for
       the Decision.

   30. Mr Melvin submitted that, if I were to find an error of law, I could
       go on to re-make the Decision,  if  necessary  following  a  resumed
       hearing.  Ms King submitted that if I were to find an error of  law,
       I should remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal Judge for a re-
       hearing, particularly since the appeal involved young  children  and
       the appeal hearing was ten months ago which is a long  period  in  a
       young child's development.  Ms King  indicated  that  the  Appellant
       would probably wish to adduce further  evidence,  in  particular  in
       relation to the position of the children.

   31. The Appellant succeeded before the First-Tier Tribunal.  It is clear
       from my above  reasoning  that  further  factual  findings  will  be
       required in order to consider the applicability of paragraphs 399(a)
       and 399A.  There are young children impacted by the outcome of  this
       appeal.  The hearing of the appeal was about ten months  ago  during
       which time the children and their relationship with their father may
       well have developed and circumstances may have changed.  I therefore
       consider that, in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of  the  Practice
       Statement and the overriding objective, it is appropriate  to  remit
       the appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before  a
       different Judge.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing with the direction that it be heard by another Judge  of  the
First-Tier Tribunal.
Signed           [pic] Date     18 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
