
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00686/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2015                  |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr D Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, KN, was born in 1973 and is a male citizen of  Zimbabwe.
    He was convicted on 11 July 2007 at Leeds Crown Court of taking a motor
    vehicle without consent and  received  a  sentence  of  sixteen  months
    imprisonment.  On 31 March 2014, the respondent  refused  to  revoke  a
    deportation order which had been made in respect of the appellant.   An
    order had been made under Section 5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    ("conducive  grounds").   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pickup) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  1
    August 2014 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant appealed to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  By a decision promulgated on 1 May 2015,  I  determined  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and I set aside its decision.   My
    reasons for doing so were as follows:

    "1.  The appellant, KN, was born in 1973 and is a citizen of  Zimbabwe.
         He has appealed against a decision of the respondent to  refuse  to
         revoke a deportation order dated 15 October 2008.  The respondent's
         decision was dated 31 March 2014.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Pickup) in a determination promulgated on 1 August  2014  dismissed
         the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
         Upper Tribunal.

      2. Paragraph [7] of the grounds of appeal reads as follows:

             "At paragraph  7  of  his  determination,  the  FtTJ  makes  a
             fundamental mistake of fact when he states that the  appellant
             was subject to the automatic  deportation  provisions  because
             the appellant's offence and conviction and  sentence  predates
             the coming into force of the automatic deportation  provisions
             under Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.   1  August  2008
             was when the automatic deportation proceedings came into force
             and the appellant's conviction and sentence took place in July
             and September 2007.  It is respectfully  submitted  that  this
             mistake of fact clearly influenced the FtTJ's consideration of
             whether the appellant's subsequent deportation order should be
             revoked - see paragraph 12 of his determination."

      3. At paragraph 12 of the determination, the judge wrote:

             "Paragraph 396 provides that  where  a  person  is  liable  to
             deportation the presumption shall be that the public  interest
             requires deportation.  It is in the public interest to  deport
             where the Secretary of State must make a deportation order  in
             accordance with Section 32 of the 2007 Act, which  applies  to
             this appellant."

      4. Mr Diwncyz, for the Secretary of State, indicated that he could not
         support the First-tier Tribunal determination in the light of  this
         error.  He accepted that the error may have influenced  the  manner
         in which the judge carried out his analysis  of  the  evidence  and
         applied  the  relevant  provision.   I  therefore  set  aside   the
         determination.   The  Upper  Tribunal  will  remake  the   decision
         following resumed hearing.

    DECISION

      5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which promulgated on 1
         August 2014 is set aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal  will  remake  the
         decision following a resumed hearing ..."

 2. The resumed hearing took place at Bradford on 16 November 2015 when  Ms
    Khan appeared for the appellant and Mr Diwncyz, a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.  The burden  of  proof
    in the appeal is on the appellant and the standard of  proof  (in  this
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR) is  the  balance
    of probabilities.

 3. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and  also  his  partner  (GB).
    The representatives made submissions and I reserved my decision.

 4. There are three children of the relationship of the appellant  and  GB.
    The eldest child has lived in the United Kingdom since the age of 4 and
    is a naturalised British  citizen  who  is  now  aged  15  years.   The
    remaining children are aged 10 years, 6 years respectively are  British
    citizens; GB is a British citizen by naturalisation; she  was  born  in
    Zimbabwe.  Although I set aside Judge Pickup's decision, I find, as  he
    did, that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    all three children [40].  Mr Diwncyz, for the respondent, did not  seek
    to dissuade me from such a finding.  It was also the case that  two  of
    the children have been living in the United Kingdom for at least  seven
    years.  The appellant himself has been resident in the  United  Kingdom
    for nearly fourteen years.  Furthermore, the appellant is  the  primary
    carer of the children.  I accept that to be the  position;  Mr  Diwncyz
    did not seek to persuade me otherwise.  Indeed, I found the evidence of
    the appellant and GB as regards the circumstances of their children and
    their own family living arrangements to be true and accurate.

 5. This is a case where it is necessary to apply the provisions of Section
    117C(5) of the Immigration Act 2014 (Section  19  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - as amended):

         '117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.'

 6. The appellant does not fall into the more serious category of  offender
    (i.e. those sentenced to at least four years' imprisonment) covered  by
    subsection (6).  The focus of the Tribunal is, therefore, upon  whether
    the effect of the appellant's deportation on the partner  (GB)  or  the
    children would be unduly harsh.  Ms Khan did not seek  to  persuade  me
    that the "unduly harsh" test could be satisfied  by  separation  of  GB
    from the appellant.  The appellant's adult partner,  GB,  was  born  in
    Zimbabwe and there was no reason to suppose that she would not be  able
    to reintegrate into the society of that country with the appellant upon
    return.

 7. As regards the effect upon the  children,  however,  I  find  that  the
    effect would be unduly harsh.  There was evidence from a social  worker
    as well as from the appellant and GB which gave details  of  the  depth
    and strength of the relationship between the  three  children  (all  of
    whom are significantly British citizens) and the appellant.  It  is  of
    great significance that the appellant acts as  the  children's  primary
    carer at the present time.  Assistance as to the proper  interpretation
    of "unduly harsh" is provided in the presidential decision MK  (Section
    55 -  Tribunal  options)  Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  00223  (IAC)  in
    particular at [46]:

         "The determination of the two questions  which  we  have  posed  in
         [44](d) above requires an evaluative assessment on the part of  the
         Tribunal. This is to be contrasted with a fact finding exercise. By
         way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly harsh" does  not
         equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,  undesirable  or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.
         "Harsh" in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.  Furthermore,   the
         addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated standard
         still higher. Approached in this way,  we  have  no  hesitation  in
         concluding that it would be unduly harsh  for  either  of  the  two
         seven year old British citizen children concerned  to  be  abruptly
         uprooted from their United Kingdom life setting and  lifestyle  and
         exiled to this struggling, impoverished and  plague  stricken  west
         African  state.  No  reasonable  or  right  thinking  person  would
         consider this anything less than cruel."

 8. Mr Diwncyz did not seek to argue that the children travel  to  Zimbabwe
    to settle there with the appellant.  The focus, instead, in  this  case
    was upon the  potential  undue  harshness  which  would  occur  if  the
    children remained living in the United Kingdom and  the  appellant  was
    separated from them by deportation to Zimbabwe.  The  comments  of  the
    Tribunal in MK at [47] are helpful:

         "The final question is whether it would be unduly harsh for  either
         child to remain in the United Kingdom without the  Appellant.  This
         is a different question from that considered in [46] above. We have
         identified a range of facts  and  considerations  bearing  on  this
         issue. Once again, an  evaluative  judgment  on  the  part  of  the
         Tribunal  is  required.  In  performing  this  exercise   we   view
         everything in the round. The Appellant plays an important  role  in
         the lives of both children concerned particularly that of his  step
         son. He is the provider of stability, security,  emotional  support
         and financial support to both children. We have rehearsed above the
         various benefits and advantages which he brings  to  the  lives  of
         both children, coupled with his personal attributes and merits.  We
         remind ourselves of section 55 of the 2009 Act. We acknowledge  the
         distinction between harsh and unduly  harsh.  We  remind  ourselves
         again  of  the  potency  of  the  main  public  interest  in  play,
         emphasised most recently by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  MA
         (Somalia)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1192.  The  outcome  of  our  careful
         reflections in  this  difficult  and  borderline  case  and  in  an
         exercise bereft of bright luminous lines is as  follows.  Balancing
         all of the facts and factors, our conclusion is that  the  severity
         of the impact on the children's lives  of  the  Appellant's  abrupt
         exit  with  all  that  would  flow  therefrom  would  be  of   such
         proportions as to be unduly harsh."

 9. Each case must be decided on its own facts.  In order to  succeed,  the
    appellant  must  show  that  the  effect  upon  the  children  of   his
    deportation to Zimbabwe and his separation  from  them  is  not  merely
    harsh but unduly harsh.  The evidence indicates that the appellant, the
    children and GB live as a family  unit,  the  harmonious  operation  of
    which depends upon the presence of the appellant as primary  day-to-day
    carer of the children.  The rupture of those strong bonds would, in  my
    opinion and on the basis of the evidence before the Tribunal, result in
    an effect upon the children which may properly be described  as  unduly
    harsh.  For that reason I find the appellant's case  falls  within  the
    exception identified in Section 117C(5).  Further, in the light of  the
    children's nationality, their length of residence in the United Kingdom
    and the settled and secure nature of their current home arrangements, I
    find that it would be unduly harsh to expect the children  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe.  If the appellant left and GB remained with the children  she
    would have to replace him as primary carer which though possible  would
    not be in their best interests.

10. It is vitally important not to lose sight in these deliberations of the
    public interest concerned with the deportation of this appellant.   The
    more serious the appellant's offending, the greater the public interest
    concerned with his  removal.   The  appellant's  offence  was  serious,
    essentially involving theft but there  is  no  indication  of  violence
    having been used or of any sexual/drug-related element  in  the  crime.
    Furthermore, the crime took place a number of years ago following which
    the appellant appears to achieved some rehabilitation.   Having  regard
    to all the evidence, and whilst in  no  way  seeking  to  diminish  the
    importance of the public interest concerned with his removal,  I  find,
    referring again to the reasons which I have set  out  above,  that  the
    appellant's appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

11. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse to revoke the deportation order is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 1 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

