

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00792/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th July 2013                             |On 29th July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President

                                   Between

                        FRANCIS OSAIGBOVO GIWA-OSAGIE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent on 16 April 2013 making
    a deportation order against him under the provisions of s.32 of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  A panel of the First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Britton
    and Doctor Okitikpi, dismissed his appeal, in a determination sent  out
    on 3 June 2013.   The  appellant  has  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal against that decision.

 2. The appellant was in detention at all material  times  and  remains  in
    detention.  About a week before the date fixed for the hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, there was an application for  an  adjournment,  on
    the basis that the appellant's solicitors had not been able to  prepare
    adequately.  The application was refused on the grounds that there  had
    been sufficient time.  A member of the firm appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal at the hearing and renewed the application.  When it  was
    refused,  on  the  additional  ground  that  the   representative   had
    apparently failed to take the opportunity of having a number  of  hours
    with appellant on the very  day  of  the  hearing,  the  representative
    withdrew,  leaving  the  Tribunal  to  hear  the  appeal  without   his
    assistance.  The appellant gave oral evidence, which is  noted  in  the
    determination.

 3. The reasons given for  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal are that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    its decision to refuse an adjournment and to proceed in the absence  of
    the representative.  In a response to  the  grant  of  permission,  the
    Secretary of State indicates that she "does not oppose the  appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  and  invites  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing".

 4. It is not entirely easy to see what the Secretary or State  means.   As
    permission had been granted, no useful purpose would have  been  served
    by her opposing the application for permission; and the phrase "a fresh
    oral (continuance) hearing" means nothing to me.  But  it  does  appear
    that the parties are in agreement.   In  the  circumstances  no  useful
    purpose would be served by holding a hearing.

 5. The position is that, as the parties agreed, the hearing  conducted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal is one which, in the circumstances ought not to
    have taken place.  The appellant had thought until the moment that  the
    hearing started that he  would  be  represented.   To  require  him  to
    proceed immediately and to deal with  the  matter  himself  created  an
    impression of unfairness.  No doubt the Tribunal intended to create  no
    such impression, and made the decision that it thought was best on  the
    day: it seems to me, as it apparently seems to the Secretary of  State,
    in both cases with the benefit of hindsight, however,  that  they  just
    stepped over the margin of what was permissible.

 6. I note that the appellant's previous  representative  appears  to  have
    acknowledged before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  lack  of  any
    preparation in the period between the notice of appeal and the date  of
    the hearing was a matter for which he and his  firm  were  responsible.
    The Tribunal will take that matter up with the appropriate  authorities
    when the appellant's appeal is no longer pending.  For the present, the
    appropriate decision is that which follows, taking  into  account  that
    the proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  be  regarded  as
    having  been  unfair.   I  emphasise  that  although   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision is  set  aside,  the  evidence  given  before  that
    Tribunal remains evidence in the case and may be relied upon by  either
    party in subsequent hearings.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was affected by error  of  law.
    I set it aside.  I remit  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for consideration by a differently-constituted panel.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 24 July 2013
