
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00362/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 09 January 2017                   |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DENISS CMOKOVS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (SSHD) against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  AA
         Wilson promulgated on 24 November 2016  in  which  he  allowed  the
         appeal of Mr Deniss Cmokovs (hereinafter  'the  Claimant')  against
         the SSHD's decision of 22 July 2016 to  make  a  deportation  order
         against him under Regulations 19(3)(b) and 21  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

Background

      2. The Claimant is a national of Latvia, born on  28  March  1983.  He
         claims to have  first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2003  but
         returned to Latvia  in  2004.  He  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom
         shortly after Latvia joined the EU in May 2004. He has remained  in
         the United Kingdom ever since. The judge noted  that  the  Claimant
         had worked as a labourer doing painting  and  decorating,  and  had
         also be self-employed. He had been registered for employment  as  a
         jobseeker. He sublet property in the UK and had not claimed  public
         benefits.

      3. Between 21 March 2006 and 15 June 2016  the  Claimant  received  38
         convictions for 58 offences.  These  included  2  offences  against
         property (2007 to 2009), 40 theft and  kindred  offences  (2006  to
         2016), 15 offences relating to police/courts/prison (2006 to  2016)
         and  one  drugs  offence  (2012).  The  Claimant  also  received  a
         reprimand/warning/caution on 21 May 2005. The PNC (Police  National
         Computer) printout detailing the Claimant's  convictions  indicated
         that he received a  number  of  fines  and  deferred  sentences  of
         imprisonment in respect of  a  significant  number  of  shoplifting
         offences. He additionally received a number of community sentences.
         The  PNC  indicated  that  he  breached  a  significant  number  of
         community sentences.

      4. The PNC referred to a number of custodial sentences received by the
         Claimant.  On  31  August  2007  he  was  sentenced  to   40   days
         imprisonment. The SSHD's decision under appeal suggests  that  this
         sentence was deferred but the PNC does not reflect this. I  note  a
         Home Office letter at C1 of the SSHD's  bundle,  dated  19  October
         2007 and addressed to the Claimant at HMP Aberdeen, indicating that
         he received a prison sentence of 5 months, 27  days  on  31  August
         2007 in relation to an offence of theft. There is also contained in
         the SSHD's bundle (at B12 to B3) correspondence confirming that the
         Claimant  was  recommended  by  the  Peterhead  Sheriff  Court  for
         deportation on the same occasion. It is unclear to  me  from  where
         the reference to '5 months, 27 days' originates but, having  regard
         to the PNC,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  did  receive  a
         custodial sentence of at least 40 days imprisonment  on  31  August
         2007 and that this sentence, unlike others received  in  2007,  was
         not deferred. On 19 October 2007  he  was  served  with  a  warning
         letter notifying him that the SSHD had decided to take  no  further
         action on this occasion, although with a warning that she  may  not
         be prepared to exercise such leniency should he come to her adverse
         attention in the future.

      5. On 12 May 2008  the  Claimant  received  a  sentence  of  4  months
         imprisonment  in  relation  to  a  shoplifting  offence  that   was
         committed on 27 April 2008. On 13 June 2008 the Claimant was served
         with a letter indicating that the SSHD had given  consideration  to
         this conviction but decided,  again,  to  take  no  further  action
         against him. The same warning as to future criminal  activities  by
         the Claimant  was  issued.  On  1  August  2012  the  Claimant  was
         sentenced to 2 periods of 90 days imprisonment. On 23  August  2013
         he received a sentence of 42 days imprisonment. On 6 August 2014 he
         was sentenced to 21 days imprisonment,  and  on  15  June  2016  he
         received a total of 1 month's imprisonment in relation to  offences
         of theft from a motor vehicle and going equipped for theft.

      6. Having set out the Claimant's immigration history and  the  details
         of  his  numerous  criminal  convictions  the  SSHD  rejected   the
         Claimant's assertion that he had resided in the United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with the 2006 Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
         five years. The SSHD did not therefore consider that  the  Claimant
         had acquired a permanent right of residence. Nor  was  it  accepted
         that he had been continuously resident in the United Kingdom for 10
         years as he failed to provide any evidence  to  confirm  the  exact
         length of his residence in the UK and provided no evidence to  show
         that he had exercised Treaty rights for a continuous period  of  10
         years in accordance with the 2006 Regulations. As a consequence the
         SSHD was not satisfied  that  the  Claimant  was  entitled  to  the
         enhanced protection under Regulation  21(3)  or  (4)  of  the  2006
         Regulations.

      7. The SSHD then considered the  principles  relating  to  deportation
         decisions as set out in regulation 21(5) of the  2006  Regulations.
         The Claimant was said to be a persistent offender with an appalling
         criminal record in the UK. His previous convictions failed  to  act
         as a deterrent and he had shown a blatant disregard  for  the  law.
         There was said to be a pattern  of  acquisitive  offending  and  15
         offences relating to  police/courts/prisons  and  offences  against
         property. The Claimant was considered to pose a  risk  of  harm  to
         shopkeepers and the general public due to the nature of his  repeat
         offending.  His  conviction  history  was  said  to   indicate   an
         antisocial attitude towards the public and community. He had  shown
         no remorse for his behaviour. His history of failure to comply with
         community orders indicated a continued risk of harm to the  public.
         Having concluded that the Claimant was unable  to  support  himself
         and his lifestyle without resorting to criminal activities, and  in
         the absence of any evidence that  he  had  been  exercising  Treaty
         rights, the SSHD satisfied herself that the Claimant was likely  to
         offend again on his release. In the absence of sufficient  evidence
         that he had adequately addressed all the reasons for his  offending
         behaviour the SSHD concluded that the Claimant had a propensity  to
         reoffend  and  that  he  represented   a   genuine,   present   and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public   to   justify   his
         deportation on grounds of public policy.

      8. The SSHD then considered whether  the  Claimant's  deportation  was
         proportionate within the terms of regulation 21(5)(a) of  the  2006
         Regulations and noted that he was born in Latvia, spent  his  youth
         and formative years in that country, was now 33 years  old  and  in
         good health. There was said to be no evidence to  substantiate  the
         Claimant's assertion to have a child in the UK. By  the  Claimant's
         own admission he had not, in any event, seen his child for 7  or  8
         years, although he claimed to  have  some  Internet  contact  on  a
         monthly basis. The SSHD again noted the absence of evidence of  the
         Claimant's employment and rejected his claim  to  have  engaged  in
         regular or lawful employment in the UK. The  SSHD  did  not  accept
         that the Claimant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK.
         There was no evidence that  he  made  a  positive  contribution  to
         society and he provided no evidence  of  significant  ties  to  the
         community. His antisocial behaviour indicated the opposite. It  was
         not accepted there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration into Latvia given that he lived there until  adulthood.
         The  Claimant  also  had  family  in   Latvia   (in   his   Current
         Circumstances Proforma the Claimant indicated that his mother lived
         in Latvia and that he spoke to her weekly) and there was no  reason
         why he would be unable to re-establish a life on return to Latvia.

      9. The SSHD considered the case of Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718, relating
         to the prospects  of  rehabilitation,  but  noted  the  absence  of
         evidence that the Claimant had undertaken any  rehabilitative  work
         while in custody. The SSHD acknowledged  the  Claimant's  assertion
         that he had a brother in the UK but the brother's presence did  not
         prevent the Claimant from committing  further  offences.  The  SSHD
         believed the Claimant could work towards rehabilitation  in  Latvia
         with the support of his family  members  living  there.  Given  the
         threat posed by the Claimant to the  public,  the  SSHD  considered
         that his personal circumstances did not preclude  his  deportation.
         The SSHD went on to consider whether her decision breached  Article
         8 ECHR, but concluded that it  did  not.  The  SSHD  certified  the
         matter under Regulation 24AA of the 2006 Regulations  but  took  no
         action to remove the Claimant from the UK prior to the date of  his
         appeal. The SSHD also issued  a  certificate  under  s.94B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which  prevents  the
         Claimant from appealing the refusal of his human rights claim until
         he has left the UK if this would not cause a breach of s.6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     10. The Claimant was not represented in his appeal  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal. The judge found he had no jurisdiction to  entertain
         the appeal under Article 8. Noting that the SSHD had not  attempted
         to remove the Claimant from the UK, and in light of  an  invitation
         from the Presenting Officer, the appeal under the 2006  Regulations
         proceeded. The First-tier Tribunal judge heard oral  evidence  from
         the Claimant and considered an HMRC a letter, dated 25 August 2016,
         relating to the Claimant's national insurance record.

     11. In his decision the judge stated, at [4], that the  time  spent  by
         the Claimant in prison did not constitute residence. The judge  set
         out  the  pertinent  aspects  of  the  Claimant's  criminality  and
         immigration history. The judge noted that the  HMRC  letter  of  25
         August 2016 showed that the Claimant had 8 qualifying years of  NIC
         contributions up to 5 April 2016. This was said by the judge to  be
         similar to the employment record contended by  the  Claimant  which
         showed "... periodic gaps but nevertheless substantial  periods  of
         contribution." The judge was satisfied the Claimant had been in the
         UK since 2004 and that he had been physically present for more than
         10 years in the UK.

     12. Having set out the relevant provisions of Regulations 15, 19 and 21
         of the  2006  Regulations  the  judge  asked  himself  whether  the
         Claimant had been "... effectively part of  the  community  of  the
         United Kingdom or his criminality is such that he never really  has
         established any community position within the UK." The judge  noted
         that the Claimant gave his evidence in English  and  his  claim  to
         have a child in  the  UK.  The  judge  noted  the  Claimant  was  a
         persistent offender. At [10]  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         Claimant had been in the UK for a continuous period of at least  10
         years prior to the relevant decision. The judge indicated that  the
         degree of integration in the United Kingdom by an  EU  citizen  had
         been considered by the Court of Appeal in AA(Nigeria)  [2015]  EWCA
         Civ  1249.  The  judge  then  stated,  "It  therefore  follows  the
         [Claimant] cannot be removed from the  United  Kingdom  unless  the
         [SSHD] can show that  there  [are]  imperative  grounds  of  public
         security."

     13. At [11], noting that the Claimant  had  established  a  pattern  of
         convictions  involving  shoplifting  and  obstruction   of   police
         officers, the judge was not persuaded that the  Claimant's  conduct
         was so serious so as to amount  to  imperative  grounds  of  public
         security.

     14. The judge proceeded to consider whether, if the  Claimant  was  not
         entitled  to  the  highest  level  of  protection,  the  SSHD   had
         established the existence of serious grounds of  public  policy  or
         public security requiring the  Claimant's  deportation.  The  judge
         concluded  that  there  were  serious  grounds  of  public   policy
         justifying his deportation and was satisfied that such  a  decision
         was proportionate having regard to the specific warnings previously
         given  to  the  Claimant,  the  pattern  of  antisocial   behaviour
         accompanying the Claimant's thefts, the fact that drugs had  played
         a substantial part in the Claimant's criminality, and  the  absence
         of any satisfactory evidence that  the  Claimant  had  changed  his
         behaviour. In so doing the judge took into account  the  Claimant's
         prospects of rehabilitation and his assertion to have a brother  in
         the UK. The appeal was allowed by the judge on the basis  that  the
         Claimant had resided in the UK for a continuous period of 10  years
         and that there  were  no  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
         justifying his deportation.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     15. The SSHD's Grounds asserted that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to
         conclude that the Claimant accumulated 5 years continuous residence
         given that the evidence upon which the judge relied showed periodic
         gaps in the payment  of  NIC  contributions,  and  given  that  the
         periods of imprisonment interrupted the continuous residence by the
         Claimant. It was further submitted that the judge  failed  to  take
         into account the Supreme Court decision in  SSHD  v  Franco  Vomero
         (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49 (FV(Italy))  when  determining  whether  the
         Claimant  was  entitled  to  the  imperative   grounds   level   of
         protection. The  Grounds  asserted  that  permanent  residence  was
         required before someone could avail themselves of the highest level
         of protection and that the Supreme Court had issued a reference  to
         the CJEU  in  respect  of  this  point.  The  Grounds  additionally
         asserted that,  in  any  event,  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
         determine whether the Claimant  had  sufficient  integrative  links
         within the UK as a result of his 10 years residence. In the absence
         of any lawful assessment  of  the  Claimant's  overall  integrative
         links, and in light of the findings by the judge at  [13],  it  was
         submitted that the judge had materially erred in law.

     16. In granting permission Designated judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
         Murry stated,

             "At paragraph 6 of the decision the judge finds the [Claimant]
             has been physically present in the UK for over  10  years.  He
             seems not to have taken into account his  time  in  prison  or
             they gaps in his employment in this calculation. At  paragraph
             10 the judge states that the [Claimant] has been in the UK for
             a continuous period of 10 years. It is not clear whether  this
             is correct. At paragraph 13 the judge deals of  the  situation
             had the [Claimant] not been in the UK for 5  years  and  finds
             his removal would be justified that was the case. At paragraph
             9  the  judge  considers  whether  the  [Claimant]  has   been
             effectively part of the community of the UK. It is  not  clear
             what his view on this is, as there are pros and cons mentioned
             in this paragraph. There are arguable errors  of  law  in  the
             judge's decision."

The Upper Tribunal hearing

     17. The Claimant was not represented at the Upper Tribunal  hearing.  I
         confirmed at the outset that  he  was  sufficiently  proficient  in
         English so as to follow and engage in a  meaningful  way  with  the
         proceedings. I explained to the Claimant the purpose of  the  error
         of law hearing and how the hearing would proceed. I indicated that,
         following the submissions by the Home Office, I would summarise the
         Presenting Officer's arguments so that the Claimant was fully aware
         of the points raised by the SSHD  and  to  enable  him  to  respond
         accordingly.

     18. Mr Tufan adopted the grounds  of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
         Claimant had not attained  permanent  residence  in  light  of  his
         periods of imprisonment. More significantly, the judge had erred in
         his approach to the relevance of the periods of  imprisonment  when
         determining whether the Claimant was entitled to the highest  level
         of protection. The judge failed  to  assess  whether  the  Claimant
         demonstrated sufficient integrative links to prevent his periods of
         imprisonment interrupting his acquisition of a continuous period of
         10 years residence.

     19. In reply the Claimant indicated that he entered the United  Kingdom
         in 2003 as a student and lived in the UK  since  2004.  He  claimed
         that he had worked but had also worked under a  different  National
         Insurance number. He referred to the family he had  in  the  United
         Kingdom  -  his  ex-wife,  his  girlfriend,  his  brother  and  his
         brother's children. None of these individuals lived in London. When
         asked whether he had been imprisoned in 2007 and 2008 the  Claimant
         said he couldn't remember but he thought he had been imprisoned.

     20. Having considered the judge's decision, the  submissions  made  and
         the relevant authorities,  I  indicated  that  the  FTT  judge  had
         materially erred in his legal approach both to the question whether
         the Claimant had acquired  permanent  residence,  and  whether  the
         Claimant was entitled  to  the  highest  level  of  protection.  My
         reasons, given in summary at the hearing, were that the periods  of
         the Claimant's imprisonment, in principle, interrupted his  ability
         to acquire 10 years continuous residence and that the judge did not
         adequately  consider  whether   the   Claimant   had   demonstrated
         sufficient integrative links with the United Kingdom,  despite  his
         various terms of imprisonment, as part of an overall assessment.

     21. I indicated that I would remake the decision. To this  end  I  took
         into account further documentary evidence provided by the  Claimant
         relating to his brother,  and  further  evidence  relating  to  his
         girlfriend.  The  Claimant  provided  an  NHS  appointment   letter
         relating to Mr Nikolays Cmokovs (the Claimant's  brother),  with  a
         residential  address  in  Lancashire,  dated  30  June  2016.  Also
         provided were a letter from the employer of the Claimant's brother,
         dated 12 July 2016, and some utility and council tax bills relating
         to the Claimant's brother. I additionally  took  into  account  the
         HMRC documents previously served by the Claimant.

     22. In his further  oral  evidence  the  Claimant  indicated  that  his
         brother lived in Lancashire and was  not  present  at  the  hearing
         because he worked and his wife worked and also looked  after  their
         children.  If  released  the  Claimant's  brother  would  find  the
         Claimant a job. The  Claimant's  girlfriend  was  on  holiday.  The
         Claimant had not asked her to write a letter or statement  for  the
         Tribunal. The Claimant provided two enveloped  letters,  apparently
         written in Russian, and post-marked at the end of 2016. These  were
         said to have been sent by the Claimant's girlfriend to him  at  his
         removal centre. Their relationship began in  2012.  His  girlfriend
         was working in the UK and was a  student  as  well.  She  was  also
         Latvian and still had family in Latvia. When  asked  whether  there
         was any reason why she could not return with him to Latvia in order
         to maintain their relationship the Claimant  said  that  he  didn't
         think there was any reason but again referred to her employment and
         her studies. There were no questions asked by Mr Tufan.

     23. Mr Tufan who submitted that the Claimant was not entitled either to
         the imperative  grounds  of  protection  or  the  medium  level  of
         protection enjoyed by those who had acquired  permanent  residence.
         The Claimant was described as a recidivist and had  been  offending
         since arriving in the UK. He posed a present and serious threats to
         the public. I was reminded that, at the hearing before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, no-one gave evidence on the Claimant's behalf. There
         was no evidence that he had a child  in  the  UK  and  he  accepted
         himself that he had not seen the child for a long time.  There  was
         no satisfactory evidence from the girlfriend and she was  not  here
         today. There was no evidence that the girlfriend and  the  Claimant
         had cohabited.

     24. The Claimant submitted that his brother had  children  and  claimed
         that his mother now lived  in  Russia.  There  were  no  sufficient
         public policy grounds to warrant his deportation and he had changed
         his character.

Discussion

     25. I am satisfied that the judge was not entitled to conclude that the
         Claimant acquired a permanent right of residence. This  is  because
         the  Claimant's  periods  of  imprisonment   prevented   him   from
         accumulating 5 years continuous residence in  accordance  with  the
         2006 Regulations. At paragraphs 4 and 5 of this decision I have set
         out the Claimant's various periods of imprisonment,  based  on  the
         PNC printout and the warning letters sent to him in 2007 and  2008.
         The Claimant could not remember whether he had been  imprisoned  in
         2007 or 2008 but he believed he had. I am satisfied, based  on  the
         aforementioned evidence, that he was imprisoned in 2007  and  2008.
         The Claimant entered the United Kingdom as an  EU  citizen  shortly
         after May 2004. He was imprisoned in 2007, 2008, 2012,  2013,  2014
         and 2016. There has been no period of 5 years continuous  residence
         without imprisonment. In Onuekwere v Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department (Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-378/12, at  [22]  the
         CJEU stated that it was clear from the very terms and  the  purpose
         of Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38 that periods of  imprisonment
         cannot  be  taken  into  consideration  for  the  purposes  of  the
         acquisition of a right of permanent residence for the  purposes  of
         that  provision  (implemented  by  Regulation  15   of   the   2006
         Regulations).  Further,  that  articles  16(2)  and  (3)  "must  be
         interpreted as meaning that continuity of residence is  interrupted
         by periods of imprisonment in the host  member  state"  (para  32).
         This approach was endorsed by the Supreme Court  in  FV(Italy).  It
         follows that the Claimant had not acquired  a  permanent  right  of
         residence as his periods of custody interrupted the  continuity  of
         his residence.

     26. It was not disputed by Mr Tufan that the  Claimant  has  physically
         resided in the United Kingdom for over 10 years (since  2004).  The
         Grounds of Appeal, which Mr Tufan adopted, argued that the Claimant
         was only entitled to the highest level  of  protection  if  he  had
         first achieved permanent residence. A majority of the Supreme Court
         favoured the view that possession of a right of permanent residence
         was not needed in order to enjoy enhanced protection under  article
         28(3)(a)  (the  equivalent  of  Regulation  21(4)(a)  of  the  2006
         Regulations). However, as a minority regarded the position as being
         at least unclear, the Court referred this  question  to  the  CJEU.
         Given the indication of the majority of the Supreme Court, and  the
         wording  of  the  relevant  Directive  and  the   manner   of   its
         incorporation into the corresponding  Regulation,  I  am  satisfied
         that the Claimant does not need to achieve permanent  residence  in
         order to avail himself of the imperative level of protection.  This
         'error of law' has not been made out.

     27. I am however satisfied that the judge erred in  law  in  concluding
         that the Claimant had acquired the  highest  level  of  protection.
         This is because the judge failed to consider whether the Claimant's
         various periods of imprisonment interrupted his accumulation of  10
         years residence, and failed to  consider  whether  his  integrative
         links  with  the  United  Kingdom,  in  light  of  his  periods  of
         imprisonment,  were  such  as  to  prevent  his  imprisonment,   in
         principle, from interrupting the continuity of his residence.

     28. The expulsion decision was made on 22 July 2016.  According  to  MG
         (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of Citizen's Directive) Portugal  [2014]
         UKUT 392 (IAC), which considered the  judgement  of  the  Court  of
         Justice of the European Union in case C- 400/12 (SSHD  v  MG)  with
         respect to the meaning of the "enhanced protection" provision,  the
         10 year period should be calculated by counting back from the  date
         of the expulsion decision. This was the approach taken by the First-
         tier Tribunal judge. But the CJEU case also  made  clear  that,  in
         principle, periods of imprisonment interrupted  the  continuity  of
         the period of residence. In Ahmed Warsame v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 16
         counsel for the SSHD accepted that there is a "maybe"  category  of
         cases under MG where a person has resided in the host state  during
         the ten years  prior  to  imprisonment,  depending  on  an  overall
         assessment of whether integrating links have been broken, and  that
         in such cases it might be relevant to determine, by way of  overall
         assessment, the degree of integration in the host member  state  or
         the extent to which links with the original member state have  been
         broken.

     29. The Claimant may therefore  potentially  fall  within  the  'maybe'
         category of  cases  where  a  period  of  imprisonment  during  the
         relevant 10 years does not necessarily prevent him from  qualifying
         for enhanced protection if he was sufficiently integrated, although
         a period of imprisonment  has  a  negative  impact  in  so  far  as
         establishing integration is concerned.

     30. Nowhere in his decision does the judge contemplate the interruption
         of  the  Claimant's  10  years  residence   by   his   periods   of
         imprisonment. Nor is there  any  assessment  by  the  judge  as  to
         whether the nature and degree of  the  Claimant's  integration  was
         sufficient to warrant the application of the enhanced test (on  the
         basis that the Claimant fell within the 'maybe' category identified
         in Warsame at [9] and [10]).

     31. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain a
         legally adequate analysis of whether the Claimant's integration was
         of a degree sufficient to attract  the  operation  of  the  highest
         level of protection, notwithstanding his incarceration for  several
         shorts periods which, in  principle,  would  have  interrupted  the
         continuity of his 10 year period of residence. There is no adequate
         assessment of the personal, family, cultural, social, financial and
         occupational roots developed by the Claimant since his  arrival  in
         the  UK.  The  failure  by  the  judge  to  undertake  this   vital
         consideration,  necessary  to  ascertain  whether  the   Claimant's
         integration  is  sufficient  to  attract  the  highest   level   of
         protection in  light  of  his  criminality,  renders  the  decision
         legally unsustainable.

Remaking the decision

     32. Having concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a
         legally adequate  analysis  of  the  Claimant's  integrating  links
         during his 10 years residence prior to the deportation decision,  I
         proceeded to remake the decision taking  account  of  the  evidence
         adduced by the Claimant of his links with the UK.

     33. The Claimant was able to  produce  only  limited  evidence  of  his
         employment in the United  Kingdom.  I  am  nevertheless  satisfied,
         based on the HMRC document provided by the Claimant,  that  he  has
         worked in the United Kingdom  (as  evidenced  by  his  attaining  8
         qualifying NIC years). It is also clear that  the  Claimant  speaks
         English. These were both points the First-tier Tribunal held in the
         Claimant's favour and I do the same.

     34. The Claimant claimed to have a girlfriend in the UK. He did provide
         some evidence in support of this assertion. There were two letters,
         contained in envelopes sent to his removal centre and  date-stamped
         the end of 2016. The letters however were in Russian and there were
         no translations. The Claimant  had  not  asked  his  girlfriend  to
         provide a letter or statement to the Tribunal in support  of  their
         claimed relationship. When asked why his girlfriend was not present
         at the hearing the Claimant said she was still  on  holiday.  There
         was no evidence in support of this assertion. The Claimant  claimed
         he and his girlfriend had been in a relationship since 2012  but  I
         note that in his Current Circumstances Proforma, signed  and  dated
         by the Claimant  on  8  June  2016,  he  made  no  mention  of  his
         girlfriend. He indicated on the 1st page of this document  that  he
         previously resided in a council house and shared the address with a
         'friend'. Despite having no legal representation  the  Claimant  is
         proficient in English and was made aware of the date and purpose of
         the Upper Tribunal hearing. At his hearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal the Claimant had also claimed to have a girlfriend but she
         provided no letter or statement to that Tribunal and  she  did  not
         attend the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  Having  regard  to  this
         evidence in the round I am not satisfied  that  the  Claimant  does
         have a girlfriend in the UK.

     35. Even if I am wrong in my conclusion and the Claimant  does  have  a
         girlfriend, he indicated at the Upper Tribunal hearing that she was
         Latvian and that she still had family in Latvia. She was said to be
         working in the UK and was a student. When asked whether  there  was
         anything preventing their relationship from  continuing  in  Latvia
         the Claimant said that he didn't think there was any reason why she
         could not return to Latvia.

     36. The Claimant  produced  some  evidence  relating  to  his  brother,
         including a letter addressed to the brother from his employer, some
         utility and council tax bills and a NHS letter. This confirms  that
         someone with the Claimant's  surname  is  resident  in  the  United
         Kingdom. I am prepared to accept that  the  Claimant  does  have  a
         brother in the United Kingdom. There is however no  other  evidence
         relating to the relationship between the Claimant and  his  brother
         or his brother's family. Significantly, there is little evidence to
         suggest that the Claimant and his brother are in regular contact.

     37. There is no evidence of the Claimant's relationship  with  his  son
         other than his own assertion. On his own admission the Claimant has
         not seen his son for 7 or 8 years and they only communicate via the
         Internet. There is  no  evidence  of  such  communication.  In  the
         circumstances I do not accept that the appellant has a genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with any child in the UK.

     38. There is no satisfactory evidence of the nature and extent  of  any
         private life established by the Claimant  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         There are, for example, no statements or letters  of  support  from
         friends  or  colleagues,  and  no  evidence   whatsoever   of   any
         contribution, other than through his  NI  contributions,  that  the
         Claimant has made to society. There is nothing to indicate he  owns
         property or has any stake in his community.

     39. The extent of the Claimant's criminality undermines  any  assertion
         by him that he has established strong integrating links during  his
         12 years residence. He has engaged in  a  multitude  of  antisocial
         activities and has been imprisoned on six  different  occasions.  I
         take account of the fact that his sentences  of  imprisonment  have
         been short (ranging from 4 months to 21 days), that  his  offending
         has been towards the lower end of the spectrum,  and  that  he  had
         resided in the United Kingdom  for  over  12  years  prior  to  the
         deportation decision. I  am  however  unable  to  conclude,  having
         engaged in an overall assessment, that the  Claimant's  criminality
         has not interrupted his accumulation of 10 years  residence.  I  am
         consequently satisfied that the Claimant is  not  entitled  to  the
         highest level of protection.

     40. For the reasons I have  already  given  at  paragraph  25  of  this
         decision I am satisfied the Claimant has not acquired  a  permanent
         right of residence.

     41. The decision to deport the Claimant must  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the principles enunciated in  regulation  21(5)  of  the  2006
         Regulations. I am satisfied  that  the  decision  was  taken  based
         exclusively on the Claimant's personal conduct.  I  have  no  doubt
         that the Claimant's personal conduct represents a genuine,  present
         and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society. The Claimant is a persistent offender who has
         failed to take advantage of any of the opportunities offered to him
         through various community sentences and drug rehabilitation orders.
         The Claimant's acquisitive offending threatens social cohesion  and
         the financial integrity of businesses. I am wholly  satisfied  that
         he has a propensity to reoffend, despite his assertion that he is a
         reformed character. There is nothing in the  Claimant's  background
         or the evidence he has provided to indicate that he has  taken  any
         steps to reduce the risk of further  offending.  In  reaching  this
         conclusion I have not taken into account matters isolated from  the
         particulars of his case, nor do I reach my decision  based  on  his
         previous criminal convictions alone.

     42. I have considered the proportionality of the Claimant's deportation
         in light of his personal and family circumstances.  I  have  found,
         for the detailed reasons given above,  that  the  Claimant  has  no
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner or  children  in
         the UK, and there is nothing to indicate that his relationship with
         his adult sibling contains any elements of reliance or  dependency.
         The applicant is a 33-year-old  man  who  has  not  identified  any
         significant health issues. I do note however that he was  a  heroin
         addict and, when completing his pro forma, indicated that  he  took
         methadone daily.  There  is  nothing  before  me  to  suggest  that
         appropriate treatment for his drug use would not  be  available  in
         Latvia. I accept, as did the First-tier Tribunal, that the Claimant
         has been working in the UK but this work has been irregular. He has
         integrated into society  in  the  UK  to  the  extent  that  he  is
         proficient in English and has experience of manual labour. There is
         however  no  other  evidence  of  the  nature  or  extent  of   his
         integration into society.

     43. The Claimant speaks Russian and maintains that his mother no longer
         lives in Latvia. He claims to have little in  common  with  Latvian
         society. He was however born  in  Latvia  and  has  lived  in  that
         country for most of his life, including his formative years. He  is
         a national Latvia. I am not satisfied that  he  has  lost,  to  any
         significant extent, his social  and  cultural  ties,  at  least  in
         relation to the large ethnic Russian community in Latvia.

     44. I have also considered whether the Claimant's associations with the
         UK make this country best placed to facilitate his  rehabilitation.
         There is no evidence that the Claimant has undertaken any  form  of
         rehabilitation in the UK and the absence  of  any  strong  familial
         relationships or friendships in the UK does not  suggest  that  his
         deportation  to  Latvia  would  deprive  him  of   any   meaningful
         opportunity at rehabilitation.

     45. For all the above reasons I am  satisfied  that  it  would  not  be
         disproportionate to deport  the  Claimant,  on  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security, given the present threat  he  poses  to
         the fundamental interests of society.



The First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of law.

I have re-made the decision and I have dismissed the Claimant's appeal

[pic]    13 January 2017
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

