
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00365/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Determination & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 29 July 2015                          |        On 14 October 2015            |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                  kadir ali

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Greenwood, Counsel instructed by MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing on
    16 March 2015, the result of which was that the First-tier Tribunal was
    found to have  erred  in  law  in  its  dismissal  of  the  appellant's
    deportation appeal.

 2. The error of law decision is reproduced in full as  an  annex  to  this
    determination and to which reference should be  made  for  the  further
    background to the appeal.

 3. It can be seen therefore, that the appellant was subject to a  decision
    to make a deportation order as a result of his most recent  conviction,
    being for an offence of burglary for which he received  a  sentence  of
    two years and ten months' imprisonment.

 4. Ms Greenwood made an application to adduce further evidence in terms of
    the appellant's family life in the UK in the light of the fact that the
    original hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  now  of  some
    vintage.  Mr Melvin submitted that there was very  little  in  the  new
    evidence in terms of the  appellant's  claimed  relationship  with  his
    partner, or family life with his mother.

 5. I decided to allow the evidence to be adduced given the time  that  had
    elapsed since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. It is also  important  to  record  at  this  stage  that  Ms  Greenwood
    indicated that Ringki Boshir, said to be the appellant's  fianc�e,  had
    not attended the hearing as she was not fit to travel  because  of  her
    health.  It was specifically confirmed at  the  start  of  the  hearing
    however, that there was no application for an adjournment. Later during
    the hearing there was an application for an adjournment and to which  I
    refer below

 7. At the conclusion of the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision  but  gave
    directions to the effect that no later than seven  days  from  29  July
    2015 medical evidence was required in  relation  to  Ms  Boshir's  non-
    attendance.  Subsequent to the hearing, on 3 August 2015, the  Tribunal
    was provided with an email from Ms Boshir dated 2 August 2015, a letter
    from Clare Road Medical Centre dated 30 July 2015  and  a  letter  from
    University Hospital of Wales dated 26 May 2015. I refer in more  detail
    to those documents below.

    The appellant's oral evidence

 8. In examination-in-chief the appellant  adopted  his  witness  statement
    dated 24 July 2015.  As to whether  he  has  been  employed  since  his
    release from detention, he said that he was employed  by  the  National
    Contract Service ("NCS") as a supervisor, to supply  staff  to  hotels,
    and kitchen porters.  This was arranged through a  friend.   They  were
    aware that he was coming out of prison.  The employment was  in  Slough
    but because of the travel and the fact that he was wearing a  tag,  his
    employment was ended about two and a half months ago.

 9. He also had employment with Zyber Construction in  Camden,  whereby  he
    would pick up employees from one location and drop them off at another.
     He had explained that he was on a tag.  The job was to  start  between
    7:30 and 8:00am but he was unable to start that early  because  of  the
    tag times.

10. He lives with his mother, younger brother and two younger sisters.   He
    looks  after  his  mother,  doing  her   shopping   and   getting   her
    prescriptions.  He takes her to hospital and to  the  doctor  when  she
    needs to go.  She is unable to shop by herself because she is unable to
    walk a long distance.

11. He and Ms Boshir intend to marry.  She would move to his house with his
    family.  She has looked at work in that area.  She thought it would  be
    a good idea if he moved away from the people he grew up with.

12. As to who would look after his mother in those  circumstances,  ideally
    he would like his mother to move in with him.

13. Before he was sent to prison,  he  and  his  brother  were  paying  the
    mortgage on the house, half each.  The family is struggling  as  he  is
    not working.  At the moment they are living under one roof  but  if  he
    had to go back to Bangladesh and his family had  to  support  him  they
    would have to pay for accommodation and he would  have  to  start  from
    scratch.

14. In cross-examination he said that his mother is  unwell.   He  did  not
    refer to her illness in his witness  statement  because  they  did  not
    think of putting it in the statement.

15. However, she has a history of health problems.  He  has  always  looked
    after her except for when he has been in prison.  He is certain that he
    spoke about her health during the 2008 hearing before the Tribunal.

16. He thinks that in the last nine years over the period of his  offending
    he has only been away from his family for about 36  months  altogether.
    He has been on a tag, on bail and released early.  During that time his
    siblings looked after his mother.  If he had to go back  to  Bangladesh
    they would look after her.

17. His girlfriend, Ms Boshir, made her statement about a week ago.  He has
    read it.  He does not know why it does not say anything about the  time
    they have spent together since the last hearing.  He  is  not  able  to
    travel to see her in Wales because of the tag times.  He could not take
    the risk of going by public transport to Wales.  She has come to  visit
    him in the school holidays.  At the weekends she has marking to do.

18. As to the suggestion that theirs does  not  sound  like  a  very  close
    relationship, the appellant said that they are close and intend to  get
    married if he is allowed to stay in the UK.  If he was not on  the  tag
    he would definitely go to Wales.

19. His girlfriend drives to work in Barry which takes about an hour.   She
    leaves school at about 4:00pm and gets home at around  6:00pm.   As  to
    how much time he had  spent  with  her  in  the  last  10  months,  the
    appellant said that since he had been out of prison, he  had  seen  her
    three times.  When he was in prison he had seen her  at  least  once  a
    month.

20. As to why she has not attended the hearing, he explained that last week
    she went to the hospital for an operation and thought she would be well
    enough to travel.  Last night she told him that she  was  not  in  fact
    well enough.  He could provide a medical certificate.

21. As to his employments, his second employment  was  cash  in  hand.   In
    relation to his first employment, although they took his bank  details,
    he had not actually been paid anything.  Half the time he  was  working
    from home from where he did some recruitment.

22. The second employment lasted about five weeks.  He  could  provide  the
    contact details as to those jobs.  He does not have a job offer  letter
    from Zyber Construction but he does have one from NCS.

23. In answer to my questions the appellant explained  the  operation  that
    his girlfriend had to have, saying that she was in hospital for two  or
    maybe three days.  The operation was in June and  since  then  she  has
    started bleeding so she had to go back.  She was last in hospital  last
    week.  That was not for an operation but just for  a  check-up  because
    she started bleeding again.  She was in hospital for a whole  day  last
    week.

    Adjournment application

24. After the appellant had given evidence  Ms  Greenwood  sought  a  short
    adjournment in order to take instructions.  She then informed  me  that
    her instructions initially were not to ask for an adjournment to secure
    the attendance of Ms Boshir,  but  that  was  not  discussed  with  the
    appellant.  Ms Boshir has important evidence  to  give  which  suggests
    that the appellant can come within another paragraph of the Immigration
    Rules.  She had not  in  fact  taken  instructions  properly  from  the
    appellant when he arrived.

25. Ms Greenwood said that her understanding was that her instructions were
    that she was not to ask for an adjournment.  However, that conversation
    was  under   some   "pressure"   and   there   may   have   been   some
    misunderstanding.  She reiterated that her understanding had been  that
    she was not to ask for an adjournment.

26. I decided to refuse the application for an adjournment,  having  regard
    to rules 2 and 5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
    for the following reasons.  The application for an adjournment was made
    very late, and  should  have  been  made  earlier.   The  issue  of  an
    adjournment was canvassed at the  outset  of  the  hearing  and  I  was
    informed then  that  there  was  no  application  for  an  adjournment.
    Furthermore,  the  appellant  had  given  his  evidence  and  had  been
    questioned about the relationship.  In those  circumstances,  it  would
    not have been appropriate for the hearing to be adjourned  and  for  Ms
    Boshir then to be able to give evidence with  the  potential  that  she
    would become aware of what the appellant had said in his evidence, thus
    prejudicing the respondent.  I was not satisfied that the interests  of
    justice required an adjournment, taking into account the  interests  of
    the appellant and the respondent.  I  was  satisfied  that  the  appeal
    could justly be determined without the  hearing  being  adjourned,  and
    taking into account that Ms Boshir had provided a witness statement.

    Layli Begum's oral evidence

27. Mrs Begum adopted her witness statement in  examination-in-chief.   She
    said that she lives with her four children.  The appellant looks  after
    her because she is not well.   He  gives  her  her  medicine  and  does
    shopping for her.  He takes her to the doctor's and helps  her  in  the
    bath and shower.

28. Her health problems are diabetes, heart  problems,  raised  cholesterol
    and migraine.  She has cramping in the legs and  joints  and  finds  it
    difficult to sit down or stand.  Her body also shakes when she  speaks.
    She has high blood pressure.

29. She is unable to walk and gets breathing problems when she  tries.   He
    has helped her around the house for around six or seven years.

30. In cross-examination she said that her health problems are not referred
    to in her witness statement because she did not realise that  that  was
    necessary.

31. She does not receive benefits such as carer's allowance  or  disability
    benefit.

32. When the appellant was in prison, she had even more difficulties.   Her
    other children looked after her, but not like he did.

33. The children who live with her who are working are her second daughter,
    Sylvia Khatun, her fourth son, Abdul Rahim, and her youngest  daughter,
    Sofia Rahenna Khatun, who does  voluntary  work.   Her  third  daughter
    Shiria lives in a different house and also works.

34. She has lived in East Ham since 1990.   She  has  met  the  appellant's
    girlfriend.  She is a friend of her daughter Shiria.  She is unable  to
    remember the last time she saw the appellant's girlfriend  but  it  was
    about two or three months ago.  It was just before he was released from
    prison.  She is sure about that but is unable to remember the number of
    days before his release that she  saw  Ms  Boshir.   She  came  to  the
    Tribunal for a hearing in respect of bail.

35. As to the appellant's evidence that he had met Ms  Boshir  three  times
    since he was released from prison, she said that the appellant had told
    her that they do meet.  As to whether she visited Mrs Begum,  she  said
    that Ms Boshir works in a school and does not have any  holidays.   Now
    that she has holidays she would come to visit her.

36. She does not know where the appellant met her, given that Ms Boshir did
    not come to visit her.  It was most probably in Cardiff.  As to whether
    the appellant had travelled to Cardiff since his release  from  prison,
    the appellant had told her that  he  went  once  or  twice  to  Cardiff
    because she was not well.  She is not sure where they met.   She  knows
    that he goes to Cardiff but actually is not sure if it is Birmingham or
    Cardiff, then repeating that it was Cardiff.

    Submissions

37. Mr Melvin relied on  the  reasons  for  deportation  decision  and  the
    respondent's skeleton argument dated 29 July 2015.

38. He submitted that the only real additional evidence  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was in relation to the claimed relationship  with  Ms  Boshir.
    Although it was claimed that there were occasional visits whilst he was
    in prison, that is not in her witness statement.  The  evidence  as  to
    their relationship is purely a reaction to the findings of  the  First-
    tier Judge to the effect that their relationship was  not  genuine  and
    that the evidence of their relationship was scant at best.

39. The further evidence does not change that  conclusion.   The  appellant
    was released from prison in March 2015.  His evidence is  that  he  has
    met Ms Boshir on three occasions since.   However,  nothing  in  either
    witness statement refers to those meetings.

40. Mrs Begum said that she had not seen Ms Boshir since the  bail  hearing
    and that the appellant had visited her in Cardiff.  However,  his  oral
    evidence was that he had not travelled to Cardiff since his release.

41. The appellant's assurances before the Tribunal in 2008 as to his  being
    a changed character have been totally undermined by events since.

42. There is no medical evidence in relation to what are  said  to  be  the
    health conditions of the appellant's mother and she is  not  apparently
    receiving any benefits, such  as  carers'  allowance.   That  does  not
    square with what is said  about  her  inability  to  provide  financial
    support to the appellant in Bangladesh.   It  was  submitted  that  her
    health conditions have been grossly exaggerated in order to try to show
    dependency beyond ordinary emotional ties.

43.  I  was  referred   to   the   decision   in   Bossade   (ss.117A-D   -
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC),  in  respect  of
    which it was submitted that the facts were very  similar  to  those  of
    this appellant.  It is difficult to see how the appellant could be said
    to be fully integrated into UK society.  He has been sentenced to about
    nine years' imprisonment and has served at least three years.  There is
    scant evidence of any work.  There is some evidence of work for Asda in
    around 2006 but little since, apart from the letter provided today.

44. It is accepted that in  terms  of  paragraph  399A  the  appellant  has
    resided for most of his life in the UK but it was not accepted that  he
    is socially and culturally integrated in the UK or that there would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh.

45. I was referred to the Immigration Directorate Instructions Chapter  13:
    criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR  cases  ("the  Guidance").   The
    appellant had made little contribution to society and was a  danger  to
    the public given his antisocial behaviour.  His last  offence  was  for
    burglary.

46. Mrs Begum's evidence is that she had lived in East Ham  for  25  years.
    Newham is the centre of the Bangladeshi community in the UK with  about
    20,000 Bangladeshi residents in that area.  It is difficult to see how,
    with reference to the Guidance, the appellant could be said to have  no
    ties, friends or relatives in Bangladesh.

47. Ms Greenwood submitted that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    the  appellant's  integration  into  Bangladesh.   These  include   his
    relationship with his  mother  and  with  Ms  Boshir.   Ms  Boshir  had
    provided a surety of �3,000 in respect  of  his  bail,  notwithstanding
    that she is a teacher and does not have a high income.

48. She was too unwell to  attend  the  hearing.   Their  relationship  has
    endured for some considerable  period  of  time  despite  the  distance
    between them.  It would be unduly harsh on her for him to be  deported.
    Her father would not approve of the relationship if the  appellant  was
    not allowed to  remain  in  the  UK.   She  would  have  to  sever  her
    relationship with her parents.

49. The appellant has family life with his mother, which was a finding made
    in 2008.  Their relationship has continued and there is  no  reason  to
    depart from that finding.   The  appellant  provides  his  mother  with
    physical and emotional support.  He has always lived in  her  household
    and the relationship of family life has not ended  simply  because  the
    appellant has reached his majority.

50. The Immigration Rules do not  contemplate  family  relationships  other
    than  in  the  case  of  partners.   Therefore,  there  are  compelling
    circumstances to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

51. The family do not frequently travel back  and  forth  from  Bangladesh,
    although they visit.  That is  not  frequent.   Family  life  would  be
    broken if the appellant were removed.

52. There are in addition, very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into Bangladesh.  There is a wealth of evidence that he has
    integrated into the UK having been here since the age of 2.  English is
    his first language even if it were to be found that he does  have  some
    level of Bangladeshi language.  He has worked and has the capacity  for
    employment  but  his  employment  opportunities  have  been  restricted
    because of the conditions of bail.

53. There is evidence  from  his  brother,  Abdul  Rahim,  in  his  witness
    statement about the appellant's voluntary work  and  playing  football.
    His integration is not undone by his convictions.

54. He is assessed as  being  at  a  low  risk  of  re-offending.   He  has
    undertaken courses in prison, albeit that  the  time  he  has  been  in
    prison he has not been integrating into society in general  in  the  UK
    but he was preparing for his release.

55. As to very significant obstacles, he does speak some  Sylheti  and  has
    been exposed to some extent to  the  written  language.   His  language
    skills however, fall below what would allow him to engage with  society
    in Bangladesh.

56. Although both he and his mother say that there are some  family  there,
    they would not provide support for him.  They are either unemployed  or
    involved in subsistence farming.  It is immaterial that he grew up in a
    Bangladeshi area of London.  That would not help him to  integrate  and
    establish himself in Bangladesh.  The lack  of  family  life  there  is
    relevant.

57. He is unlikely to  commit  further  offences  and  is  likely  to  find
    employment in the UK.

    My assessment

58. The Immigration Rules that are directly relevant  to  this  appeal  are
    paragraphs 398-399A.  They provide as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law,

             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
              if -

             (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                  of his life; and

             (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."


59. The provisions of ss.117A-117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") are as follows:

        "117A: Application of this Part

             (1)  This part applies where a court or Tribunal is required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Act -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question the court or
                  Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117B, and

                  (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations listed in Section
                      117C.

             (3)  In sub-Section (2), "the public interest question" means
                  the question of whether an interference with a person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is justified
                  under Article 8(2).







         117B: Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                  That is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C:  Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted."

60. It can be seen that in relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  for  the
    appellant to succeed in his appeal he  would  have  to  establish  that
    paragraph 399 or 399A  applies,  or  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in those  two  paragraphs.
    I bear in mind the submission on behalf of the appellant to the  effect
    that  family  life  between  adults  is  not  catered  for  within  the
    deportation Immigration Rules and, so it was submitted, there would  be
    a need for  a  full  Article  8  assessment.  This  submission  relates
    primarily, if not exclusively, to his relationship with his mother.

61. I consider firstly the extent to which the appellant is  able  to  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 399 in terms of his relationship with  Ms
    Boshir, although in fact I was not  specifically  addressed  by  either
    party in relation to  paragraph  399(b).   The  first  question  to  be
    determined however, is whether the appellant does have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her.

62. I refer above to information received after the hearing in response  to
    the directions I gave concerning Ms Boshir's absence from the  hearing.
    The email from Ms Boshir  dated  2  August  2015  contains  a  detailed
    summary of what can be described as gynaecological problems, she having
    suffered from those problems since about 2009 according to  her  email.
    Suffice to say, the letter from the Clare Road Medical Centre and  that
    from the University Hospital of Wales are sufficient to satisfy me that
    Ms Boshir has given a satisfactory explanation  for  her  inability  to
    attend the hearing before me.

63. Mr Melvin's skeleton argument contends that the finding made  by  Judge
    Jackson in terms of the appellant's relationship with Ms  Boshir  is  a
    finding that should be preserved. As is made clear in the error of  law
    decision at [40] and [44], it is evident that  Judge  Jackson  was  not
    satisfied as to the genuineness and subsistence of their  relationship.



64. For the reasons I have explained, I  allowed  further  evidence  to  be
    admitted  in  terms  of  their  relationship.   That  further  evidence
    consisted of the witness statements from  the  appellant  and  from  Ms
    Boshir.  There was also  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.   In  Ms
    Boshir's witness statement she explains that she and the appellant have
    been in a serious relationship "for some time" and that her parents had
    previously approved of her relationship with him and their intention to
    get married.

65. Her witness statement continues however, to state that her  father  has
    told her that if the appellant is removed from the UK he would withdraw
    his approval of marriage and has in fact done so, subject to her  being
    able to show that he no longer faces removal.  In the  event,  she  has
    now decided that it would not be possible for  her  to  follow  him  to
    Bangladesh.  Although she intends to marry him and start a  family  she
    has had to listen to her father's advice about Bangladesh, and that  he
    has told her that if she defies him and goes  to  Bangladesh  with  the
    appellant she would be disowned.  Thus, she has decided that she  could
    not follow him there.

66. She further explains that his removal would therefore mean the  end  of
    their relationship and any plans they have for  marriage.   She  states
    that they intend to marry within months of his being allowed to stay in
    the UK.  She explains what her plans are in terms of moving  to  London
    and looking for employment.   Her  evidence  was  consistent  with  the
    appellant's in terms of the long-term plan being for them to  move  out
    of London because East London  is  the  environment  in  which  he  has
    committed a number of offences.

67. I am not satisfied however, that the appellant has established that  he
    and Ms Boshir are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  I  am  not
    satisfied that the evidence before me adds significantly to that  which
    was before Judge Jackson.  Before  her  the  evidence  was  of  limited
    frequency of contact between them which included only two visits to the
    appellant by Ms Boshir whilst he  was  in  prison.   Those  two  visits
    occurred only after the respondent's decision to deport the  appellant.
    The appellant had been in prison for the majority of the claimed period
    of their relationship.  Ms  Boshir  had  cited  work  reasons  for  not
    visiting the appellant more than twice  but,  in  the  words  of  Judge
    Jackson at [52] "without engaging with the fact that  she  works  in  a
    school and has extended holidays outside of term time".

68. Furthermore, the evidence between the appellant and his  mother  before
    me was inconsistent in terms of his contact with Ms  Boshir  since  his
    release from prison.  Mrs Begum said that the appellant had visited her
    in Cardiff since his release, but the appellant's evidence was that  he
    had not travelled to Cardiff to see her since his release. Furthermore,
    neither the appellant's nor Ms Boshir's recent witness statements refer
    to what contact they have had since his release.

69. In addition, I do not find satisfactory the appellant's explanation for
    not having seen Ms Boshir at weekends in terms of her having marking to
    do.  The appellant said that he had seen her three times since  he  had
    been released but Mrs Begum does not appear to  have  hosted  any  such
    visits and thought that they had met  in  Cardiff.   That  is  what  he
    apparently told her.  That is inconsistent with his evidence.

70. I also note that in Ms Boshir's email about her hospital  admission  on
    20 May 2015 when she had surgery performed under  general  anaesthetic,
    she said that she was  discharged  several  hours  later.   Indeed  she
    describes being admitted to the day surgery at Llandough Hospital.   In
    answer to my questions the appellant knew something of  the  nature  of
    her operation. However, he said that she was in hospital for  two  days
    definitely, and maybe even three.  His apparent lack  of  knowledge  in
    relation to her hospital admission is inconsistent with  a  person  who
    claims to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner.



71. So far as concerns his relationship with his mother, and  whether  that
    amounts to family life, of course the appellant has to  establish  that
    his relationship with her extends beyond ordinary emotional ties  given
    that he is an adult.  The relationship of family life between an  adult
    child and parent could amount to  family  life,  for  example,  if  the
    parent is in some way dependent on the child, or indeed vice versa.

72. In this case the appellant relies on the  assertion  that  he  provides
    assistance to her in terms of shopping, helping her with her medication
    and personal domestic needs, and his living in her household.

73. In 2008, as noted in the error of law decision at [45],  it  was  found
    that the appellant does have family life with his mother and  siblings.
    I observe in passing, that there was no argument before me in terms  of
    family life with his siblings.  The focus for the argument in terms  of
    family life was in relation to his relationship with his mother.

74. Although in 2008 it was found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant has family life with his mother (and siblings), at that  time
    he was aged 22.  He is now aged 29.   In  the  meantime,  he  has  been
    sentenced to a  further  four  years'  imprisonment,  the  most  recent
    offence of burglary resulting in  a  sentence  of  two  years  and  ten
    months' imprisonment.

75. It could not realistically be said that the appellant  is  in  any  way
    dependent on his mother in terms of any  need  for  emotional  support.
    Although he lives in her household, at his age his is capable of  being
    financially, emotionally and socially independent.  The  fact  that  he
    has continued to  offend  notwithstanding  his  relationship  with  his
    mother, indicates a lack of influence on her part  over  him,  and  his
    independence of thought and action.

76. Whilst I am prepared to accept that the  appellant's  mother  may  have
    some health conditions, what was said in evidence about her  health  in
    unsupported by any medical evidence.  I do not accept that  her  health
    is as poor  as  has  been  suggested.   Apart  from  the  lack  of  any
    supporting medical evidence, there is no reference to her ill-health in
    the witness statements.  I do  not  accept  the  explanation  for  that
    omission.  If her health was as poor as has been  suggested,  and  that
    she is thus dependent on the appellant, it is reasonable to assume that
    there would have been some reference to her health  conditions  in  the
    witness statements.

77. Furthermore, the appellant is not the only child of his  mother  living
    at home.  The evidence is that when the appellant has  been  in  prison
    the appellant's mother has been assisted by the other siblings.   I  do
    not  accept  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  provides   particular
    assistance to his mother beyond that of the other siblings,  given  the
    appellant's apparent  lack  of  commitment  to  her  in  terms  of  his
    offending and that there are other siblings at  home  who,  unlike  the
    appellant, have not apparently made the choice of excluding  themselves
    from the opportunity to care for their mother  by  committing  offences
    which have the potential to result in imprisonment.

78. I am not satisfied that the evidence establishes that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his mother (or with his  siblings)  amounts  to  more
    than ordinary emotional ties.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied that  he
    has family life with his mother.

79. The relevance of that conclusion is in terms of whether there are "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above those described in  paragraphs
    399 and  399A,  requiring  a  more  detailed,  or  further,  Article  8
    assessment.  This is a matter to which I shall return presently.

80. In terms of paragraph 399A(a), the appellant has been lawfully resident
    in the UK for most of his life.  It is not however, accepted on  behalf
    of the respondent that he is socially and culturally integrated in  the
    UK.  In summary, the  respondent  relies  on  his  criminal  offending,
    suggesting a lack of integration.   It  is  said  in  the  respondent's
    skeleton  argument  that  there  is  no  evidence   of   any   positive
    contribution  by  the  appellant  to  UK  society;  on  the   contrary.
    Furthermore, there is little evidence it  is  said  that  he  has  ever
    worked in the UK during his adult life.  I was referred to the Guidance
    in terms of the question of integration.

81. Whilst not disagreeing with the respondent's submissions  in  terms  of
    the fact of the appellant's convictions and the limited evidence of his
    employment, it does seem to me that the appellant having arrived in the
    UK when he was just 2 years of age, it is likely  that  notwithstanding
    his offending he is socially and culturally integrated in the  UK.   He
    was educated here and will have become integrated before having started
    his offending when he was 20 years of age.

82. The real question it seems to me is whether under paragraph 399A(c)  it
    could be said that there would be "very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into the country to which it is proposed he  is  deported",
    namely Bangladesh.

83. It is important in this respect to have regard to the findings of Judge
    Jackson who heard his appeal  on  15  July  2014.   The  error  of  law
    decision from [24] sets out Judge Jackson's findings.   These  included
    that the appellant's mother is fluent in  Sylheti  and  has  family  in
    Bangladesh,  albeit  that  her  parents  have  now  passed  away.   She
    concluded that the appellant retains linguistic  ties  with  Bangladesh
    with spoken Sylheti at least and that there is no reason why  he  would
    not be able to improve his language skills on return.  At [58] there is
    further  reference  to  the  appellant's   cultural   connection   with
    Bangladesh in terms of having been brought up  in  a  family  household
    where his parents' origins are in Bangladesh.  He lived  in  Bangladesh
    in 2004 and visited in 2000 and 2011.  He has met family members there.
     He saw three uncles as recently as 2011 at his sister's wedding.   She
    concluded that there is no reason why contact could not or would not be
    re-established on return.

84. At [59] it was concluded that the appellant has ties there which go far
    beyond his nationality, and remain in spite of the  fact  that  he  has
    resided in the UK since he was 2 years old.

85. Although the appellant's and his mother's witness  statements  provided
    for the  hearing  before  me  seek  to  re-open  the  question  of  the
    appellant's ties with Bangladesh, there is no basis upon  which  to  do
    so, there having been no  error  of  law  in  Judge  Jackson's  factual
    assessment in this respect, as is clear from the error of law decision.
     In any event, nothing in those  witness  statements  undermines  Judge
    Jackson's conclusions.   In  particular  in  relation  to  Mrs  Begum's
    parents having died, that was information that was before Judge Jackson
    who referred to it in the determination.

86. I am not satisfied that the appellant has established that there  would
    be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  Bangladesh.   I
    accept that there would be some obstacles to his integration there, but
    I do not accept that they would be very significant in the light of the
    established facts.

87. In these circumstances, the appellant is not able to meet  all  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 399A.  Thus, he is not able to establish that
    in terms of  the  Immigration  Rules  an  exception  to  the  automatic
    deportation provisions applies in terms of Article 8.

88. Furthermore, the evidence does  not  establish  that  there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above those described  in  paragraph
    399A, that assessment being informed by the factors set out in s.117B-C
    of the 2002 Act.  As I have already found, the appellant does not  have
    a relationship of family life with anyone in the UK, in particular  his
    mother or siblings.  There is no other basis  from  which  to  conclude
    that there are any such very  compelling  circumstances.   Indeed,  not
    only are there no "circumstances" over and above  399A,  there  are  no
    "compelling"  circumstances  and  still  less  no   "very"   compelling
    circumstances.

89. Even if a full or further Article 8 assessment  is  required,  applying
    the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 criteria, and incorporating ss.117A-C of  the
    2002 Act, the outcome of the appeal would be  the  same.   Indeed,  the
    potency of  the  public  interest  arguably  makes  the  case  for  the
    appellant's removal all the more emphatic when these statutory criteria
    are considered.

90. In summary, the appellant has not  established  that  the  respondent's
    decision would amount to a breach  of  his  Article  8  rights  in  any
    respect.

    Decision

91. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  That decision having been set aside,  the  decision
    is re-made, dismissing the appeal.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            8/10/15




                                    ANNEX

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  6  May  1986.   He
    arrived in the UK on 4 June 1988 with his mother, Layli Begum, on  what
    is  described  as  a  "family  visa".   He  was  subsequently   granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 2. The appellant has a number of criminal convictions  which,  aside  from
    bringing him before the criminal courts  has  brought  him  before  the
    immigration tribunals.

 3. The Secretary of State decided to make a deportation order against  the
    appellant for an offence of possession of a controlled drug with intent
    to supply for which he received a sentence of two  years'  imprisonment
    on 28 November 2007.  His appeal against that  decision  was  heard  in
    2008 by the then Asylum and Immigration Tribunal whereby his appeal was
    allowed.

 4. Subsequent convictions resulted in a decision dated 26 February 2014 to
    deport him under the automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.  The particular offence which prompted that decision was  one
    of burglary of which he was convicted  on  15  August  2013  and  which
    resulted in a sentence of two years and ten months' imprisonment.

 5. His appeal against the decision to make a deportation order came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson on 15 July 2014 whereby he  dismissed
    the appeal in a determination promulgated on 6 August 2014.

 6. Permission to appeal was given by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  on  20
    October 2014.  The specific ground  on  which  permission  was  granted
    relates to the changes introduced to the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") by Section 19 of the  Immigration  Act
    2014, as well as corresponding changes to the Immigration  Rules.   All
    these changes were introduced subsequent to the  hearing  before  Judge
    Jackson but prior to the promulgation of his determination.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 7. The first ground before the Upper  Tribunal,  in  summary,  is  to  the
    effect that Judge Jackson erred in law in failing to apply the  primary
    legislative and Immigration Rules changes introduced by the Immigration
    Act 2014 and HC 532 on 28 July 2014.  Although those changes  were  not
    in force at the date of the hearing, it was nevertheless submitted that
    Judge Jackson should have directed a further hearing or invited written
    submissions from the parties.

 8. Grounds 2 and 3 relate to the judge's conclusions  on  certain  factual
    matters, it being contended that those  conclusions  were  inconsistent
    with the findings that had been made in the  earlier  determination  of
    the deportation appeal in 2008.

 9. So far as the first ground is concerned, Mr Duffy conceded  that  there
    was an error of law in Judge Jackson's decision but  it  was  submitted
    that that error of law was not such as to require the  decision  to  be
    set aside, it not being material to the outcome.

10. Ms Greenwood relied on the skeleton argument before the Upper Tribunal.
     In essence, she submitted that the test to be applied as a  result  of
    the changes that were introduced is a different  test.   Formerly,  the
    appellant was  required  to  establish  that  he  has  "no  ties"  with
    Bangladesh.  Now, amongst other things, he must  establish  that  there
    would  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his   integration   into
    Bangladesh (both under the Immigration Rules and under Section 117C  of
    the 2002 Act).  It was submitted that, for example, findings would need
    to have been made in  relation  to  matters  such  as  the  appellant's
    ability to find employment and the level of cultural understanding that
    would be needed for him to integrate.  Similarly, there was no  finding
    in relation to whether his family in Bangladesh  would  be  willing  or
    able to assist him in integrating.

11. Furthermore, in terms of the new statutory  regime,  it  was  submitted
    that Judge Jackson did not explicitly find that there  was  no  genuine
    relationship between the appellant and Ringki Boshir,  the  appellant's
    partner.  The appeal was determined, it was argued, on the  basis  that
    there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  preventing  family  life
    between them continuing outside the  UK.   However,  a  "key  question"
    under the new Immigration Rules is whether it would be  'unduly  harsh'
    to require her to leave the UK with the appellant  or  to  remain  here
    without him.

12. It  as  submitted  that  Judge  Jackson's  findings  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's ability to speak, read and write Sylheti  are  inconsistent
    with those of Immigration Judge Herlihy who heard  the  appeal  by  the
    appellant in 2008.  Judge Herlihy found that the  appellant  "does  not
    read or write Bengali" and that Bengali is only spoken by him  and  his
    siblings to his mother.  However,  Judge  Jackson  concluded  that  the
    appellant speaks Sylheti and although accepting that he does  not  read
    or write  the  language  fluently,  he  is  likely  to  have  had  some
    experience of reading and writing Sylheti during  the  nine  months  he
    spent with his family members in 2004,  at  a  time  when  he  attended
    school in Bangladesh.  Judge Jackson further found that the appellant's
    spoken fluency is greater than he and his mother  had  claimed  in  the
    appeal.

13. In addition, it was  submitted  that  Judge  Jackson  had  not  made  a
    specific finding in terms of whether there was family life between  the
    appellant and his mother and siblings in the  UK.   Judge  Herlihy  had
    found that there was such family life and there was no good reason  for
    Judge Jackson to have departed from that finding.

14. The written grounds themselves, in terms of grounds 2 and 3, take issue
    with the judge's conclusions in terms of whether the appellant has ties
    to Bangladesh, those conclusions it is  said  being  inconsistent  with
    findings made at the earlier appeal.

15. Mr Duffy, although accepting that there was an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in failing to take into account the
    legislative changes and the changes to the Immigration Rules  prior  to
    promulgation of the decision, submitted that that error of law  is  not
    material  to  the  outcome.   We  were  referred  to  the   Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Chapter 13: Criminality Guidance  in
    Article 8 ECHR Cases" ("IDIs"), versions 4.0 dated 8 May 2013  and  5.0
    of 28 July 2014.  With reference to the question of 'no ties (including
    social, cultural or family)' it was submitted that the IDIs in relation
    to that former manifestation of the rules referred to the same sorts of
    factors as the IDIs for July 2014 refer to in the assessment  of  "very
    significant obstacles" to reintegration.  Indeed, it was submitted that
    this was a more difficult test for the appellant  to  meet.   Thus,  in
    terms of the decision in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC), if somebody has been found to have ties to the
    country of removal, it would be impossible for that person to show very
    significant obstacles to reintegration.  Even if there is a  difference
    in the two tests,  it  is  not  sufficiently  different  to  produce  a
    different result and accordingly the error of law by the judge in  this
    respect is not material.

16. As regards  the  other  grounds,  the  only  difference  between  Judge
    Jackson's findings and those of Judge Herlihy at the  appeal  in  2008,
    concerns the question of the appellant's  ability  to  read  and  write
    Bengali.  In any event, there is no difference in the determinations in
    terms of the appellant's ability to speak Bengali.

17. Furthermore, Judge Herlihy was not aware that the appellant would later
    go to Bangladesh for a wedding in 2011.  Judge Jackson was entitled  to
    use new information to make further findings of fact.   The  judge  had
    applied the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702  and  had  taken
    into account the passage of time since Judge Herlihy's decision.

18. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin and
    Mr Duffy relied on his reasons for doing so.

19. In reply Ms Greenwood submitted that the IDIs are only guidance but  in
    any  event  they  assist  the  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

Our assessment

20. In the appeal heard  in  2008,  so  far  as  material  to  the  present
    proceedings, the Panel made a number of  findings.   It  was  concluded
    that the appellant had family life with his mother and siblings in  the
    UK with reference to the "considerable evidence" presented to the panel
    of the extent of that family life.  It was  found  that  following  the
    recent  death  of  the  appellant's  father  there  was  a  "degree  of
    dependency" by the appellant's mother on the appellant, as  the  oldest
    son in the family.

21. At [64] it was found that although the appellant at that time did  have
    grandparents, aunts and uncles in Bangladesh, it was accepted  that  he
    does not read or write Bengali and that at  home  the  language  spoken
    amongst the appellant and his siblings is English, and that Bengali  is
    only spoken by him and his siblings to his mother.

22. At [72] it  was  noted  that  the  appellant,  if  deported,  would  be
    returning to Bangladesh having left there when he was 2 years  of  age.
    It was found that although he does have family  in  Bangladesh,  namely
    grandparents, uncles and aunts, all his formative life has  been  spent
    in the UK where he has been educated.  The Panel further concluded that
    although the appellant's mother has contact with Bangladesh as does his
    older sister, the decision to deport him  was  not  proportionate.   At
    [74] it was decided that there is "very strong evidence of family  life
    by the Appellant and his mother and siblings".

23. It is worth noting that the panel in 2008 was  considering  the  appeal
    with reference to paragraph 364 of the Immigration Rules which included
    a presumption in favour of deportation where a  person  was  liable  to
    deportation.  Paragraph 364 was subject to human rights considerations.

24. The material findings of Judge Jackson were as follows.   He  concluded
    that the appellant was  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In particular, he concluded that he was not able to
    meet the requirements in terms of paragraph 399 with  reference  to  Ms
    Boshir, said to be his partner.  Even if they were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  it   was   decided   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles preventing family life continuing outside  the
    UK.

25. In terms of whether the  appellant  has  no  ties  to  Bangladesh,  she
    referred to the decision  in  Ogundimu.   Reference  was  made  to  the
    appellant's life in the UK whereby at [56] it was stated  that  "it  is
    undisputed that he has family, private life and cultural  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom (as was found in 2008 by Judge Herlihy)".  It was  found
    that the appellant's mother is fluent in  Sylheti  and  has  family  in
    Bangladesh, albeit that her parents have now passed  away,  and  noting
    that the appellant's mother says that since then she has even  less  or
    not contact with her siblings.

26. At [57] Judge Jackson stated as follows:

         "The Appellant speaks Sylheti and whilst I accept that he does  not
         read or write the language fluently (I would find that he is likely
         to have had some experience of reading and writing  Sylheti  during
         the nine months he spent without his  UK  family  members  in  2004
         during which time he attended school in Bangladesh),  I  find  that
         his spoken fluency is greater than he and his mother  have  claimed
         in this appeal.  The Appellant's mother does not speak  English  at
         all to the Appellant and her evidence in the last appeal and in the
         written statements is that she has a close  relationship  with  the
         Appellant and currently that they speak regularly since he has been
         in prison.  Her oral evidence that they only speak briefly  because
         they do not understand each other and that one  of  her  daughter's
         explains what the Appellant has said later is inconsistent with the
         nature and detail of the close relationship of dependence  claimed.
         It is also  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  his
         previous appeal that his younger sister (the one  said  to  do  the
         interpreting for his mother) only spoke about 10% Bengali.  I  find
         that the Appellant retains linguistic  ties  with  Bangladesh  with
         spoken Sylheti at least and there is no reason why he would not  be
         able to improve his language skills further on return."

27. Further, at [58] as to social and family ties, Judge  Jackson  referred
    to the appellant having been brought up in a family household where his
    parents' origins are in Bangladesh and from whom he can be expected  to
    have at least some  cultural  connection  with  Bangladesh.   There  is
    reference to his having some experience of  living  in  Bangladesh,  in
    2004 and visiting in 2000 and 2011.  She referred to his having  family
    members there who he has met.  She also  referred  to  the  appellant's
    three uncles who the appellant had direct contact and  links  with  and
    whom he saw as recently as  2011  at  his  sister's  wedding.   It  was
    concluded that whether or not the appellant's mother remains in contact
    with her siblings, the appellant had in the past his own direct  family
    ties to Bangladesh and even if there has not been very  recent  contact
    there is no reason why contact could not or would not be re-established
    on his return.

28. In concluding at [59] that the appellant had not  established  that  he
    has no ties to Bangladesh, she concluded that he has ties there  "which
    go far beyond his nationality and remain in spite of the fact  that  he
    has resided in the United Kingdom since he was two years old."

29. Judge Jackson referred  to  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant  has
    connections with the UK, and to which we shall refer in more detail  in
    due course.  With reference to his connections with Bangladesh, at [67]
    she reiterated that he has ties remaining in Bangladesh,  and  at  [68]
    that  his  family  in  the  UK  have  visited  Bangladesh  on  numerous
    occasions.  She concluded that there is no reason to  think  that  they
    would not do so again in the future to have contact with the appellant.
     She also referred to their being able to maintain contact with him  by
    other means.

30. Whereas under the former paragraph  399A(a)  the  appellant  needed  to
    establish that he had "no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)
    with the country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
    UK", under the amended paragraph 399A he needs to establish that "there
    would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the country
    to which it is proposed he is deported."  As already indicated,  it  is
    accepted on behalf of the respondent that the judge  erred  in  law  in
    applying the former version of the rules.  Similarly,  it  is  accepted
    that Judge Jackson erred by failing to apply Section  117C(4)(c)  which
    again requires him to meet the 'very significant obstacles'  test.   We
    agree that the First-tier Judge did err in law in this respect.

31. Where we part company with Mr Duffy however, is in relation to  whether
    the error of law is material, or put another  way,  whether  it  is  an
    error of law that requires the  decision  to  be  set  aside.   In  our
    judgement it is such an error.  Whilst we accept that in many,  perhaps
    even in most, cases the conclusion that an individual has ties  to  the
    country of return would  mean  that  there  are  not  very  significant
    obstacles to the person's integration there, that in our view would not
    always be the case.  Whilst the IDIs  to  which  we  were  referred  in
    relation to both 'tests' contain factors that undoubtedly overlap,  the
    IDIs are not of course to be regarded as a checklist  of  factors  that
    dictate the outcome of  the  enquiry  in  terms  of  whether  the  very
    significant obstacles threshold has been met.  In any event, even  with
    reference to some of the factors set out in  version  5.0  which  deals
    with the amendments to the Immigration Rules, it can be seen  that  the
    answer in terms of the enquiry into 'no  ties'  and  'very  significant
    obstacles' will not always be the same.  Thus,  at  5.4.6  one  of  the
    considerations said to be relevant would include  whether  the  foreign
    criminal has previously demonstrated an ability to integrate in  a  new
    place, for example if he came to the UK as an adult.

32. Furthermore, it is possible  to  envisage  circumstances  in  which  an
    individual has ties of one sort or another to a particular country, for
    example linguistic or cultural ties, but where there would nevertheless
    be very significant obstacles  to  integration  if,  for  example,  the
    individual would not be accepted into society there and would  have  to
    live a solitary or isolated life.

33. Of course, although we bear in mind the submissions on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to the effect that on the particular facts the  outcome  for
    this appellant would be the same, we are not prepared at this stage  to
    come to that view.  It may be that in the light  of  such  findings  by
    Judge Jackson as are to be preserved, the outcome  will  in  the  event
    turn out to be the same, but that is not a matter that can be  resolved
    without further enquiry.  In addition, we are loathe to conclude that a
    failure to apply a relevant statute, by design introduced presumably to
    reflect what is regarded by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  a  new  and
    qualitatively  different  test,  is  nevertheless  to  be  regarded  as
    immaterial to the outcome.

34. Thus, we are satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
    to be set aside.

35. It is however important for the future conduct of the appeal to resolve
    the other grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant.

36.  In  terms  of  the  complaint  in  the  grounds  that  Judge   Jackson
    impermissibly made findings contrary to those of Judge Herlihy in terms
    of the question of 'no ties', we reject that contention.  In the  first
    place, Judge Herlihy was not concerned with the issue of whether  there
    were no ties to Bangladesh, that not having been a  formal  legal  test
    that needed to be assessed or evaluated.   Furthermore,  Judge  Herlihy
    herself found that the appellant would have family  in  Bangladesh,  at
    that time being grandparents, aunts and  uncles.   To  suggest  as  the
    grounds do that Judge Herlihy's findings "clearly amount"  to  findings
    of no ties to  Bangladesh  is  quite  simply  wrong.   Judge  Jackson's
    enquiry was focused in part on the question  of  "ties",  and  included
    reference to  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  visited  Bangladesh,
    including in 2011, having contact with relatives there.

37. We are entirely satisfied that her findings on this issue are  findings
    that are sustainable on the evidence and not impermissibly inconsistent
    with those of Judge Herlihy.

38. As to ground 3, which in effect contends  that  because  Judge  Herlihy
    found  in  2008  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant, Judge Jackson should have come to the same view,  again,  we
    disagree with that suggestion.  Apart  from  anything  else,  as  Judge
    Jackson pointed out at [61] the passage of time since  Judge  Herlihy's
    decision included two  further  convictions,  despite  the  appellant's
    assurances during the course of the appeal before Judge Herlihy that he
    would not re-offend.

39. To some extent, the  skeleton  argument  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  re-fashions  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  include  specific
    complaints about particular factual  findings.   These  relate  to  the
    appellant's claimed  relationship  with  Ms  Boshir,  said  to  be  his
    partner, the question of the appellant's language skills, and the issue
    of family life in the UK.

40. It is suggested at [28] of the skeleton argument that Judge Jackson did
    not explicitly find that the relationship between the appellant and  Ms
    Boshir was not genuine, but rather determined that aspect of the appeal
    on the basis that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  preventing
    family life continuing outside the UK.  However,  in  our  view  it  is
    clear that Judge Jackson did not accept that the  appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms Boshir.   As  the  skeleton
    argument points out, at [52] it was  found  that  "The  evidence  of  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and Ms Boshir
    is scant at best."  There then follows  examples  of  features  of  the
    evidence which cast doubt on that relationship, including  the  limited
    frequency of contact which itself  included  only  two  visits  to  the
    appellant by Ms Boshir whilst he was in  prison.   It  was  noted  that
    those two visits only  occurred  after  the  respondent's  decision  to
    deport the appellant.  Furthermore, at [53]  Judge  Jackson  stated  as
    follows: "In any event, even if there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  between  them,  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles
    preventing family life continuing outside  the  United  Kingdom."   The
    phrase "even if" makes it plain that she did not accept that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting relationship between them.   In  addition,  at
    [68] the same phraseology is used "even if they are in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship".

41. It is suggested that where at  [57]  Judge  Jackson  made  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's ability to use the  Sylheti  language,  she
    made findings contrary to those of Judge Herlihy in  her  determination
    at [64].  Judge Herlihy said at [64] that "we accept his evidence  that
    he does not read or write Bengali and that at home the language  spoken
    amongst the Appellant and his siblings is English and that  Bengali  is
    only spoken by him and his siblings to his mother."   It  is  submitted
    that without reference to the decision of  the  panel  in  2008,  Judge
    Jackson impermissibly came to a different view.

42. However, Judge Jackson did accept that the appellant "does not read  or
    write the language fluently" but concluded that he is  likely  to  have
    had some experience of reading and  writing  Sylheti  during  the  nine
    months he spent without his UK family members in 2004 during which time
    he attended school in  Bangladesh.   That  is  not  a  matter  that  is
    referred to by Judge Herlihy but again it is important to bear in  mind
    what the focus for the enquiry of the  respective  judges  was.   Judge
    Jackson was specifically here making an enquiry into  the  question  of
    what  ties  the  appellant  has  to  Bangladesh.   In  fact,  the  only
    difference in terms of the reading or writing issue is Judge  Jackson's
    addition of the word "fluently".  The difference in  our  judgement  is
    not material to the issues in any event.

43. So far as his spoken ability is concerned, the panel in 2008  expressly
    found that the  appellant  spoke  to  his  mother  in  Bengali.   Judge
    Jackson's conclusion that the appellant speaks Sylheti is even on  that
    minimum basis a sustainable finding.  The conclusion  that  his  spoken
    fluency is greater than he and his mother had  claimed  in  the  appeal
    before her, is supported by the matters referred to by Judge Jackson at
    [57]. Thus, she referred to evidence given in the earlier appeal  which
    was inconsistent in some respects with the evidence before her.  In any
    event, she was entitled to conclude that there  is  no  reason  why  he
    would  not  be  able  to  improve  his  spoken  Sylheti  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.

44. Again, in relation to the  appellant's  relationship  with  Ms  Boshir,
    having  stated  that  "The  evidence  of  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and Ms Boshir is scant at best",  it
    is plain that Judge Jackson was not satisfied  that  they  did  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.   Referring  to  the  evidence  as
    "scant at best", can only mean that she was not  satisfied  as  to  the
    relationship.

45. We have already noted  that  the  panel  in  2008  concluded  that  the
    appellant does have family life with  his  mother  and  siblings.   The
    contention on behalf of the appellant  as  expressed  in  the  skeleton
    argument is that Judge Jackson did not properly address the question of
    whether the appellant has family life with his mother and siblings, and
    impermissibly departed from the findings of the panel in 2008.  In  our
    judgement there is merit in that  contention.   Our  analysis  in  this
    respect  can  conveniently   start   at   [61]   of   Judge   Jackson's
    determination.  There she referred to the decision  in  Devaseelan  and
    its application to the facts of the appeal before her.  She noted  that
    Judge Herlihy found that there was strong evidence of family life  with
    the appellant's mother and siblings in the UK and  that  the  appellant
    had spent all of his formative life in the UK.  She noted that  it  was
    found that the decision to  deport  him  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to family and private life.  She  correctly
    stated that the earlier determination was only the starting  point  and
    pointed out that it was important to recognise that the previous appeal
    was not in relation to the automatic deportation provisions  under  the
    UK Borders Act 2007, but under paragraph 364 of the Immigration  Rules.



46. She went on to state as follows:

         "and that the passage of time since that decision has included  two
         further convictions (despite the evidence given and  assurances  in
         the last appeal that the Appellant would not offend again)  and,  I
         find, a change in  the  previous  elements  of  dependency  by  the
         Appellant's  mother.   In  particular,  the  Appellant's  brother's
         evidence was that he was  financially  supporting  his  mother  and
         sisters and in practical terms, the Appellant cannot be doing so as
         well  whilst  in  prison.   In  undertaking   the   assessment   of
         exceptional circumstances in this appeal,  I  therefore  take  into
         account the previous findings as a starting point but also consider
         the Appellant's current circumstances."

47. There is to be found the conclusion that  there  is  a  change  in  the
    previous elements of dependency by the  appellant's  mother.   However,
    the only explanation for  that  view  of  the  change  in  elements  of
    dependency by the appellant's mother is the financial support now being
    provided by the appellant's brother, rather  than  the  appellant.   We
    cannot  find  in  the  determination  any  other  reasoned  basis   for
    concluding that the appellant no longer has family life with his mother
    and siblings.

48.  In  addition,  Judge  Jackson's  earlier  findings  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's family life are in our  judgement  inconsistent  with  what
    follows.  For example, at  [67]  it  is  stated  that  the  appellant's
    "social, culture and family ties are strongest in the United  Kingdom".
    At [69], finding that the appellant's  deportation  was  proportionate,
    she stated that this was notwithstanding the length of time he has been
    in the UK since the age of 2 and "his family and private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom".

49. Whilst it may be that Judge Jackson would have been entitled to find on
    the evidence before her that the appellant did  not  have  family  life
    with his mother and siblings, the reasons for coming to that view,  and
    for departing from the findings of Judge Herlihy, albeit that they were
    made in 2008, would have to have been given.  We are satisfied that  in
    this respect Judge Jackson also erred in law.  Whether that is an error
    of law which in itself would have required the decision to be set aside
    is academic in our view but  for  the  reasons  already  expressed  the
    decision does need to be set aside.

50. The decision will therefore, have to be re-made.  We  have  taken  into
    account the submissions of the parties in terms  of  whether  that  re-
    making should be done in the  Upper  Tribunal  or  whether  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having  regard  to  the
    Practice Statement  at  7.2,  we  are  of  the  view  that  it  is  not
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is not a case where the matter is  to  be  heard  de  novo  and  the
    majority of findings of fact are not infected by the error of law.   In
    these circumstances the appropriate forum  for  the  re-making  of  the
    decision is the Upper Tribunal.  To that end, a further hearing will be
    listed in due course.

51. The parties are to take note of the directions below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.   If either party wishes to rely on  further  evidence,  that  party
         must comply with Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    2.   In relation to any witness whom it is proposed  should  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is no need for
         further examination-in-chief.

    3.   The parties  must  be  in  a  position  to  make  submissions,  if
         required, in relation to what findings of fact made  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Jackson are to  be  preserved.   In  principle,  the
         findings of fact made by Judge Jackson except as  infected  by  the
         error of law are to stand.

