
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00623/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th March 2018                   |On 28th March 2018                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |David Felkl                                       |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal who, following
    a hearing on 20 December 2017, allowed the appeal  of  Mr  David  Felkl
    (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of the Czech Republic,  born  on
    25 March 1972, against a decision of the respondent of 16 October  2017
    to  make  a  deportation  order  under  regulation  23(6)(b)   of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (the   "EEA
    Regulations"). The respondent had also certified the applicant's  human
    rights claim under regulation 33 of the EEA Regulations.

 2. The claimant's appeal did not include a challenge to the refusal of his
    human rights claim.

Procedural issue before me

 3. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the claimant at the  hearing
    before me at 10:00 hrs or by 11:00 hrs. Mr Duffy informed me  that  the
    claimant was "voluntarily removed" from the United Kingdom on 9 January
    2018.

 4. The reason why the removal was described as  "voluntary"  is  that  the
    claimant had signed a document entitled: "Post-decision disclaimer in a
    deportation case" (hereafter the "Disclaimer"). In this  document,  the
    claimant had ticked the option that states:

         "I  am  aware  that  I  have  an  outstanding  appeal  against   my
         deportation but I wish to withdraw this appeal and leave the United
         Kingdom as soon as possible. Ref: 27447582".

    There was also a declaration by  the  claimant  that  stated  that  the
    document had been read to him in the Czech language  and  that  it  had
    been understood by him.

    The document was signed by the claimant.

    It was also signed on 23 December 2017 at 10:20 by a Mr. Muhammad  Khan
    whose position was described on the document as "Home Office - AO".  Mr
    Khan confirmed that the claimant had signed the form  in  his  presence
    and that the form had been read to the claimant in his presence.

 5. Mr Duffy informed me that the Home Office has not been notified by  the
    claimant of his address  in  the  Czech  Republic.  I  noted  that  the
    Tribunal had not been notified of an address for the  claimant  in  the
    Czech Republic.

 6. The Notice of Hearing for the hearing on 19 March 2018 was sent  on  22
    February 2018. In relation to the claimant,  it  was  sent  to  him  at
    Morton Hall Immigration Reporting Centre  ("IRC"),  Swinderby,  Lincoln
    LN6 9PT.

 7. I considered whether the Notice of Hearing for the  hearing  before  me
    had been duly served. Although I am  aware  that  the  claimant  is  no
    longer at the Morton Hall IRC because he  has  been  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom, he has not notified the Tribunal (or the  Home  Office)
    of his address in the Czech Republic. I also noted that:

    (i)    By a notice dated 30 October 2017 under ref:  IA47,  the  First-
         tier Tribunal informed the claimant as follows:

             "We have  been  informed  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
             exercised statutory powers to certify your human rights  claim
             with the effect that  you  can  be  removed  from  the  United
             Kingdom before your appeal has been finally determined.

             If this is the case you will have to continue with your appeal
             after you have left the United Kingdom and  as  a  result  the
             address the Tribunal currently uses  to  correspond  with  you
             will need to be updated.

             If you wish to continue with your appeal  you  should  provide
             the Tribunal with your new address within 28 days  of  removal
             from the UK. If you do not do so your appeal  may  be  decided
             without a hearing on the basis of the papers currently  before
             the Tribunal."

    (ii)   In  addition,  the  claimant  was  notified  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  by  virtue  of  directions  issued  by  Designated  Judge
         McCarthy on 5 December 2017 of his responsibility  to  provide  the
         Tribunal with his new contact details within 7 days of his removal.

 8. Given that the claimant had been informed  in no uncertain terms  that,
    if he is removed, the address  for  correspondence  that  the  Tribunal
    holds will need to be updated and that, if he wished to  continue  with
    his appeal after his removal, he must provide the Tribunal with his new
    address within a certain time frame  (which  has  now  elapsed),  I  am
    satisfied that the Notice of Hearing dated 22 February  2018  has  been
    duly served on the claimant because it was sent to him at  the  address
    most recently held on record for the claimant before his removal.

 9. Given that the claimant has been  removed  and  he  has  not  made  any
    contact with the Tribunal, there is no reason to think  that  he  might
    attend a future hearing if the hearing on 19  March  2018  were  to  be
    adjourned.

10. In all of  the  circumstances  and  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective, I exercised my discretion and proceeded with the hearing  in
    the absence of the claimant and any representation on his behalf.

The judge's decision

11. There was a procedural issue before Judge  Hawden-Beal.  There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the claimant or the  Secretary  of  State
    before the judge.

12. At para 1 of her decision, the judge said that the paperwork before her
    indicated that the Secretary of State intended to remove  the  claimant
    from the United Kingdom on 15 December 2017. She said that she  had  no
    information before her that indicated that the claimant's  removal  had
    not taken place.

13. At para 8, the judge  noted  that  a  further  case  management  review
    hearing had been directed to be listed for the week  of  18th  December
    2017 once it became known that the claimant was likely to be removed on
    15 December 2017 (the judge's reference to 11th December at para 8 must
    be a mistake). At para 9, she said that neither the  claimant  nor  the
    Home Office had notified the Tribunal by  18th  December  2017  of  the
    claimant's address in  the  Czech  Republic  or  of  how  he  could  be
    contacted.

14. The judge therefore decided to exercise her discretion under Rule 25 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 (the "FtT Rules") and decide the  appeal.  Rule  25
    provides:

         "Consideration of decision with or without a hearing

         25. -    (1)  The Tribunal must hold  a  hearing  before  making  a
                  decision which disposes of proceedings except where

                  (a)  each party has consented to, or has not objected  to,
                  the matter being decided without a hearing;

                  (b)  the appellant has not consented to the  appeal  being
                  determined without a hearing but the Lord  Chancellor  has
                  refused to issue a certificate of fee satisfaction for the
                  fee payable for a hearing;

                  (c)  the appellant is outside the United Kingdom and  does
                  not have a representative who has an address  for  service
                  in the United Kingdom;

                  (d)  it is impracticable to give the appellant  notice  of
                  the hearing;

                  (e)  a party has failed to  comply  with  a  provision  of
                  these Rules, a practice direction or  a direction and  the
                  Tribunal is  satisfied  that  in  all  the  circumstances,
                  including the extent of the failure and  any  reasons  for
                  it, it is appropriate to determine the  appeal  without  a
                  hearing;

                  (f)  the appeal is  one  to  which  rule  16(2)  or  18(2)
                  applies; or

                  (g)  subject to paragraph (2), the Tribunal considers that
                  it can justly determine the matter without a hearing.

             (2) Where paragraph (1)(g) applies, the Tribunal must not make
                  the decision without a hearing without  first  giving  the
                  parties  notice  of  its  intention  to  do  so,  and   an
                  opportunity to make written representations as to  whether
                  there should be a hearing.

             (3) ..."

15. The judge did not identify the particular provision in rule 25 (1) that
    she considered applied in the instant case.

16.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  not  given  any  opportunity  to  make
    representations as to whether there should be a hearing.

17. The judge proceeded to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

The grounds and the limited grant of permission

18. There were two grounds, as follows:

    (i)    Ground 1 was that the claimant had withdrawn his appeal pursuant
         to the Disclaimer.

    (ii)   Ground 2 was that the judge erred in  law  in  proceeding  under
         rule 25 because rule 25 only applied if the claimant  had  in  fact
         been removed. There was no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
         claimant had been  removed.  The  judge  stated  that  she  had  no
         information that the claimant had not been removed  which  (it  was
         contended) was a misapplication of the burden of proof and amounted
         to a procedural impropriety. The claimant remained  in  the  United
         Kingdom until 9 January 2018 when he was removed voluntarily on the
         basis of his disclaimer.

19. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N  J  Bennett  refused  permission  on
    ground 1 which he considered unarguable. He said that an  appeal  could
    only be withdrawn under rule 17 of the  FtT  Rules  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal receives a  notice  to  that  effect  whereas  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not received any such notice until the Secretary of  State
    lodged the Disclaimer with the application of permission.

20. Judge Bennett considered it  arguable  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    disposing of the appeal  under  rule  25  in  circumstances  where  the
    claimant was still in the United Kingdom and therefore there  had  been
    no default in complying with the  Tribunal's  directions  issued  on  4
    December 2017 or with  rules  12(1)  or  (3)  and  there  had  been  no
    impracticality in giving the claimant Notice of  Hearing.  Furthermore,
    he considered it arguable that the judge had  not  complied  with  rule
    25(2).

Assessment

21. The Secretary of State did not renew the application for permission  on
    ground 1. It was therefore not open to  Mr  Duffy  to  contend  at  the
    hearing before me (as he sought  to  do  at  the  commencement  of  the
    hearing before me) that the claimant had withdrawn his appeal  for  the
    purpose of establishing that the judge had materially erred in  law  so
    that her decision should be set aside. If her decision falls to be  set
    aside on ground 2, then all matters are before me.  In  that  event,  I
    would  be  entitled  to  take  into  account  all  evidence  before  me
    (including the Disclaimer) in re-making the decision on the  claimant's
    appeal.

22. I am satisfied that the judge's decision to proceed under rule 25 gives
    rise to a procedural irregularity which amounts to an error of law. The
    procedural irregularity is that she  applied  rule  25  which  was  not
    applicable, for the following reasons:

    (i)    The judge speculated in assuming  that  the  claimant  had  been
         removed. Even in cases where  removal  directions  are  set  for  a
         particular date, this does not mean that removal will actually take
         place on the date in question.

    (ii)   In any event, I am entitled to take into  account  the  evidence
         that the claimant was in the United Kingdom as at 20 December  2017
         as a fact that existed as at the date of  the  hearing  before  the
         judge and which was an incontrovertible fact.  Evidence which post-
         dates the decision of a judge can be admitted to establish an error
         of law if it establishes an existing fact that is incontrovertible.
         I am satisfied that that is the case in the instant case.

    (iii)  The judge therefore erred in law in  proceeding  under  rule  25
         because none of the circumstances identified in  rule  25(1)  could
         apply given that the claimant was still in the United  Kingdom  and
         there had not been any breach of directions such that rule 25(1)(e)
         applied on any legitimate view. None  of  the  other  circumstances
         applied.

23. In the alternative, the procedural irregularity was  that  the  judge's
    failure to comply with rule 25(2) led to the  Secretary  of  State  not
    having had an opportunity to make representations as to  whether  there
    should be a hearing.

24. Given that the procedural irregularity has  led  to  the  Secretary  of
    State not having had a hearing and that the judge allowed the appeal, I
    am satisfied that the decision of the judge  involved  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that it falls to be set aside in its entirety.

25. I therefore proceed to re-make the decision on the claimant's appeal.

26. Mr Duffy submitted that the claimant had abandoned his  appeal.  Having
    considered this matter further since the hearing, I have concluded that
    the appeal cannot be treated as abandoned for the following reasons:

    (i)    s.104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         (the "2002 Act") does not apply;

    (ii)   s.92(8) of the 2002 Act does not apply;

    (iii)  there is no other statutory provision which applies; and

    (iv)   rule 17A of the UT Rules cannot confer power to treat an  appeal
         as abandoned where such power  is  not  conferred  by  a  statutory
         provision.

27. I have considered whether the claimant has withdrawn his appeal.

28. As explained at para 21 above, given that I have set aside the decision
    of the judge and that I am proceeding to re-make the  decision  on  the
    appeal, I am entitled to take into account the Disclaimer  because  all
    matters are now at large before me.

29. Although the Disclaimer is addressed to the Secretary of State, I  take
    into account that the claimant must  have  intended  the  Secretary  of
    State to communicate the Disclaimer to the Tribunal.

30. The claimant was removed on 9 January 2018. He was  informed  at  least
    twice (see para 7 above) of his responsibility to inform  the  Tribunal
    of his address in the Czech Republic. He has not informed the  Tribunal
    of his address in Czech Republic.

31. The directions dated 5 December 2017 also informed the claimant that he
    had submitted a document in the Czech language which the Tribunal could
    not consider because it  was  not  in  the  English  language.  He  was
    notified that if he wished the Tribunal to consider this  document,  he
    would have to  provide  a  translation.  Nothing  was  heard  from  the
    claimant subsequently.

32. The claimant has not made any contact with the  Tribunal.  He  has  not
    even provided an email address.

33. I have carefully considered all the material before me.  I  cannot  see
    anything which suggests that the claimant has the remotest intention to
    pursue his appeal or that he has any interest at all in the outcome  of
    his appeal.

34. The claimant has not notified the Tribunal that  he  has  appointed  or
    instructed anyone in the United Kingdom to represent him in his appeal.



35. In all of the circumstances, I have concluded  that  the  claimant  has
    withdrawn his appeal.

    Decision on error of law issue

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hawden-Beal  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to  be  set
    aside.

    The decision is set aside in its entirety. The Upper Tribunal proceeded
    to re-make the decision on the appeal.

    Decision on re-making of the decision on the claimant's appeal

    For the reasons given above, the Upper Tribunal has concluded that  the
    claimant has withdrawn his appeal.


[pic]

Signed      Date: 23 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

