


IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 December 2015                        |On 1 April 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  A. r. a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this case we maintain the designations as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Thus Mr A.R.A is the Appellant, the Secretary of  State
    the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  in  1968.   The  immigration
    history is that he claims to have been in the UK since  1979.   However
    the Respondent's records indicate that he was readmitted to the  UK  in
    1992 and his passport was endorsed with indefinite leave to enter.   He
    married a British citizen in 1997 and has four children below  the  age
    of 18.

 3. Between 1997 and March 2011 he was convicted of  numerous  offences  of
    dishonesty for which, variously,  he  received  prison  sentences,  was
    given  community  service  orders  and  ordered  to   pay   costs   and
    compensation.

 4. On 21 March 2011 at Southwark Crown  Court  he  was  convicted  of  two
    counts of obtaining property by deception, four counts  of  dishonestly
    making false representations to make gain  for  self/another  or  cause
    loss to  other/expose  to  risk,  and  nine  counts  of  various  other
    offences.  He was sentenced to a total of nine years' imprisonment.

 5. On 7 May 2014 a deportation order was made by virtue of  Section  32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 6. He appealed.

 7. Following a hearing at Cardiff Crown Court on 26 January 2015 Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Burnett  and  Mrs  Street,  Non  Legal  Member
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 8. The Tribunal  at  paragraphs  [62]  to  [69]  set  out  the  applicable
    provisions of  the  Rules  and  various  case  law  extracts  which  it
    considered relevant to the appeal.  It acknowledged that the exceptions
    in paragraph 399 and 399A of the Rules do not apply and that  he  would
    have to demonstrate 'very compelling circumstances over and above those
    described in 399 or 399A'.

 9. Having gone on to consider the Appellant's offending  history  and  the
    sentencing remarks of March 2011, the Tribunal found that the Appellant
    has an 'appalling record' [81] and  that  the  offences  committed  are
    'extremely serious'.  They acknowledged the 'great weight' to be  given
    to the need to protect public security against crime and to deter [82].

10. Moving on to  family  life  the  Tribunal  found  (at  [84])  that  the
    Appellant maintains a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife
    and children.  They go on (at [86]) to acknowledge that the nature  and
    quality of his relationship with his children  needs  to  be  assessed.
    They note that the children are British and that he had  been  involved
    in their lives until his incarceration in March 2011 [88].

11. They next go on to consider the best interests of the children and find
    that it would be 'very difficult' for the Appellant's wife and children
    to visit him in Iran and conduct their family life  there.   They  also
    find that it would be unduly harsh for the wife and children to  remain
    in the UK without the Appellant.  As such they made an overall  finding
    that the best interests of the children are to be with both parents and
    remain in the UK.

12. They conclude that the circumstances amount to very compelling  reasons
    over and above the matters listed in paragraph 399 and 399A. [105]

13. Advancing to consider Article 8 the Tribunal considered s117C(6).  They
    find that having been in the UK for many years he has no ties  in  Iran
    and reintegration would be difficult.  Also  that  the  effect  of  the
    deportation on his wife and  children  would  be  unduly  harsh.   They
    concluded that there are 'very compelling circumstances over and  above
    those in Exceptions 1 and 2'. [114]

14. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on 22 April 2015.

15. At the error of law hearing before us Mr Duffy  in  essence  sought  to
    rely on the grounds.  The Appellant left the matter for us.

16. We found the decision to be materially flawed.

17. It suffices to note the following: In Chege (Section 117D - Article 8 -
    approach) [2015] UKUT  00165  the  Tribunal  stated  that  the  correct
    approach where an appeal on human rights grounds has  been  brought  in
    seeking to resist deportation, is to consider (i) is  the  Appellant  a
    foreign criminal as defined by s117D(2)(a), (b) or  (c);  (ii)  if  so,
    does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules;
    (iii) if not are there very compelling circumstances  over  and  beyond
    those falling within 399 and 399A relied upon, such  identification  to
    be informed by the seriousness  of  the  criminality  and  taking  into
    account the factors set out in s117B.

18. There is no dispute  that  the  Appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal  as
    defined.

19. The Tribunal acknowledged the legislative framework to be followed  [62
    ff].  However, they failed to carry out  an  assessment  in  accordance
    with the structured legal framework required.

20. The first problem is the assessment of family life.  The Tribunal noted
    that there was no oral evidence or witness statements from his wife and
    children.  Also the comment in the refusal letter  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant continued to maintain a  relationship  with
    them.  Further, that he is a convicted fraudster.   Despite  that  they
    found there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and
    children [84].

21. They did so because the Appellant provided photographs of his wife  and
    children and these showed a change in the age of the  children.   Also,
    there was a letter about an 'Xbox' cable which 'shows she is still very
    much involved in the Appellant's life'.

22. We consider that in the absence of oral  evidence  from  his  wife  and
    children or  even  statements  from  them  and  noting  that  he  is  a
    'convicted fraudster' the finding that there was subsisting family life
    on the basis solely of some  photographs  and  a  single  letter  shows
    inadequate reasoning on a material matter.

23. The Tribunal then moved on to consider the  children's  best  interests
    noting that there was no 'independent information from GP's and schools
    provided to confirm  where  the  children  lived  and  when...also...no
    professional reports before the Tribunal as to  an  assessment  of  the
    children's best interests and welfare' [85].  They continue  (at  [86])
    'It is necessary to analyse the nature and quality of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his children in looking at the  next  issue  in  this
    appeal'.

24. The problem is that, apart from noting that the  children  are  British
    and but for the youngest, at school and that prior to his incarceration
    in 2011 he was involved in their lives [86,87], the  Tribunal  gave  no
    consideration at all to their best interests.

25. Issues that should have been considered included how would the children
    be affected were their parents to be separated; is the Appellant needed
    to  prevent  the  children  being  ill-treated  or  their   development
    significantly impaired;  has  their  care  been  other  than  safe  and
    effective.  Also, the extent of any practical difficulties  the  mother
    would face in caring for the children as she presumably was caring  for
    them during his imprisonment.  Further, whether there is evidence  that
    the children would lose contact with the Appellant  or  could  such  be
    maintained for example by phone, internet, by visits.

26. In failing to  give  adequate  reasons  on  this  material  matter  the
    Tribunal erred.

27. They went on to consider whether it would  be  'unduly  harsh  for  the
    child to remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be  deported'
    [89].  They concluded (at [104]) that it would be.  They find that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK since childhood and has no  ties  to  Iran
    [96].  However, there is simply no analysis of why it would  be  unduly
    harsh  for  the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  him   (399
    (a)(ii)(b)).

28. In failing again to give adequate reasons the Tribunal once more erred.

29. Further, in having failed adequately or at all to consider on the facts
    whether paragraph 399 or 399A applied, the  Tribunal  (at  [105])  went
    straight to 'very compelling circumstances' and  concluded  that  there
    were such.  They failed to engage with the requirement that  the  'very
    compelling circumstances'  are  'over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A' (paragraph 398).

30. Once more the Tribunal in failing to give adequate or any  reasons  for
    their conclusion that there were very compelling circumstances over and
    above those in 399 and 399A materially erred.

31. Having apparently allowed the appeal under the Rules the Tribunal  went
    on to consider Article 8.  This was an error as the  Rules  as  far  as
    deportation is concerned are a complete code.  In any event, yet again,
    their analysis was inadequate.  There was no analysis of why the effect
    of the Appellant's deportation on the children would  be  unduly  harsh
    (s117C(5)).  While they note s117C(6) they repeat the error of  finding
    that there would be 'very  compelling  circumstances'  over  and  above
    those in Exceptions 1 and 2 without giving adequate  reasons  for  that
    conclusion.

32. Having concluded for the reasons given at the error of law hearing that
    the decision was materially flawed we set aside the decision.

33. The Appellant stated that he would wish to lead evidence from his  four
    children.

34. We considered that as facts will need to be found on  material  issues,
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reheard
    with no findings preserved.

35. We therefore direct accordingly.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent of setting side  the  FtT  decision  and
remitted for rehearing and fresh decision, to  be  heard  by  a  differently
constituted bench.

Direction regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal ) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

