
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00247/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd March 2015                             |On 30th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 KEITH HOKO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Following a hearing on 6th November 2014 I found an  error  law  in
         the following terms in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
         such that the decision is set aside to be remade.


             1. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
                which  dismissed  his  appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
                respondent to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order.  The
                appellant had pleaded that his removal would be a breach  of
                the refugee convention and Article 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  The
                First-tier Tribunal  judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
                excluded from international protection  on  refugee  grounds
                and considered his appeal on human rights grounds  only.  He
                dismissed the appeal on grounds that he would be at risk  of
                being persecuted for  his  imputed  political  opinion.  The
                remaining heads of his grounds of  appeal  were  his  mental
                health and the risk of suicide  and  Article  8  because  of
                family and private life. The First-tier Tribunal judge found
                [22]:


                   "I am not satisfied that there is a real  risk  that  the
                   appellant would take his own life if he were faced with a
                   forced  return  to  Zimbabwe.  Dr  Buller  describes  the
                   "possibility" of self-harm. He does not  however  suggest
                   that this extends to a real risk  of  suicide.  Moreover,
                   the appellant's medical condition is not  otherwise  life
                   threatening. Suitable anti-psychotic  drugs  are  readily
                   available in Zimbabwe. The fact that this may be at  cost
                   is irrelevant. As previously noted, there is no  evidence
                   that mood stabilising medication would be unavailable  to
                   him in Zimbabwe. I have noted from the sources  that  are
                   cited at pages 54 and 155 of the  appellant's  bundle  of
                   documents, that the provision of psychiatric services  in
                   Zimbabwe is limited. It nevertheless  exists.  I  am  not
                   therefore satisfied that there is a real  risk  that  the
                   appellant would suffer inhuman or degrading treatment  in
                   Zimbabwe due to a lack of appropriate medical  treatment,
                   whether for a terminal condition or otherwise. It follows
                   that his removal would not result  in  a  breach  of  his
                   rights under Article 3 of the European Convention for the
                   Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental freedoms.  For
                   the same reason, I am satisfied that  removal  would  not
                   interfere  with  his  right  to  respect  for  moral  and
                   physical integrity under Article 8. If however I am wrong
                   in this - and Article 8  is  engaged  by  reason  of  the
                   effect that removal might have upon his medical condition
                   - then I consider that the appellant's removal  would  be
                   proportionate in order to protect the rights and freedoms
                   of others. The very fact that the appellant suffers  from
                   Schizo- affective disorder means that  there  is  a  real
                   risk that he will cause serious harm to others. That risk
                   will continue regardless of whether he is threatened with
                   imminent removal. This is because he in any event has  an
                   ambivalent  attitude  towards  taking   his   psychiatric
                   medication. I am therefore satisfied that his removal  is
                   justified by reference to one of the legitimate aims..."


             2. Permission to appeal had been granted on the basis  that  it
                was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  have  adequate
                regard to the two medical reports produced  with  regard  to
                his assessment of the risk of  self-harm  and  a  consequent
                breach of Article 3. The grounds seeking permission refer to
                the reasons for the challenge  to  the  Article  3  "health"
                findings, adversely infecting the  Tribunal's  findings  and
                that they amount to a breach of the appellant's physical and
                moral integrity. Permission was neither granted nor  refused
                on that ground and I therefore treat it as a live issue.


             3. There had been no challenge to the  findings  of  the  judge
                with regard  to  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
                protection on the basis of his claimed risk of being at risk
                of being persecuted for his imputed political opinion.


             4. Before me Mr Siddique confirmed that the appellant  was  not
                pursuing the  asylum  aspect  of  his  appeal  but  that  in
                addition to the Article  3  "health"  risk,  the  Article  8
                aspect was connected to the risk of  suicide  and  thus  was
                pursued although he made no  specific  submissions  in  this
                regard.


             5.  Mr Siddique submitted that relevant elements of the medical
                reports had been omitted in the summary set out in  [19]  of
                the determination. In particular he  refers  to  the  recent
                history of self harm  and  the  recent  incident  where  the
                appellant went to a bridge and heard voices telling  him  to
                jump off. He submitted that the judge failed  to  take  this
                into account in his assessment of future risk and  that  the
                low  to  moderate  risk  of  suicide  becomes  high  if  the
                appellant becomes unwell. The issue of risk  was  elaborated
                upon  by  Dr  Pick  who  agreed  with  Dr  Buller.  Although
                medication exists in Zimbabwe  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
                judge to consider and asses its accessibility given that the
                medical evidence was that if the appellant  did  not  access
                his medication he would become unwell and  would  become  at
                high risk to himself and others.  There  was  no  indication
                that the judge had considered  J  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629  in
                reaching his conclusions.


             6.  Mr  Diwnycz  disputed  that  there  had   been   inadequate
                consideration of  the  evidence  or  that  J  had  not  been
                considered. Although there had been no mention of J by  name
                it was plain that the principles  had  been  adequately  and
                correctly applied. He referred to the language used  by  the
                two psychiatrist and submitted that  both  had  applied  the
                test of 'real risk' as required; Dr Pick's report stopped at
                saying the risk was significant  rather  than  stressing  it
                would be "highly likely" or "real". The use of  these  words
                to connote the test to  be  applied  was  challenged  by  Mr
                Siddique who asserted that these words were relevant to  the
                balance of  probabilities  and  not  the  test  relevant  to
                Article 3.


            Undisputed findings


             7. In [19] the First-tier Tribunal  judge  made  the  following
                undisputed findings:
                1) The appellant suffers from Schizo-affective disorder. His
                   symptoms are  characterised  by  a  combination  of  both
                   psychotic and manic symptoms...
                2) He requires indefinite (most likely  lifelong)  treatment
                   with  a  combination  of  both  antipsychotic  and   mood
                   stabilising medication...He is at present  being  treated
                   with a combination of  Chlorpromazine  (an  antipsychotic
                   drug) and mood stabilisers (Depakote and Lithium)...
                3) There are five different  antipsychotic  drugs  that  are
                   readily available in Zimbabwe [the letter from the  FCO].
                   One of these  (Thioridazine)  is  considered  by  the  UK
                   medical authorities to be generally inappropriate due  to
                   its   impact   on   cardiac   conduction,   and   another
                   (Olanzapine)  would  be  unsuitable  for  the   appellant
                   because of his cholesterol problems. Whilst the remaining
                   drugs might  constitute  appropriate  treatment  for  the
                   appellant's psychosis, they would  need  to  be  combined
                   with mood stabilising medication...
                4) There is no evidence  that  mood  stabilising  drugs  are
                   unavailable in Zimbabwe. I express the  finding  in  that
                   particular way because the burden of proof  is  upon  the
                   appellant.
                5) The appellant's bouts of mental  illness  are  associated
                   with significant risk of harm  both  to  himself  and  to
                   others...
                6) The appellant's  most  recent  relapse  was  due  to  his
                   failure to take psychotic medication over a period  of  a
                   month. This was due to the stress  of  these  proceedings
                   and  his  ambivalence  towards  taking  his   psychiatric
                   medication. There is a high risk  that  he  will  relapse
                   again if he fails to take his medication...
                7) It is "possible" that a fear of forced return may provoke
                   the appellant to "an impulsive act of self harm"...


             8. In response to a question from me as to whether  there  were
                any elements of the psychiatrist evidence that had been left
                out of account Mr Siddique referred to the following:
                1) the reference by Dr Buller to  the  most  recent  relapse
                   where the appellant had gone to a bridge  and  had  heard
                   voices telling him to jump off  resulting  in  him  being
                   sectioned...
                2) that if the appellant becomes unwell  he  presents  as  a
                   high risk of suicide and it is whilst on medication  that
                   he presents as low to moderate risk...
                3) that  both  psychiatrists  demonstrate  how  quickly  the
                   appellant can become unwell...
                4) that becoming unwell is related not just in terms of lack
                   of medical treatment but also the  effect  of  stress  of
                   forced removal to Zimbabwe...
                5) accessibility of medication is relevant to the assessment
                   of risk...


             9. Although the determination considers the  medical  evidence,
                the concentration by the  judge  on  the  use  of  the  word
                "significant" by the psychiatrists  rather  than  the  terms
                used in the Rules of "real risk", has  led  the  judge  into
                error in his assessment of the medical evidence.  There  was
                no adequate consideration by the judge of  the  most  recent
                attempt by the  appellant  to  attempt  suicide,  which  was
                clearly a serious attempt that was only thwarted by a passer
                bye.  There  has  been  no  adequate   assessment   of   the
                appellant's  access  to  medical  care  in  Zimbabwe   which
                although not determinative, is certainly a matter which  has
                to be factored in  given  the  strong  medical  evidence  of
                potential self harm in  the  absence  of  adequate  care.  A
                further factor that may be relevant is  that  the  appellant
                became ill whilst in the UK and sought and was provided with
                treatment here.


            10. Taking all of these factor  together  and  recognising  that
                this is a difficult case to which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                judge evidently gave considerable and serious thought, I  am
                nevertheless satisfied that the judge has erred  in  law  in
                his approach to the medical evidence. I  am  satisfied  that
                the determination should be set aside to be remade in so far
                as Article 3 is concerned.


            11. I heard no specific  argument  as  regards  Article  8,  the
                submissions being subsumed into Article  3.  Although  there
                was  no  specific  argument  it  is   appropriate   in   the
                circumstances of this appeal for the appellant to  have  the
                opportunity to argue Article 8, given the  close  connection
                with the Article 3 grounds.


            12. Before me, I heard submissions on the basis that  if  I  did
                set aside the decision, I would not have  to  reconvene  the
                hearing. The parties would inform the tribunal whether  they
                intend to call one or other of  the  psychiatrists  to  give
                oral evidence.


            13. Having reconsidered this I am now of the view that given the
                nature and extent of the medical  evidence  that  is  to  be
                considered, it is appropriate for  an  oral  hearing  to  be
                listed before the Upper Tribunal  for  submissions.  If  the
                parties wish to call one or other psychiatrist to give  oral
                evidence they are to notify the Tribunal within 14  days  of
                promulgation of this determination.


            Conclusions:


            The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
            involve the making of an error on a point of law.


                I set aside the decision to be remade


            Consequential Directions


                If either party wishes to  call  oral  psychiatric  evidence
                they are to notify the Upper  Tribunal  within  14  days  of
                promulgation of this decision.


                Both parties to file and serve a skeleton argument no  later
                than 3 days before the date of hearing.


                The resumed hearing to be listed for  2  hours,  submissions
                only save as indicated above.


    Resumed hearing


      2. Mr Siddique, in his skeleton argument, stated that  Article  8  was
         not being pursued. I heard submissions from both parties  and  drew
         the attention of the parties to GS [2015] EWCA Civ 40.


      3. The  claimants  in  GS  all  suffered  from  very  serious  medical
         conditions and it was accepted that their life expectancy on return
         to their home country was extremely diminished. GS  considered  the
         relevant jurisprudence and despite  the  consequences,  found  that
         none of the claimants were successful in their Article 3 claims, no
         matter the clear adverse effects that refusal would bring.


      4. The medical aspects of those claimants are  different  to  that  of
         this appellant, whose  medical  condition  stems  from  psychiatric
         illness. I heard oral evidence from Dr Pick. He was  impressive  in
         his explanation of the appellant's condition and did  not  seek  to
         exaggerate the  consequences  to  the  appellant  of  a  change  in
         medication. He described the appellant as being at the extreme  end
         of the spectrum for his illness because he relapses so quickly  and
         the relapse is so severe. He becomes rapidly  disorientated,  hears
         voices not only telling him for example to jump from a  bridge  but
         also that he would survive such a jump. Dr Pick described  how  the
         appellant had on occasion to be placed in  a  locked  room  totally
         without stimulation in order to enable him to be brought down  from
         his dangerous state. He said this was a treatment used very  rarely
         now and indicated the serious nature of  the  appellant's  illness.
         Professionally his concern was that the appellant can  be  reckless
         with a  grandiose  sense  of  his  own  strength  alongside  voices
         commanding him to do things seriously adverse to his survival.  The
         appellant has been gradually deteriorating over the years  and  now
         he would not be able to adapt to change, as he would have been able
         to,  say  10  years  ago.  He  has  no  social  life  outside   the
         professionals with whom he  has  contact  and  the  day  centre  he
         attends. He can deteriorate very quickly; here in the UK he can  be
         collected and taken to a place of safety. What is seen during  this
         deterioration is a very angry  man,  not  a  man  who  is  mentally
         unwell; the appellant has  a  chronic  mental  illness  with  acute
         relapses. Dr Pick expressed the opinion that deportation  increased
         the risk of relapse; the appellant would not be able to  adapt  and
         this in turn leads to an increased risk of self-harm.


      5. In so far as the drugs available in Zimbabwe were concerned Dr Pick
         said the following: a change in drug regime has to  be  managed  by
         the reduction of the drugs he is currently on and then  after  that
         reduction has taken place, an  increase  in  the  other  drug.  The
         transition to change medication is in  the  region  of  2-4  weeks;
         there is a time lag of anti-psychotics taking effect  of  4-5  days
         and so the full effect of the new drugs could be 3-4  weeks.  There
         are risks associated with  that  for  anyone.  In  so  far  as  the
         appellant is concerned his history of rapid deterioration  adds  to
         the concerns of managing a change in drug(s). The change has to  be
         very carefully monitored. Other anti-psychotics that have been used
         in the past have  not  been  effective.  Lithium  was  unsuccessful
         because the appellant did not manage  to  take  it  with  the  care
         required. The same  was  for  other  anti-psychotics.  The  current
         medication and dosage is one that has been  tried  and  established
         over the years as suitable for the appellant. The options available
         for the appellant are limited and the risks associated with relapse
         during any change are significant.  He  has  been  on  the  current
         medication since 2007 and although this medication is  not  perfect
         it is providing a  degree  of  stability.  Any  change  had  to  be
         carefully managed and monitored.


      6. The drugs available in Zimbabwe according to  the  letter  dated  5
         February 2013 from the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  and  their
         suitability for  the  appellant  are,  according  to  Dr  Pick,  as
         follows:


             Olanzapine    not tolerated
             Haloperidol   the appellant was on this but taken off in  2007
                             because it was not tolerated
             Thioridazine  unsafe because of possible cardiac side effects
             Respiridone   the appellant has not tried this
             Trifluoperazine   this is a drug rarely used in the UK; it  is
                             one  of  the  older  anti-psychotics   (as   is
                             Thioridazine); there are possible cardiac  side
                             effects although Dr Pick could not say this for
                             certain.


      7. Dr Pick, in response to a question from me, said that as soon as it
         became apparent that the appellant would be removed from the UK the
         medical team responsible for his care would set in motion, as  much
         as was possible, a regime to enable risk to be minimised.


      8. The written reports by Dr Buller and Dr Pick paint a picture  of  a
         highly disturbed man who consistently over time made a  wide  range
         of threats to staff and also perpetrated  violence.  These  threats
         include specific threats of killing staff, sexual violence  towards
         female  staff  in  addition  to  self-laceration.  The  threats  of
         violence to others have diminished.


      9. There was no challenge by Mr Diwnycz to the evidence of Dr Pick  or
         the medical reports. I accept in full the evidence given;  Dr  Pick
         in his oral evidence was impressive, clear and  constructive.  When
         considered alongside the reports it is  plain  that  after  a  very
         short time in Zimbabwe, the appellant will not be  able  to  access
         drugs suitable for his illness; not because he cannot  afford  them
         but because they do not exist there. The only drugs  available  are
         unsuitable save for Respiridone which has not been tried. There  is
         no suitable combination available and in any  event  it  is  highly
         unlikely (see below) that the necessary managed change to the  drug
         regime would be available.


     10. The appellant has no  friends  or  relatives  in  Zimbabwe  and  no
         friends or relatives in the UK.


     11. Zimbabwe has a population in excess of 14 million.  The  background
         material on country conditions in Zimbabwe  refer  to  an  improved
         access to general health care and improving  access  to  drugs  and
         treatment. But the situation for mental health remains poor. The US
         State Department Report 2013 published on 27th February 2014 says:


             "Persons  with  mental   disabilities   also   suffered   from
             inadequate  medical  care  and  general  provision  of  health
             services. There were eight mental health institutions  in  the
             country with a  capacity  of  more  than  1,300  patients,  in
             addition to the three special institutions run by the ZPCS for
             long-term patients and those considered  to  be  dangerous  to
             society. Inpatients  in  the  eight  centralized  institutions
             received cursory screening, and most waited for at  least  one
             year for a full  medical  review.  A  shortage  of  drugs  and
             adequately trained mental  health  professionals  resulted  in
             patients  not  being  properly  diagnosed  and  not  receiving
             adequate  therapy.  There  were  fewer   that   10   certified
             psychiatrists  working  in  public  and  private  clinics  and
             teaching in the country. There was a 50 per cent vacancy  rate
             for psychiatric-trained nurses. More than 90  percent  of  the
             available psychiatric services were  provided  at  the  mental
             institution in Bulawayo.  NGOs  reported  that  patients  were
             subjected to extremely poor living conditions due in  part  to
             shortages of food, water, clothing, and sanitation.  Budgetary
             constraints  and  limited  capacity  at   these   institutions
             resulted in persons with mental  disabilities  being  kept  at
             home and cared for by family, sometimes in chains and  without
             treatment.
             Prison inmates in the three facilities run by  the  ZPCS  were
             not necessarily convicted prisoners. Inmates with  psychiatric
             conditions were examined by two doctors, who were required  to
             both confirm a mental disability and recommend that a  patient
             either be  released  or  returned  to  a  mental  institution.
             Prisoners with mental disabilities routinely waited as long as
             three years before being evaluated."


     12. There was no more up to date background material as to the state of
         health services  for  mentally  ill  individuals  in  Zimbabwe.  Mr
         Diwnycz  submitted  that  although  the  services  and   facilities
         available were not to the standard available in the UK, the lack of
         facilities did not meet the very high threshold required to  amount
         to a breach of Article 3. He submitted  that  there  were  possible
         drugs available to the appellant in Zimbabwe.


     13. Mr Siddique relied in particular upon J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  629
         and Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  He  submitted
         that there would be a risk of suicide  both  in  the  UK  when  the
         appellant was faced with actual removal pursuant to the deportation
         order and in Zimbabwe.


     14. Article 3 provides


             "No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
             degrading treatment or punishment."


     15. GS surveyed the relevant jurisprudence. In [39] Lord  Justice  Laws
         says:


             39. As regards Article 3 the  Strasbourg  court  has  repeated
             time without number that "to fall within the scope of  Article
             3 the ill treatment must attain a minimum level of  severity".
             But this formula is at too  high  a  level  of  generality  to
             provide, or even suggest,  a  paradigm.  In  my  judgment  the
             language of the Article shows that  the  paradigm  case  of  a
             violation is an intentional act which constitutes  torture  or
             inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment...."


         He goes on to consider the paradigm as evaluated in  Bensaid  v  UK
         (2001) 33 EHRR 205, D v UK (1977) 24 EHRR 423 and N v UK (2008)  47
         EHRR 39. D and N refer to article 3 principally applies to  prevent
         a deportation or removal where the risk of  ill  treatment  in  the
         receiving country emanates from intentionally inflicted acts of the
         public authorities.  He refers to [43] of N;


             43. The court does not exclude that there may  be  other  very
             exceptional cases where the  humanitarian  considerations  are
             equally  compelling.  However  it  considers  that  it  should
             maintain the high threshold set in D v the United Kingdom  and
             applied in subsequent case-law, which it regards as correct in
             principle, given that in such cases, the alleged  future  harm
             would emanate not from the intentional acts  or  omissions  of
             public authorities or non-State bodies,  but  instead  from  a
             naturally  occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of   sufficient
             resources to deal with it in the receiving country.


         Between [46] and  [67]  Lord  Justice  Laws  in  GS  considers  and
         analyses departures from the Article 3 paradigm. Having referred to
         N [42] to [45] and [OI-6] of Mwanje v Belgium (2013) 56 EHRR 35 and
         considered MSS v Belgium & Greece (2011) 53 EHRR2, Sufi & Elmi v UK
         (2012) 54 EHRR 9, SSHD v UK  (2013)  57  EHRR  18  and  Tarakhel  v
         Switzerland (Application no 29217/12) Lord Justice Laws said:


             "52....the gravity of what may befall an Article 3 claimant is
             not the only test of his claim. It has to be  shown  that  the
             impugned State should be held responsible for his  plight.  As
             regards that, the nature of the paradigm case and the scope of
             its proper expectations are surely critical....
             ....
             59. Thus  in  MSS  and  Sufi  &  Elmi  the  court  looked  for
             particular features which might bring the case within  Article
             3,  and  found  them  -  in  Greece's  legal  duties  and  the
             applicant's status as an asylum seeker, and in the  nature  of
             the crisis in Somalia.
             60. One may contrast the case of SSHD v UK (2013) 57 EHRR  18,
             in which a severely disabled Afghani  claimed  that  he  would
             face a real risk of ill  treatment  if  he  were  returned  to
             Afghanistan. The court referred to both MSS and  Sufi  &  Elmi
             (see paragraph 76 and 77) but followed neither; it  held  that
             the correct approach was that set out in N:
                  92.  The  Court   therefore   considers   that,   in   the
                  circumstances of  the  present  case  where  the  problems
                  facing the applicant would  be  largely  as  a  result  of
                  inadequate social provisions through a want of  resources,
                  the approach adopted by  the  Court  in  N  v  the  United
                  Kingdom, cited above, is more appropriate. The Court  will
                  therefore need to determine whether or not the applicant's
                  case is a very  exceptional  one  where  the  humanitarian
                  grounds against removal are very compelling"
             Applying N, the court held (paragraph 95) that no sufficiently
             exceptional circumstances.
             .....
             62. ....it is clear that the departures  from  the  Article  3
             paradigm given in MSS and the other  cases  to  which  I  have
             referred do not extend the reach of the departure allowed in D
             and discussed at paragraphs 42-45 in N v UK. The plight of  an
             individual whose life expectancy may be severely shortened  by
             his removal or deportation to his home  state  is  a  distinct
             state of affairs whose treatment under the Convention  is  not
             qualified  by  the  court's  approach,  for  example,  to  the
             reception conditions for asylum seekers. The circumstances  in
             which a departure from the Article 3 paradigm is justified are
             variable: the common factor is that there exist very  pressing
             reasons  to  hold  the  impugned  State  responsible  for  the
             claimant's  plight.  But  the  fact  that  there   are   other
             exceptions unlike D or N does not touch cases - such as these-
             where the claimant's appeal  is  to  the  very  considerations
             which D and N address."


         Lord Justice Laws cites [15], [36] and [69] of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL
         31 and refers to [89-94] as  the  ratio  decidendi  of  N  and  for
         completeness I also quote:


             "15.  Is there, then, some other  rationale  [other  than  the
             pressing nature of  the  humanitarian  claim]  underlying  the
             decisions in the many immigration cases where  the  Strasbourg
             court has distinguished D's case?  I  believe  there  is.  The
             essential distinction is  not  to  be  found  in  humanitarian
             differences. Rather it lies in recognising that article 3 does
             not require contracting states to undertake the obligation  of
             providing aliens indefinitely with medical  treatment  lacking
             in their home countries. In the case of D and in  later  cases
             the  Strasbourg  court  has  constantly  reiterated  that   in
             principle  aliens  subject  to  expulsion  cannot  claim   any
             entitlement to remain in the territory of a contracting  state
             in order to continue to benefit from medical, social and other
             forms of assistance provided by the expelling state. Article 3
             imposes no  such  'medical  care'  obligation  on  contracting
             states. This is so even  where,  in  the  absence  of  medical
             treatment,  the  life  of  the  would-be  immigrant  will   be
             significantly shortened. But in the  case  of  D,  unlike  the
             later cases, there  was  no  question  of  imposing  any  such
             obligation on the United Kingdom. D was dying, and beyond  the
             reach  of  medical  treatment  then  available."   (per   Lord
             Nicholls)
             "36.  What was it then that made the case exceptional?  It  is
             to be found, I  think,  in  the  references  to  D's  'present
             medical condition' (para 50) and to  that  fact  that  he  was
             terminally ill (paras 51: 'the advanced stages of  a  terminal
             and incurable illness'; para 52: 'a terminally ill man';  para
             53: 'the critical stage now reached in the  applicant's  fatal
             illness'; Judge Pettiti: 'the final  stages  of  an  incurable
             illness'). It was the fact that he was already terminally  ill
             while still present in the territory of  the  expelling  state
             that made his case exceptional." (per Lord Hope)
             "69.  In my view, therefore, the test, in this sort  of  case,
             is whether the applicant's illness has reached such a critical
             stage (ie he is dying) that it would be inhuman  treatment  to
             deprive him of the care which he is  currently  receiving  and
             send him home to an early death unless there is care available
             there to enable him to meet that fate with dignity." (per Lady
             Hale)


     16. In J Dyson LJ in paragraph 17 identifies the important  distinction
         both  in  Strasbourg  and  our  jurisprudence  of   "foreign"   and
         "domestic"  cases.  He  breaks  down  three  stages  (i)  when  the
         appellant is informed that a final decision has been made to remove
         him - domestic; (ii) when  he  is  physically  removed  -  domestic
         because in practice arrangements are made by the Secretary of State
         in suicide cases for an escort, and (iii) after he has  arrived  in
         his country of destination - foreign. In foreign  cases  he  states
         (paragraph 27 and 28) that in a 'foreign' case a causal  link  must
         exist between the act or threatened act of removal and the  inhuman
         treatment relied upon as  violating  the  appellant'  s  Article  3
         rights and that the Article 3 threshold is particularly high simply
         because it is a 'foreign' case. In paragraph  31  he  says  that  a
         question of considerable relevance is whether the


             "removing and/or receiving state has effective  mechanisms  to
             reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms,
             that too will weigh heavily against an applicant's claim  that
             removal will violate his or her Article 3 rights".


     17. In so far as 'domestic' cases are concerned, Dyson LJ refers to the
         different approach because, in particular, the concern to avoid  or
         minimise the extra territorial effect is absent. He refers  to  the
         sophisticated mechanisms that exist within the countries  signatory
         to the ECHR to protect vulnerable persons  from  self  harm  within
         their jurisdictions ([31]). In [37] Dyson LJ reiterates that


             "In order to establish the causal link between removal and the
             threatened breach of Article 3, it was necessary on the  facts
             of the case to show that the  proposed  removal  significantly
             increased any suicide risk that was  already  present.  AS  Mr
             Beal points out, this approach only becomes factually relevant
             where there is a risk of suicide both in the  UK  and  in  the
             receiving state."


     18. In J the appellant's fear of return and the link  to  his  risk  of
         suicide was closely linked to his subjective fear of  return  which
         was found not to be objectively well founded;  furthermore  it  was
         found that he would have the continued support  of  family  in  Sri
         Lanka. In [63] Dyson LJ notes:


             "...Having regard to the very high threshold for article 3  in
             foreign cases of this  kind,  the  IAT's  decision  cannot  be
             characterised as perverse. In particular: (i) the  adjudicator
             had found that any subjective fears which the appellant  might
             have on return were not objectively justified; (ii)  he  would
             have family support on his return; and  (iii)  he  would  have
             access to medical treatment in Sri Lanka which it was conceded
             was adequate (the IAT noted in this regard that  most  of  the
             treatment in the UK consisted in  the  prescription  of  anti-
             depressant  medication;  he  had  only  been  placed   in   an
             institutional setting on two occasions)."


     19. Although not a part of the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal,  [75]
         expresses concern at the  possibility  that  J's  family  may  have
         perished in the tsunami and that this


             "...might cause a significant deterioration in the appellant's
             mental health or render him significantly more  vulnerable  on
             his return to Sri  Lanka  than  the  adjudicator  of  the  IAT
             supposed would be the case"


     20. In Y and Z [2009] EWCA  Civ  362,  another  Sri  Lanka  case,  Lord
         Justice  Sedley  giving  the  lead  judgment  identified   "tenable
         concerns about the DIJs appraisal of psychiatric evidence  and  the
         availability of  treatment  and  extended  family  support  in  Sri
         Lanka". Y and Z considered whether the  fear  of  return  by  those
         appellants fell within the fifth "criteria" in J. that  is  not  in
         issue in the instant appeal which is primarily concerned  with  the
         other issue identified in Y and Z namely  the  sixth  "criteria"  -
         "whether the removing and/or  the  receiving  state  has  effective
         mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide. If  there  are  effective
         mechanisms, that too will  weigh  heavily  against  an  appellant's
         claim that removal will violate his or her article 3 rights."


     21. In [40] of Y and Z, Sedley LJ sets out in brief the evidence before
         him of the availability of psychiatric services in Sri Lanka.  This
         includes that the country has one of the highest suicide  rates  in
         the world, has only 41 qualified psychiatrists and is significantly
         short of skilled mental health staff; a psychiatrist:patient  ratio
         of about 1:9000 and  no  known  prospect  of  familial  shelter  or
         support. In paragraph [50] he states:


             "The first distinction which it  is  appropriate  to  draw  in
             relation to the present case is that, in contrasts  with  what
             is envisaged at the end of �N (Grand Chamber) the  anticipated
             self harm would be the consequence of  the  acts  of  the  Sri
             Lanka security forces, not of a naturally  occurring  illness.
             It would be, if it were to occur,  the  product  of  fear  and
             humiliation brought about  by  the  brutality  to  which  both
             appellants were subjected before they fled."


     22. In �52 he distinguishes Y and Z from RA (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA Civ
         1210 where that appellant's  account  of  torture,  which  was  the
         foundation of the psychiatric  prognosis,  was  rejected  and  that
         although there was a suicide  risk  on  return  RA  had  sufficient
         financial resources to access private health care. He  goes  on  to
         conclude in the appeals of Y and Z


              61. The upshot of the material  findings  and  of  the  expert
                  evidence which (for reasons I have given) stood  unshaken,
                  is that, although some psychiatric care  is  available  in
                  Sri Lanka, these two  appellants  are  so  traumatised  by
                  their experiences, and so subjectively  terrified  at  the
                  prospect of return to the scene  of  their  torment,  that
                  they will not be capable of  seeking  the  treatment  they
                  need. Assuming (what cannot be  certain)  that  they  come
                  unscathed through interrogation at the  airport,  with  no
                  known family left in Sri Lanka and no home to  travel  to,
                  the chances of their finding a secure base from  which  to
                  seek the palliative and therapeutic care  that  will  keep
                  them from taking their own lives  are  on  any  admissible
                  view of the evidence remote.
              62. None of this reasoning represents a license for  emotional
                  blackmail by  asylum-seekers.  Officials  and  immigration
                  judges  will  be  right  to  continue  to  scrutinise  the
                  authenticity of such claims as these with  care.  In  some
                  cases the Home Office may want to seek its own or a  joint
                  report. But there comes a point at  which  an  undisturbed
                  finding that an appellant has been tortured and  raped  in
                  captivity has to be conscientiously  related  to  credible
                  and uncontradicted expert evidence that the likely  effect
                  of the psychological trauma  (aggravated  in  the  present
                  cases by  the  devastation  of  home  and  family  by  the
                  tsunami), if return is enforced, will be suicide.
              63. On the present  evidence,  including  where  material  the
                  AIT's evaluation of it, the clear likelihood is  that  the
                  appellants'  only  perceived  means  of  escape  from  the
                  isolation and fear in which return would place them  would
                  be to take their own lives. For reasons I have given,  the
                  concomitant  findings  that  their  fear  is   no   longer
                  objectively well-founded and that  there  exists  a  local
                  health service  capable  of  affording  treatment  do  not
                  materially  attenuate  this  risk,  which  is  subjective,
                  immediate and acute.
              64. In this situation, return would in my judgment  reach  the
                  high  threshold  of  inhuman   treatment   unconditionally
                  prohibited by art. 3 of the ECHR.


         Discussion


     23. On the facts of this case I do not accept that the risk of  suicide
         in the UK demonstrates that the appellant will  commit  suicide  in
         the UK. He is receiving  excellent  treatment  and  those  who  are
         treating him are monitoring him closely and aware of the  potential
         risks. Although there have been  suicide  attempts  and  these  are
         increased during poor medication periods, those treating  him  have
         in place structures and strategies for  monitoring  and  protecting
         him. If and when the appellant is notified of actual removal, as Dr
         Pick said, those treating him would do their best to  ensure  there
         were adequate mechanism in place to minimise the risk; such  having
         been the case so far.  In  the  meantime  his  condition  is  being
         adequately monitored and maintained. Of course the risk  cannot  be
         obliterated altogether but the treatment available to the appellant
         here in the UK is such as to minimise it in so far as is  possible.
         Furthermore he will continue on the medication  (monitored),  which
         has been deemed to be the most appropriate.


     24. In so  far  as  the  risk  whilst  in  transit  is  concerned,  the
         respondent provides medical escorts and those  treating  him  would
         work closely with the respondent in managing removal  and  ensuring
         that the required  medication  was  administered.  Again  the  risk
         cannot be obliterated but the medical authorities will work closely
         to ensure that the risk is minimised.


     25. The issue as  to  the  'foreign'  element  is  more  complex.  This
         appellant is suffering  from  a  naturally  occurring  illness;  in
         contrast to Y and Z, his condition has not been  brought  about  by
         any adverse state action or intervention. He is at the extreme  end
         of the spectrum. He would not have access to his current medication
         in Zimbabwe firstly  because  it  is  not  available  and  secondly
         because there is no-one (friend or family) in the UK who  would  be
         able to transmit the required medication to him. Although there  is
         a possibility of alternative medication available its  efficacy  is
         currently unknown, it may  be  contraindicated  but  there  was  no
         significant evidence to that  effect  but  on  the  other  hand  it
         appears,  from  the  availability  of   psychiatric   and   medical
         personnel,  that  the  process  of  transferring  him  on  to  that
         medication would in all likelihood inadequately monitored and would
         in itself result in an increased serious  risk  of  self  harm  and
         deterioration in his mental capacity. There are 11 institutions for
         the  treatment  of  mental  health  inpatients  covering  a   total
         population in excess of  14  million.  The  inpatient  capacity  is
         likely to be somewhere in the region of 2000 (taking the figure  of
         1300 for eight institutions referred to in the background  material
         and  there  additional  institutions).   Although   screening   and
         treatment takes a lengthy period of time, given the seriousness  of
         this appellant's condition  and  his  extremely  rapid  decline  if
         inadequately medicated, a delay of even a week or two would  result
         in an extreme deterioration and seriously increased risk. He has no
         friends or family in  Zimbabwe.  There  is  a  severe  shortage  of
         adequately trained and skilled mental health professionals.


     26. The serious harm to which he would be subjected  is  however  as  a
         direct result of inadequate medical facilities in Zimbabwe and  not
         through any state action or inaction. There are some facilities and
         there was no significant evidence before me  to  indicate  that  he
         would  not,  because  of  the  manner  in  which  he  presents,  be
         transferred to such a facility rapidly. Whilst there is a delay  in
         screening, screening does take place and there is  the  possibility
         of alternative medication. This appellant is not  in  the  position
         whereby he would be kept chained by relatives; my attention was not
         drawn to any evidence that he would be  similarly  treated  by  the
         authorities in Zimbabwe or in the hospital facilities. Although  it
         is likely that he will become seriously ill, my attention  was  not
         drawn to evidence that he would not access those limited facilities
         either directly or through the actions of for example the police in
         detaining him because of his behaviour.


     27. The undisputed facts of GS were  that  he  would  very  likely  die
         within one or two weeks of his return to India. To that extent  his
         case was far more serious than that of this appellant. Although, if
         not receiving  adequate  medication  and/or  treatment,  he  is  at
         serious risk of self harm it is by no means the case that there  is
         no availability of medication or treatment or that the availability
         is such that it is reasonable  to  conclude  that  because  of  the
         seriousness of his condition he would  be  unable  to  access  such
         facilities as are available.


     28. It cannot be disputed that this appellant's quality  of  life  will
         seriously suffer if removed to Zimbabwe; but that is not consistent
         with his assertion  that  the  treatment  he  would  receive  there
         reaches the high threshold required to engage Article 3 protection.


     29. The applicant did not, through his  legal  representatives,  pursue
         his appeal on Article 8 grounds and no submissions were  made  even
         though I had granted permission to argue Article 8. The decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 therefore stands.


     30. For these all reasons I dismiss the appeal.






    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision


    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it



         Date 3rd March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
