
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00883/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 22 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR RICHARD BOLADE TALABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Avery, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Lloyd, instructed by Greenland Lawyers LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge  who  together  with
    Mrs S Hussain allowed an appeal by the respondent (referred to  as  the
    claimant) against a decision that s.32(5) applied  to  the  deportation
    order made 16 April 2013.

 2. The conviction giving rise to the deportation order was made on 16 June
    2011 at  Woolwich  Crown  Court  for  one  count  of  possession  of  a
    prohibited firearm.  The claimant was sentenced on the same day to  the
    minimum  sentence  of  five  year's  imprisonment.   He  completed  his
    custodial sentence on 8 July 2013 and thereafter remained for  a  short
    period in immigration detention until 15 July when he was  released  on
    bail.

 3. The panel found that the claimant who is a  Nigerian  national  born  2
    December 1991 arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 when  he  was  aged
    either 6 or 7.  His mother had arrived two years earlier  and  remained
    after she had unsuccessfully applied for  asylum.   Both  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in 2004.  The claimant has a  daughter  born
    18 August 2009 and although they do not live together, the  mother  and
    the claimant share responsibility for her.

 4. The panel noted that paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules
    did not apply  and  directed  themselves  that  it  would  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation would
    be outweighed by other factors.  They found that  the  claimant  had  a
    "significant relationship" with his daughter. Although he had  no  real
    connection with her whilst he was in prison, the relationship  has  now
    been "rekindled".  Furthermore they found that there were no ties  that
    either the claimant or his mother  had  with  people  still  living  in
    Nigeria although they noted that the claimant's  grandmother  is  alive
    (but gravely ill) and that his mother had stayed with a cousin when she
    visited.  The claimant had never returned to Nigeria since he  came  to
    the United Kingdom.

 5. After directing itself in accordance with the law  the  panel  set  out
    their conclusions on proportionality in [74] of  the  determination  in
    the following terms:

         "74. In determining this appeal, it seems to us  that  we  have  to
             decide whether the length of time the appellant  has  been  in
             the United Kingdom, bearing in mind that  it  covers  a  large
             part of his formative years - that is to say since he was aged
             7 - to his age as he is now 23 and the fact  that  he  is  the
             father of a young child who we accept  he  has  accepted  full
             responsibility for, which he shares with that of his  partner,
             the mother of the child and his own mother.

         75.   We  find  that  these  factors  are,  in   fact   exceptional
             circumstances  and  as  such  require  us  to  set  aside  the
             deportation order and allow the appellant  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom.  That is our  finding  under  the  Rules.   We
             would therefore allow the appellant's [sic] under the Rules as
             we would have done under Article 8 of the ECHR."

 6. The challenge by the Secretary of State is that:

      i) the panel had failed  to  establish  that  there  were  exceptional
         circumstances in the appeal that would preclude deportation;

     ii) the claimant's length of residence did  not  amount  in  itself  to
         something very compelling but  instead  a  factor  that  should  be
         weighed in his favour;

    iii) the claimant's paternal role towards his daughter was  not  one  of
         primary  caregiver  and   whilst   he   may   have   assumed   full
         responsibility for his obligations towards  her,  this  is  not  in
         itself an exceptional circumstance;

     iv) the panel had failed to balance  the  best  interests  against  the
         public interest;

      v) the panel had failed to conduct any assessment of the wider  public
         interest against the individual best interests of the child.

 7. In granting permission to  appeal,  UTJ  Kekic  observed  that  it  was
    arguable that despite the claimant's  long  residence,  the  panel  had
    failed to properly identify the exceptional  circumstances  given  that
    the contact with his daughter had only  recently  been  re-established.
    It was  also  arguable  that  the  public  interest  was  not  properly
    considered or assigned sufficient weight.

 8. Mr Avery relied on the grounds of application and drew our attention to
    SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550.  Although the panel had stated
    it would have regard to exceptional circumstances,  that  exercise  had
    not been undertaken.  There was no analysis of any risk of  reoffending
    and that the panel  had  not  adequately  engaged  with  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

 9. Ms Lloyd accepted that the reasoning was brief but did not consider any
    error material.  She argued that the panel  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    factors they were required to take into  account.   She  accepted  that
    there had been no analysis of the risk of re-offending.  She invited us
    to take a "global view" based on the length of time  the  claimant  has
    been in the United Kingdom coupled  with  the  child  as  well  as  his
    attempts to rehabilitate himself indicated by his current pursuit of  a
    degree course  at  university.   It  would  clearly  be  difficult  for
    somebody who has lived here for so long to resettle in Nigeria.

10. At the hearing after reflecting on these matters we gave  our  decision
    that we were persuaded the  panel  had  erred  in  law  and  set  their
    decision aside.  Both parties accepted that in the light  of  the  need
    for rather more detailed factual findings to be made in  the  light  of
    the changed approach now required under section 117A-D of the 2002  Act
    it would be appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Our reasons for finding error of law are as follows.  We consider  that
    the panel failed to undertake the exercise it had  directed  itself  to
    carry out  between  paragraphs  [69]  to  [73]  of  the  determination.
    Significantly there was  inadequate  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the
    presumption  in  favour  of  deportation  was   embodied   in   primary
    legislation and there is simply no reference at all  to  the  power  of
    that presumption in the briefly stated reasons in [74] and  [75].   The
    panel failed to  measure  the  positive  factors  which  it  considered
    militated against removal being the claimant's daughter and his  length
    of residence here against the  general  and  specific  public  interest
    arising in this case having regard to the nature and seriousness of the
    offence.  The public interest element appears to  have  fallen  by  the
    wayside.

12. The panel did not reach a conclusion  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  Even if it can be assumed that it proceeded on the  basis  that
    the best interests required the continuing presence  of  the  claimant,
    there is no reasoned analysis how this factor was assessed against  the
    public interest.

13. The panel's conclusions about the claimant's ties with Nigeria are also
    insufficiently reasoned particularly in the light of  the  evidence  of
    surviving relatives.  The  panel  was  entitled  to  give  considerable
    weight to the claimant's length  of  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    particularly formative years as a minor,  but  here  too  there  is  an
    absence of reasoning how this factor was assessed  against  the  public
    interest.

14. As we observed at the hearing, there was no evaluation by the panel  of
    the risk of reoffending.  The panel had noted  that  between  2008  and
    2010 the claimant had been convicted and sentenced to various  offences
    including possession of offensive weapons in public places, theft  from
    a person and assaulting a constable.  The sentences  given  had  ranged
    from community rehabilitation orders to 45 days in a  young  offenders'
    institution.  It appears that no probation report was placed before the
    panel. Instead they simply had a letter from the  claimant's  probation
    officer dated 12 March 2014 explaining that he had fully complied  with
    his licence since release and  that  there  had  been  no  evidence  to
    suggest an increase of his risk of reoffending.  The  author  does  not
    explain what that risk had previously been.  It was incumbent upon  the
    panel to reach its own view on the risk of reoffending as part  of  the
    proportionality exercise.

15. For these reasons we are satisfied that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    correct to challenge this determination.  We do not  consider  that  on
    the material before them, even if the panel had undertaken an  adequate
    and properly reasoned proportionality assessment that there could  only
    be one answer.   We are not persuaded by Ms  Lloyd's  submissions  that
    the errors made were not material.

16. We therefore set aside the decision for material error and as discussed
    at the hearing remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  its
    reconsideration  pursuant  to  s.12  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

17. The findings of the panel as to the length of  time  the  claimant  has
    been in the United Kingdom and the role he plays in his daughter's life
    are preserved.  We also preserve the finding that the claimant has  not
    returned to Nigeria since coming to the  United  Kingdom.   We  do  not
    preserve the findings the panel reached regarding the absence  of  ties
    with Nigeria.



Signed                              Date 20 August 2014
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
