
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
da/00315/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2019                        |On 23 December 2019               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                        Mr Ricardo Macqueen De AGUIAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Youseffian instructed by Sabz solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mill,  promulgated  on  17  September  2019,
    allowing Mr Aguiar's appeal against a  decision  to  deport  him  as  a
    result of a conviction for which he was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment, made the subject of a Sexual Harm Prevention Order, and a
    requirement  to  be  subject  to  the  Sexual  Offenders   Notification
    requirements for a period of ten years.  The appeal came  before  Judge
    Lal on 3 September 2018. He then allowed the appeal.  The Secretary  of
    State appealed successfully to the Upper Tribunal and  the  appeal  was
    then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where it was  heard  by  Judge
    Mill.

 2. The judge directed himself  at  paragraphs  [10]  to  [14]  as  to  the
    relevant legislation in particular the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016.  The judge  noted  the  respondent's  statement
    that he entered the United Kingdom in May 2007 at the age of  19  [22].
    He concluded that:

      i) the respondent had acquired permanent residence and had accrued ten
         years' continuous residence counting back from the date of decision
         to deport [22];

     ii) the respondent had initially been a student and  had  worked  part-
         time whilst studying; and although the documentary evidence of  the
         respondent exercising his treaty rights was  not  continuous,  that
         was not fatal and that looking at the evidence (including  that  of
         his father)  as  a  whole  together  with  the  oral  evidence  was
         satisfied that the respondent had either worked or studied  in  the
         United Kingdom throughout his residence;

    iii) it was for the respondent to establish he is entitled to protection
         on imperative  grounds  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous
         residence [24]; that he was substantially integrated;  and,  having
         had regard to the entirety of the evidence  that  the  sentence  of
         twelve months' imprisonment,  imposed  after  he  had  accrued  ten
         years'  continuous  residence,  did  not  in  his  case  break  the
         continuity of residence; and accordingly, it was for the  appellant
         to  show  that  the  appellant's  deportation  was   justified   on
         imperative grounds of public security;

     iv) the respondent's residence with his father is considered  to  be  a
         protective factor [34], and he  is  in  stable  employment  in  the
         construction industry;  has  successfully  completed  work  on  the
         abstinence from a list of substances and successfully completed the
         rehabilitation programmes [35, 36];  that  the  most  recent  OASys
         assessment dated 15 February 2019 confirmed that  he  had  complied
         with all expectations, no longer has contact with  his  peers  with
         whom he associated with previously in the course of his  offending;
         the risk he posed was not imminent  [40]  that  he  has  a  support
         structure in place and has been drug free from two years and "he is
         rehabilitated".

      v) the judge concluded that the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  the
         respondent was likely to reoffend further given his  rehabilitation
         and the low risk of future offending [43]; that he  was  integrated
         into UK society; and that the public interest does not require  his
         deportation.

     vi) that although fundamental interests would be breached in the  event
         of the respondent re-offending, on the basis of the findings he was
         not a threat, the most recent OASys Report showing that he is at  a
         low risk of offending but whilst it was not required  to  establish
         that  the  risk  of  reoffending  was  imminent,  the   appellant's
         lifestyle and behaviour since his release back into  the  community
         demonstrates he is not a real risk, he having  undertaken  specific
         targeted rehabilitation work  in  regard  to  his  former  offence.
         Accordingly the decisions by  the  respondent  breached  Regulation
         27(5)(c).

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i)  in finding that the respondent had ten years' continuous residence
         there being no reason for finding that the appellant and his father
         were credible; and,

     ii) in his consideration the respondent had  substantially  integrated,
         relying on oral evidence which was in issue, the judge  failing  to
         consider the  nature  of  the  index  offence  of  the  appellant's
         lifestyle and misuse  of  drugs  which  damaged  his  claim  to  be
         integrated;

    iii) in not noting that the correct level of protection  is  the  medium
         level conferred by  Regulation  27(3)  and  that  the  respondent's
         conduct does warrant deportation  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
         deportation order;

     iv)  in failing when concluding that the  respondent  did  not  pose  a
         sufficiently serious threat to give sufficient consideration to all
         the  evidence,  in  particular  that  he  was  subject  to   orders
         demonstrating that it had been concluded that he continues to  pose
         an ongoing threat to society, a Sexual Harm Prevention Order  being
         imposed early when the court is satisfied that it is  necessary  in
         order to protect a person or a  sector  of  the  public,  the  very
         existence of this  demonstrating  that  he  must  be  a  threat  to
         society, the judge erring in failing to consider the orders at all.

      v) In failing to take into account that there was a risk of  harm  and
         in failing to have proper regard to Kamki [2017] EWCA Civ 1715.

 4. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had not dealt properly with the issue
    of integration the judge referring only to the Sexual  Harm  Prevention
    Order at paragraph 2 and had not taken this into account in his overall
    assessment nor had he  taken  into  account  the  matters  set  out  in
    Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations.  He  submitted  that  although  the
    more recent OASys Report did show  that  there  was  a  low  chance  of
    reoffending it was still relatively high, there being a 20%  chance  of
    reoffending within three years, relying on MA that 17% is a significant
    threat.  He accepted that Kamki was not applicable.

 5. Mr Youseffian submitted that the judge's finding that  the  appropriate
    level of protection was the highest is sustainable,  given  that  there
    was no error in the judge accepting the evidence of the respondent  and
    his father.  He submitted further that the respondent had shown  he  is
    integrated, and that the judge had been entitled to conclude  that  the
    integrating links had not been broken by the term of imprisonment.

 6. The appellant's first challenge to the finding as  to  the  ten  years'
    continuous residence is founded primarily on the  submission  that  the
    judge should not have accepted the evidence of the  appellant  and  his
    father.  There is no indication that in the challenge to  the  father's
    credibility was made before the judge or within the refusal letter;  Mr
    Tufan was unable to take me to any indication that this submission  had
    been made.  Even taken at its highest, all that happened  is  that  the
    appellant's father was arrested and it then turned out that it was  the
    son who had been misusing the computer to download images.  The  father
    was not charged; that is not a proper basis on which it could  properly
    be said that his credibility was undermined.

 7. It was open to the judge to conclude having  heard  oral  and  evidence
    from the appellant and his father to find that continuous residence had
    been established by that and the documentary  evidence.   There  is  no
    indication  that  the  respondent's  evidence  was  contrary   to   the
    documentary evidence  which,  although  partial,  was  supplemented  by
    evidence from his father.  There is no suggestion either  that  it  was
    submitted that the respondent or his father's evidence  should  not  be
    believed.  Whilst it may be that, in retrospect, the appellant may have
    wished to have made these submissions, the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are not a vehicle for a party to make points  he  wished
    he had made to the First-tier Tribunal.  There being no other challenge
    to the finding of ten years continuous residence, I  am  not  satisfied
    that it has been shown that the judge made an error on this point.  The
    decision was sustainable and adequately reasoned

 8. Turning to the issue of the challenge  to  whether  the  appellant  has
    substantially integrated, the sole challenge within the grounds is that
    the judge failed to consider the nature of the  index  offence  or  the
    lifestyle of "chem sex parties" and misuse of drugs.

 9. At [29] of the decision the judge sets all these issues out.  She  sets
    out the background to  the  index  offence  at  [33]  as  well  as  the
    respondent's circumstances, and his an attempt to reform and to undergo
    rehabilitative treatment indicating that these were in the judge's mind
    in reaching her conclusion.  This express reference to the  history  as
    documented and elaborated by the respondent and his father at [24]  are
    indicators as are thee conclusions  at  [43]  that  the  appellant  has
    integrated into UK society.

10. It needs to be noted also that  before  the  respondent  began  to  use
    drugs, he had been educated here, had studied here and  has  held  down
    various different employments  whilst  studying.   The  employment  and
    friendships as well as a  long  term  relationship  are  indicative  of
    societal integration beyond his family.  Whilst the use  of  drugs  and
    the criminal offending are indicators that  there  has  of  a  lack  of
    integration these have to be  looked  at  as  a  whole.   There  is  no
    suggestion here that integrative  links  were  formed  as  a  means  of
    evading deportation.  It is also relevant to bear in mind that in  this
    case the appellant had been continuously resident  for  over  10  years
    before it appears the crimes were committed.

11. It is also of note in this case that the respondent is now employed, no
    longer and has a  stable  home  life.   He  attended  and  successfully
    completed treatment programmes and lives with his father which  as  the
    OASys Report noted, was a stabilizing influence.  He spent a relatively
    short time in prison and, taking this evidence in  the  round,  as  the
    judge said she did, the  decision  that  the  respondent's  integrative
    links had  not  been  broken  by  the  imprisonment  is  a  sustainable
    conclusion.  It is sufficiently clear, reading the decision as a whole,
    that although the reasoning could be more detailed, the judge did  take
    into account the relevant considerations  when  reaching  a  conclusion
    that the integrative links had not been broken which was  one  open  to
    her on the material and in the light of the circumstances set out above
    which were in the evidence before her.   Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did not in concluding that the appellant was entitled to
    the highest level of protection.

12. As Mr Youseffian submitted, the Secretary of State did not submit  that
    if this were engaged, that the imperative grounds were justified.  That
    is a sensible conclusion given the most  recent  OASys  Report  showing
    that the appellant presents a low risk of reoffending.  Accordingly,  I
    am satisfied that the decision did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law. It cannot be argued that the judge erred in concluding that the
    respondent's offending was such that his deportation could be justified
    on imperative grounds.  It is therefore strictly unnecessary to address
    the remainder of the grounds

13. For the sake of  completeness,  however,  and  in  the  alternative,  I
    conclude that the judge was justified that the appellant does not  pose
    a sufficiently serious threat.  The submissions made with regard to the
    OASys Report are mistaken as it is clear that the threat was  found  to
    be low.  I consider there  is  significant  merit  in  Mr  Youseffian's
    submission  that  the  existence  of  orders  is  not   sufficient   to
    demonstrate there is a  threat.   There  is  an  extent  to  which  the
    Secretary of State in her grounds appears to in  effect  say  that  the
    existence of the Sexual Harm Protection Order is if not actually, close
    to determinative of the issue of harm.  Here, I consider that the judge
    has properly considered all the chances of  the  appellant  reoffending
    including the fact that he has  now  in  her  view  (and  this  is  not
    challenged) become rehabilitated has undergone drug treatment and given
    that drug abuse was  a  significant  factor  in  this  offending  is  a
    positive  factor  as  is  the  stable  home  environment  and   regular
    employment.  The  judge  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    concluding  that  the  appellant  did  not  present   a   genuine   and
    sufficiently serious threat and accordingly, even on the  medium  level
    which the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  is  applicable,  the  judge's
    conclusion that he did not present a threat was one  open  to  her  and
    properly reasoned.

14. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  I
    uphold it.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it

Signed                                  Date 19 December 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
