
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00683/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Court of Justice           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4 April 2016                               |On 19 May 2016                |
|Determination dictated immediately following  |                              |
|the hearing                                   |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               Mr Herve Mpanzu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is  a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    (hereinafter "DRC"), who was born on 16 February 1993.  Having  entered
    this country in June  2007,  he  was  convicted  of  numerous  offences
    between 2009 and 2012, culminating in a conviction on 14 June  2012  at
    Harrow Crown Court  of  offences  of  robbery,  unlawful  wounding  and
    possessing an offensive weapon for which he was sentenced  to  a  total
    period of 66 months' detention.  This offence, or offences, involved an
    unprovoked attack on a stranger outside his home, during the course  of
    which attack the appellant stabbed the victim.

 2. In consequence of this  conviction  the  appellant  became  liable  for
    automatic deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007 and the respondent invited the appellant to  make  representations
    as to why he should not be deported and, having considered them, made a
    decision to make a deportation order, on 31 March 2014.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  consisting  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Powell  and  Dr  T  Okitikpi  (non-legal  member),  who
    following a hearing at Newport on 20 April 2015 dismissed his appeal in
    a determination promulgated on 27 April 2015.

 4. The appeal was founded upon his  Article  8  rights  and  also  on  the
    assertion that the appellant would be at risk  on  return  to  the  DRC
    because as a criminal deportee having served a sentence imposed on  him
    for his  crimes  in  this  country  he  would  be  subject  to  further
    imprisonment and ill-treatment if returned to the DRC.

 5. His appeal having been dismissed, the appellant applied for  permission
    to appeal against this decision, and was granted permission  to  appeal
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 22 May 2015.

 6. Although the appellant's grounds  for  seeking  permission  to  appeal,
    which were before Judge Fisher, included a  challenge  to  the  panel's
    finding that in terms of Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return, Judge Fisher did not specifically  deal
    with this aspect of the appeal, but, (as I stated in my note of hearing
    after the hearing before me on 9 November 2015), granted permission  on
    the very narrow ground indeed that it was arguable that the  panel  had
    given inadequate consideration as to whether or not the appellant might
    have had leave to be in this country such that its finding that he  had
    no status might arguably have been inadequately reasoned.  Judge Fisher
    said as follows, when setting out his reasons for  granting  permission
    to appeal:

         "Although the appellant may face an uphill battle, it  is  arguable
         that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  because  the  finding  that  the
         appellant had no status, if wrong,  may  have  infected  the  other
         findings on whether there were exceptional circumstances".

 7. When the appeal was before me on 9 November  2015,  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented and was also not present. I was  not  satisfied  at  that
    stage that the appellant, who was believed to  be  on  bail,  had  been
    properly served with notice of the hearing and in  those  circumstances
    was obliged to adjourn the hearing of  the  appeal  but  directed  that
    enquiries should be made as to where the appellant was and  whether  or
    not he had been served.

 8. Following this hearing, enquiries were made and it  appeared  that  the
    appellant had not been served because  he  had  been  rearrested  after
    being released from serving his sentence for the very serious  offences
    of which he had been convicted, and had been  charged  this  time  with
    possession with intent to supply class A drugs.

 9. The circumstances of this are unclear, but before  me  at  the  hearing
    today the appellant, who was present but  unrepresented,  informed  the
    Tribunal that the prosecution authorities had decided  not  to  proceed
    with this charge.  He had, however, been  recalled  to  prison  on  the
    basis (which the appellant accepted) that he had been in breach of  the
    terms on which he had been released on licence and it appears  that  he
    will now remain in prison as a result of his criminal convictions until
    at least 2017.

10. The appellant now being present, I was able  to  hear  the  submissions
    that he made as well as submissions made on behalf of the respondent by
    Mr Duffy, and was able to proceed with the hearing.

11. Although, as I have indicated, Judge Fisher did not give  as  a  reason
    for granting permission to appeal any observations as to the manner  in
    which the panel had dealt with the appellant's claim under  Articles  2
    and 3 of the ECHR, he did  state,  without  giving  reasons  that  "all
    grounds are arguable" and therefore it is incumbent on me to deal  with
    any submission which might be arguable under Article 3.  I do  so  even
    though these had not been made specifically  by  the  appellant  today,
    because as he is unrepresented it  is  necessary  that  these  grounds,
    which were at  least  canvassed  within  his  grounds  of  appeal,  are
    properly considered.

12. The way in which the Article 3 (and Article 2) claim was formulated  in
    the grounds is set out at paragraph 2  of  the  grounds  under  "asylum
    factors", as follows:

         "2.  The Tribunal failed properly to  consider  all  relevant  risk
             factors on return, in terms of the Refugee Convention and ECHR
             Articles 2 and 3:

             In the course of the hearing, it was noted that the notice  of
             appeal included asylum grounds and that, on 3 March 2015,  the
             appellant's representatives, for the avoidance of  doubt,  had
             written to the respondent to summarise risk factors:

           - the appellant's grandfather and uncle [now in the UK following
             grant of asylum]  had  played  significant  roles  within  the
             former Mobutu regime, unpopular with  the  Kabila  government,
             giving rise to perception of imputed political opinion;

           - return from a country within western Europe, a known centre of
             active Diaspora community;

           - return after a long period away;

           - return with no family or connections in the DRC.

             These risks are additional to  the  appellant's  status  as  a
             criminal deportee and additional to the fact that he left  the
             DRC with a visa in his passport marked  "family  reunion"  and
             "sponsor: Blemvenu Dinganga P[anzout]" linking him  to  family
             with the adverse political profile of refugee status in the UK
             ...

             The respondent did not refute  that  the  appellant  had  been
             interviewed by DRC officials here in the UK about his and  his
             family's history, in prison in 2013 ..."

13. The grounds then make representations with regard to what is said to be
    a risk by reason of his being returned as a convicted criminal who  had
    served his sentence, and observations with regard to the evaluation  of
    the status of a decision in R (P) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) which
    was a decision allowing a claim for judicial review on  the  particular
    factors of that case.

14. The other ground of appeal, which was specifically dealt with by  Judge
    Fisher  was  that  the  Tribunal  had  found  that  the  Tribunal   had
    misunderstood the evidence,  when  asserting  that  the  appellant  had
    entered and been in the UK unlawfully (at paragraph 23) whereas in fact
    he had entered lawfully in 2007, having entry clearance  under  refugee
    family reunion arrangements with indefinite leave to remain.

15. With regard to the Article 8 ground, it is right to state  that  it  is
    apparent that there was evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant
    had in his visa a stamp showing that he had indefinite leave to  remain
    which had been granted for the reasons as set out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.    Although  this  Tribunal  has  been  told  today  that   the
    respondent has not been able to verify this stamp, the  respondent  has
    not been able to provide any evidence to suggest that the  stamp  which
    was in the appellant's passport was not a  genuine  one.   Accordingly,
    this Tribunal must proceed on the basis that no  evidence  having  been
    adduced to challenge what on the face of it is a genuine stamp  in  the
    appellant's passport, he has indeed been in this country lawfully as he
    has stated.  Accordingly this Tribunal proceeds on the basis  that  the
    appellant having spent the majority of his childhood in the  DRC,  came
    here aged 14, and spent some four years or so here during the  bulk  of
    which he was committing criminal offences,  albeit  as  a  juvenile  to
    start with, culminating in the extremely serious offence for  which  he
    received a substantial period of imprisonment.

16. I deal first of all with whether there can be said to be  any  arguable
    error of law in the  panel's  failure  to  give  any  credence  to  the
    appellant's Article 3 claim.  Dealing first  of  all  with  the  claim,
    raised in the grounds, that the appellant might be at risk because  his
    uncle had been a supporter of the Mobutu regime, this is in my judgment
    entirely unarguable.  First of all, this was not  even  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument put before the panel, but moreover it is contradicted
    by the statement made by the appellant's uncle for those proceedings in
    which the uncle stated in  terms  that  "I  had  problems  with  Mobutu
    because I was involved with an opposition politician".  It was for this
    reason that he was given refugee status in this country.  So, in  fact,
    there could be no risk either to him or to his nephew  because  of  his
    uncle's support for a regime which as a  matter  of  fact  he  did  not
    support.

17. With regard to the assertion which is now made that the appellant would
    be at risk as a returnee who was a convicted  criminal,  following  the
    decision of the Presidential panel of this Tribunal in  BM  and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC (CG) [2015] 00293, this  is
    also unarguable.  I set out what is stated  at  head  note  1  of  this
    country guidance decision, as follows:

         "1.  A national of the Democratic Republic of Congo ('DRC') who has
             acquired the status of foreign national offender in the United
             Kingdom is not, simply by virtue of such status, exposed to  a
             real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  or   treatment
             proscribed by Article 3 ECHR in the event of  enforced  return
             to the DRC."

18. Having had regard to the evidence contained within the file and to  the
    skeleton argument put before the panel on the appellant's  behalf  this
    generalised  claim  could  not  on  this   evidence   have   succeeded.
    Accordingly, the panel did not  make  any  arguable  error  of  law  in
    failing to allow the appellant's appeal on this ground.

19. I turn now to the appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   It  is
    correct that the  panel  made  a  mistake  when  considering  that  the
    appellant had been in this country unlawfully, but in my judgment, this
    mistake could not have had any material bearing on  the  decision  that
    was made.  Although in the grounds of appeal, reference is made to  the
    European decision in Maslov it is entirely  clear  that  the  appellant
    could not have succeeded on the basis as asserted now.  This appellant,
    even though he had entered this country lawfully, had clearly not spent
    the bulk of his childhood in this country,  and  appears  regularly  to
    have broken the laws of this country since being here.  By the time  he
    was convicted of the serious offences referred to above,  he  had  been
    here only some four years or so, and had committed a  number  of  other
    offences.  Furthermore, as noted by the  panel  at  paragraph  22,  and
    contrary to what the appellant was attempting to claim before the panel
    (and attempted to say before this Tribunal as well) he had not  learned
    by his mistake, but, as the panel notes was accepted by the  appellant,
    "in the course of his current detention he  has  broken  the  rules  by
    having a mobile camera phone, cash and legal highs called spice in  his
    possession and has displayed  anti-social  behaviour  in  dealing  with
    challenges to his  behaviour  by  flooding  his  cell  and  threatening
    staff".

20. Although this does not have a direct bearing on  the  panel's  decision
    (although it would have a bearing on mine were I to find that there had
    been an error of law such that I had to remake the decision) even after
    being released from custody the appellant was in further breach of  his
    licence conditions such that he has been recalled to prison.   This  is
    clearly not a case of someone who has learned any lessons at all.

21. As the panel found, correctly, having regard to the provisions set  out
    within Section 117D of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2002
    and also to the considerations set out  within  paragraph  398  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in order to succeed in a claim that his  deportation
    would be disproportionate for Article 8 purposes,  the  appellant  must
    establish (the provisions within paragraphs 399 and 399A not  applying)
    that "the public interest in deportation will  only  be  outweighed  by
    other factors where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

22. On the facts of this  case,  the  public  interest  in  deporting  this
    foreign criminal, whose criminality has been  very  serious  indeed  is
    very large, and there are no factors that are  sufficiently  compelling
    as exceptionally should lead a decision  maker  to  consider  that  his
    removal under the automatic deportation provisions would be in any  way
    disproportionate.

23. On the facts of this case, it is hard to see how any panel  could  have
    reached  any  conclusion  other  than  that  the  deportation  of  this
    appellant was entirely proportionate, given the huge public interest in
    deporting foreign criminals who commit  offences  as  serious  as  this
    appellant has done.  Accordingly, although the panel made a minor error
    in concluding that the appellant had been in this  country  unlawfully,
    whereas he had in fact been granted indefinite leave  to  remain,  this
    could not have made a material difference to  the  decision  which  was
    made.  For the avoidance of doubt, even had  I  found  that  the  error
    might have made a difference, I would have had no  hesitation  at  all,
    had I been obliged  to  remake  the  decision,  in  finding  that  this
    appellant's deportation was entirely proportionate.

24. Accordingly the appellant's appeal must be dismissed, and I so find.

Notice of Decision

There being no material error of law in the decision of  the  panel  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  panel's
decision, upholding the decision of the respondent to deport the  appellant,
is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:    13 May 2016

