
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00377/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2014                            |On 12 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                THABANI MOYO
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hussain, instructed by Polpitiya & Co Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 3 November 2013  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  and  Mr
    Griffiths which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I  refer  to  Mr  Moyo  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The undisputed background to this matter is that the appellant came  to
    the UK at the age of 18 in 1999. He had leave until 30  September  2002
    and has been an overstayer since  then.  He  nevertheless  completed  a
    B.Sc. and worked. He formed  a  relationship  from  which  he  has  two
    children. He remained in contact with the children  until  August  2012
    when he was prevented from being in touch by  his  former  partner  but
    commenced contact proceedings and is now in indirect contact with  them
    again with a court order to  the  effect  that  he  should  be  allowed
    unsupervised contact for 3 hours every 3 weeks. The appellant formed  a
    new relationship after that with the mother of the children broke  down
    and is now married to a British national.

 4. On 26 September 2008 the appellant was convicted  of  possession  of  a
    false identity document with intent and  was  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment. As a result of that  offence,  the  respondent  commenced
    automatic deportation proceedings against him, a deportation order  was
    made on 31 January 2013 and notice of the decision to deport him  under
    served on 13 February 2013.

 5. The challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was that it:

          a. applied the wrong legal  approach  to  or  placed  insufficient
             weight on  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  the
             appellant

          b. failed to show how the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  were
             exceptional or sufficiently compelling so as  to  outweigh  the
             strong public interest in deportation

          c. did not consider the risk of reoffending

 6. With respect to those acting for the Secretary of State in this matter,
    the challenges brought appeared to me to amount  only  to  disagreement
    rather than identifying anything that might amount to an error of  law,
    notwithstanding the complexity of  the  law  and  legal  principles  in
    deportation cases.

 7. As regards the weight to be given to the public interest, the panel set
    out the correct approach at [11], referring to MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA
    Civ 1192. They weighed the appellant's offence as "serious" at [21]. It
    is expedient to mention here also that the panel assessed the  risk  of
    reoffending in that paragraph and found it  to  be  low.  There  is  no
    challenge to the reasoning behind that latter finding. Ground c.  above
    was taken no further by Mr Mills before me. That ground can be found to
    be without merit quite easily given the clear  assessment  of  risk  of
    reoffending at [21] and absence of  any  challenge  to  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning for that finding.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal went on to  note  at  [25]  that  the  decision
    pursued the legitimate aim of the prevention of crime and disorder. The
    panel addressed the weight to be given to the public interest at  [26].
    I set out most of  that  paragraph  as  it  was  the  subject  of  some
    discussion at the hearing:

         "...we accept  that  as  an  objective,  the  respondent's  aim  of
         prevention of disorder or crime is different from,  and  should  be
         considered to carry more weight than, that of  the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control. We  accept  that  in  the  balancing
         exercise, great weight should be given specifically to  the  public
         interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not   satisfy
         paragraph 398 and 399 or 399A. We refer to the view of the Court of
         Appeal in MF (Nigeria) that "the  scales  are  heavily  weighed  in
         favour of deportation and something very compelling (which will  be
         'exceptional') is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         removal". That comment however should not be taken out of  context.
         We observe that the Court expressly approved of the  way  in  which
         the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MF  had   dealt   with   the   issue   of
         proportionality, in applying Maslov criteria.  The  only  point  of
         disagreement  was  that  whilst  the  Tribunal  regarded  the  full
         consideration of proportionality as something that must take  place
         outside the Rules,  the  Court  found  that  the  Rules  themselves
         mandated or directed the decision-maker  to  consider  all  of  the
         relevant  article  8  criteria  as  required  by   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence to. Hence the question whether this was  to  be  done
         within or outside  the  Rules  was,  the  Court  said,  "a  sterile
         question", and one of form not substance (my emphasis)."

 9. Firstly, then, at [11] and [26] the  panel  was  clearly  applying  the
    correct approach to the weight to be placed in  favour  of  the  public
    interest in deportation. They set out the high degree of weight  to  be
    given to the public interest clearly, did so more than once and  cannot
    be said to have failed to give "adequate consideration" to  the  public
    interest in deportation which  is  the  respondent's  first  ground  of
    appeal. The panel does not refer in terms to the case of SS  Nigeria  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 but the test set out there for a  case  having
    to be very strong to defeat the view of Parliament that deportation  is
    in the public interest is adopted in MF (Nigeria)  to  which  they  had
    thorough regard. I did not find that this ground had merit.

10. Also arising from [26] of the determination, Mr Mills sought  to  argue
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the correct guidance  from
    MF (Nigeria). He based that submission  on  the  latter  part  of  [26]
    commencing "That comment however should not be taken out  of  context".
    My reading, however,  of the latter part of [26] is that the First-tier
    Tribunal was stating that the Court  of  Appeal  were  not  seeking  to
    suggest in MF (Nigeria) that the recognition of the significant  weight
    to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation  cases  makes
    Strasbourg jurisprudence  redundant  or  sidelines  ECHR  case  law  on
    deportation. If that were so the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  would
    not have expressly approved of the reliance of the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    Maslov. That comment appears to me to be  uncontentious  and  does  not
    indicate that the panel took an incorrect approach to the weight to  be
    afforded to the public interest or high  threshold  to  be  reached  in
    order for a deportation case to succeed.

11. For these reasons, I did not find that the respondent's first ground of
    appeal had any merit.

12. I also did not find that the panel  failed  to  give  any  or  adequate
    reasons for  finding  exceptional  circumstances  that  outweighed  the
    public interest  in  deportation,  the  second  ground  of  appeal.  No
    challenge is brought to the First-tier Tribunal's  assessment  at  [23]
    that the best interests of  the  appellant's  children  are  in  having
    direct contact with their father. That is  not  surprising  given  that
    this is the view of the specialist family court which has  investigated
    the circumstances of these children in detail and  made  an  order  for
    direct contact. The reasoning  at  [27]  clearly  identifies  the  best
    interests of the appellant's children  as  "a  consideration  of  great
    weight" and as the factor that led the panel to find  that  the  public
    interest in deportation was outweighed on the facts of this  particular
    case. That was a conclusion open to them on the evidence  before  them.
    Mr Mills suggested that the panel did not state in terms that the  best
    interests of the children here were very compelling or exceptional such
    that the test in MF (Nigeria) could  be  said  to  have  been  properly
    applied. That appeared to me to be merely a question of  semantics.  As
    above, this panel clearly had the correct test in mind, stating it more
    than once.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 10 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
