
IAC-FH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th December 2014                            |On 17th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             aftab hussain aftab
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson of Counsel instructed by Burton &
Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Jones made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 18th July 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 29th September 1979.  He
    entered the UK on 10th December  1998  to  join  his  wife,  a  British
    citizen, and was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  15th  November
    1999.  They have five children born in 1999, 2001, 2002, 2006 and 2008,
    who are British citizens, as is the Appellant's wife.

 3. The  Appellant  was  convicted  of  a  conspiracy  to  assist  unlawful
    immigration at Sheffield Crown Court on 4th October 2012 and,  on  18th
    January 2013, sentenced to two years' imprisonment. On 3 February  2014
    the Respondent made a Deportation Order by virtue of section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 4. The judge was satisfied that the Appellant's risk of  re-offending  was
    low, but said that he continued to show a  lack  of  insight  into  the
    nature of his  offence.   The  Appellant  had  committed  his  criminal
    offence whilst an adult and had shown little if any remorse or  insight
    or perception of his criminality, and was evasive in his  evidence.  He
    was not a credible witness. The combination of his criminal record  and
    the  Crown  Court  judge's  sentencing  remarks  were  significant   in
    assessing and balancing the Appellant's and  his  family's  rights  and
    interests.

 5. It was conceded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  within  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  rejected  the  submission  that   the
    Appellant could not properly be returned to Pakistan on account of  any
    health issues and he  said  that  he  had  transferable  skills  and  a
    comprehensive knowledge of his country's language and culture.   Whilst
    he accepted that the Appellant had established a private  life  in  the
    UK, his wider family lives in Pakistan and would be able to welcome him
    back; he would be able to re-establish  his  life  there.   Deportation
    would be proportionate when balanced against the  Appellant's  and  his
    family's right to family life in the UK.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider the best interests of the children as a  primary
    consideration.  In particular he had not had  regard  to  the  evidence
    before him of their views, the evidence of the health problems suffered
    by their mother and the concerns about her ability to care for them, in
    particular the difficulties she had had whilst he was in prison.  There
    was also evidence of the health and educational difficulties of two  of
    the children and the positive impact that the Appellant's presence  had
    on their welfare.

 7. The assessment of proportionality focused upon the offending  behaviour
    of the Appellant and the availability of support for the mother in  his
    absence, but no proper consideration of other relevant evidence and  in
    particular the impact of the Appellant's deportation upon  the  quality
    of family life.

 8. The judge's assessment under the Rules was flawed in finding that there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to his wife  relocating  to  Pakistan.
    He failed to take into account the  fact  that  it  would  be  entirely
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave  the  UK  particularly  in
    light of the  special  needs  of  two  of  them.   Notwithstanding  the
    concession made by Counsel, the children could  not  be  cared  for  by
    another family member in the Appellant's absence because the  care  the
    mother provides is insufficient.

 9. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 13th October 2014. However at the hearing it
    was accepted that the  basis  of  the  grant  of  permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chalkley was misconceived.

Submissions

10. Mr Nicholson submitted that the clear submissions made  by  Counsel  on
    Section 55, as recorded at paragraph 13 of the determination, were  not
    taken into account by the judge.  It was accepted that  the  two  older
    children had specific behavioural needs.  The finding that the wife was
    able to care for them was entirely unreasoned - there  was  significant
    evidence before the judge that she  was  unable  to  cope  without  the
    Appellant's assistance.  There was an entire absence of a consideration
    of the best interests of the children, which were not  referred  to  in
    the determination  at  all,  and  which  should  have  been  a  primary
    consideration for the judge, his principal findings on Article 8  being
    made without any reference to them.

11. Mr Diwnycz submitted that, whilst the judge  ought  to  have  mentioned
    Section 55, he had in fact engaged with the underlying  issues  in  the
    appeal.

Findings and conclusions

12. First, it seems to be conceded in the  grounds  that  Counsel  conceded
    that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules. There is a reference at paragraph 26 of the determination  to  a
    concession that the appeal had to be considered outside of  them.   The
    judge could only deal with the appeal on the basis  that  it  was  put.
    The Appellant's wife is a British citizen and will remain in the UK  to
    look after the children.  Whilst there was evidence  before  the  judge
    that she had struggled to do so whilst he was in prison, there was also
    evidence that she was receiving assistance both from the  wider  family
    and from Social Services. It is not an error for the judge to  conclude
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met.

13. Of course  it  would  have  meant  that  this  determination  was  less
    vulnerable to appeal if the judge  had  mentioned  Section  55  in  his
    conclusions and reminded himself that  the  children's  best  interests
    were a primary consideration for him.  However the  Appellant  has  not
    established that the judge did not in practice have  proper  regard  to
    his Section 55 duties and the requirement to give proper weight to  the
    welfare of the children.

14. It is clear that the judge had the children at  the  forefront  of  his
    mind.  In a lengthy and well-reasoned determination he set out  all  of
    the evidence relating to them, recognising that two  of  the  boys  had
    special educational needs and recording the wife's evidence  that  they
    could not settle in Pakistan and that  the  Appellant's  removal  would
    have  a  devastating  effect  on  them.   He  also  recorded  Counsel's
    submissions on Section 55 and where the best interests of the  children
    lay.

15. When making his findings the judge  quite  properly  started  with  the
    Appellant's offence and his concern that the Appellant  still  did  not
    recognise that he had done anything  wrong.   He  then  turned  to  the
    position of the family.

16. He considered whether there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  them
    living in Pakistan and  recorded  that  the  family  had  been  welcome
    visitors to her husband's home there in the past  and  would  doubtless
    continue to be so.  He was  not  without  sympathy  for  the  wife  and
    family, and accepted that the relationships were caring and subsisting.
     He considered what would happen to the family if  the  Appellant  were
    deported and concluded that proper support was available.

17. This is not a case where the family's interests have been  disregarded.
    It is plain that the children would much prefer to have their father in
    the UK with them. However that has to be balanced against  all  of  the
    other evidence and the strong interests of the Respondent in seeking to
    deport foreign criminals. The decision reached  was  one  open  to  the
    judge.

18. The Appellant has not established that he failed to have  regard  to  a
    relevant consideration or that the judge erred in law.

Decision

19. The original decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
