
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00381/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 9th November 2020                 |
|On 4th November 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               BARTOSZ WALCZAK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G Rea, of Rea Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 6 March 2020.

 2. The appellant appeals  to  the  UT  on  the  grounds  attached  to  his
    application dated 26 March 2020.

 3. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  No members of the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely. The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 4. Mr Whitwell conceded that the decision of the FtT  disclosed  error  of
    law, as follows.  The judge did not make it clear what was meant by the
    "higher" and "lower" tests relevant to the case.   While  the  informed
    reader might be expected to  know  what  those  expressions  meant,  by
    reference to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, there was error in
    not articulating and applying the correct test to the facts.  There was
    inadequate consideration by  direct  reference  to  the  terms  of  the
    regulations, in particular on proportionality.   It  was  not  conceded
    that all the grounds should be upheld, particularly the point that  the
    judge should have recused himself, but that became irrelevant.

 5. I indicated that I  would  not  have  been  likely  to  find  that  the
    circumstances were such that the judge  should  have  recused  himself,
    unprompted, for knowing a solicitor previously involved in the case,  a
    matter which he very properly disclosed at the hearing.  Mr Rea did not
    wish to make anything of that matter.

 6. The following outcome is as agreed by the parties.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 8. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Clapham.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      4 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


 3.   Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

