
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00506/2019
     EA/04005/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2020                          |On 30 December 20210          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                     eg
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkin, counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal L K Gibbs ("the judge") who, in a decision promulgated  on
         29 January 2020,  allowed  the  appeal  of  EG  ("the  respondent")
         against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department ("the appellant")  dated  30  September  2019  (although
         served on 4 October 2019) to make a deportation order  against  the
         respondent in accordance with Regulations 23(6)(b) and  27  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
         Regulations") and to refuse the respondent's protection  and  human
         rights claim, and the decision dated 12 July  2019  to  refuse  his
         application for a permanent residence card pursuant  to  Regulation
         24(1) of the 2016 Regulations.


Background

      2. The respondent is a national of Albania born in  1979.  He  entered
         the UK on 23 July 2002 and made an asylum claim in a false identity
         claiming to be a Serbian national. His application was refused  and
         an appeal dismissed in 2003. On 5 June 2009 the respondent  married
         ML, a Lithuanian national exercising EEA Treaty rights in  the  UK.
         On 22 February 2010 the respondent was issued with an EEA residence
         card based on his marriage. On  20  February  2015  the  respondent
         applied for a permanent residence card.


      3. On 11 September 2015 the respondent was convicted on  three  counts
         of having concealed or disguised or  converted  or  transferred  or
         removed criminal property, and one count of possession of a class A
         controlled drug. He was sentenced on 25 September 2015. In  respect
         of the first two counts he was sentenced to concurrent terms  of  4
         years imprisonment, and in respect of the third count a term  of  7
         years imprisonment,  to  be  served  concurrently.  He  received  a
         concurrent sentence of one month for the drugs offence.

      4. The respondent's application for a  permanent  residence  card  was
         refused on 10 December  2015  but  was  reconsidered  following  an
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in 2017. The refusal to issue the
         respondent with a permanent residence card was  maintained  in  the
         decision dated 12 July 2019. On 3 June 2016 the respondent made  an
         asylum and human rights claim. The  asylum  and  the  human  rights
         claims were refused at the same time as the  respondent's  decision
         to make a deportation order and the  details  of  the  refusal  are
         contained in a decision headed  "Decision  To  Make  A  Deportation
         Order" dated 30 September 2019. The respondent exercised his  right
         of appeal both in respect of the decision  to  make  a  deportation
         order/refusal of protection and human  rights  claim  (pursuant  to
         Regulation 36 of the 2016 Regulations and s.82 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002), and in respect of the refusal  to
         issue him with a permanent residence card (pursuant  to  Regulation
         36 of the 2016 regulations).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge heard both the deport/protection/human rights appeal  and
         the appeal against the refusal to issue the permanent resident card
         together. The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent and his
         wife and considered a bundle of documents provided by the appellant
         and two bundles of documents provided by the respondent.


      6. The judge noted the acceptance by the appellant that the respondent
         had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence  and   that   his
         deportation had to be  justified  on  "serious  grounds  of  public
         policy" (pursuant to Regulation 27(3) of the 2016 Regulations).


      7. At  [7]  the  judge  set  out  at  length  the  Sentencing  Judge's
         sentencing remarks. The Sentencing Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
         respondent had a leading role in laundering  the  proceeds  of  the
         sale of drugs, that the respondent's  activities  were  "relatively
         sophisticated"   and   included   "cross-border   activity",   that
         "significant  amounts  of  money  were  involved",  and  that   the
         respondent allowed himself "to become involved in these  events  by
         reason of greed."


      8. At [8] the judge summarised the appellant's concerns, as set out in
         her decisions dated 12 July 2019 and 30 September 2019, relating to
         the respondent's offending, noting in particular that the  offences
         for which the respondent was convicted were "serious" and that  the
         Sentencing Judge repeatedly commented on the seriousness. The judge
         stated:

             "Although the [appellant] has taken into account the fact that
             the [respondent] does not have an  extensive  criminal  record
             and his risk of reconviction has been calculated as  low,  the
             [appellant] is satisfied that the serious harm which would  be
             cause as a result of any similar  instances  of  offending  is
             such that it is not considered reasonable to leave the  public
             vulnerable to the potential for the [respondent] to reoffend."

      9. From [6] to [14] the judge sets out  the  appellant's  position  in
         detail. The appellant was not satisfied the respondent had attended
         any offence-related rehabilitation courses whilst  in  custody  (at
         [9]) or that there was sufficient evidence that he  had  fully  and
         permanently addressed all the reasons for his offending behaviour.


     10. At [17] the judge found that  the  respondent  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his wife and children and that it  was
         in the children's best interests for  the  family  unit  to  remain
         intact. At [19] to [24]  the  judge  considered  and  rejected  the
         respondent's asylum  claim.  there  has  been  no  cross-appeal  in
         respect of this finding.

     11. At [25] it was noted that the  respondent  continued  to  deny  his
         culpability for the offences of which he was convicted and that  he
         blamed his previous legal representatives,  the  court  interpreter
         and the Sentencing Judge's conduct, although there was no  evidence
         of any professional complaints and the respondent's appeal  against
         conviction had been unsuccessful. At [26] the judge stated:

             "Further, given my above findings regarding the [respondent's]
             credibility I find that the [respondent]  remains  a  man  who
             cannot be trusted and who is willing to act dishonestly if  he
             perceives his actions to be in his best interests..."

     12. At [27] the judge stated:

            "However, balanced against these concerns is the OASys  report.
            I am satisfied that this was prepared by  a  person  expert  in
            such matters, in the knowledge that the [respondent]  continued
            to deny his culpability and yet it was found that he presents a
            low   risk   of   reoffending.   Further,   with   regards   to
            rehabilitative courses whilst in prison I find that the  reason
            that the [respondent] has not  produced  evidence  is  such  is
            because [sic] he was not considered in need of such:


                      "Mr G's OASys does not provide any specific target in
                      order to assess his offending. In light of  this,  he
                      has been referred  to  education  for  the  drug  and
                      alcohol  awareness  course  (on  waiting  this)   and
                      employability  (currently  attending   the   business
                      venture   course)."    (Review    of    Adult    Male
                      Categorisation, p.307 Appellant's Bundle)."

     13. At [28] the judge asked herself whether the respondent was entitled
         to a permanent  Residence  Card  or  whether  his  deportation  was
         justified on serious grounds of  public  policy,  noting  that  the
         burden of proof was on the  appellant  and  the  standard  was  the
         balance of probabilities.


     14. At [29] the judge stated:

            "I find that the [appellant] relies solely on  the  seriousness
            of the [respondent's]  criminal  convictions  in  reaching  the
            decision that he presents  an  ongoing  threat  to  the  public
            because of the serious harm  that  would  be  caused  were  the
            [respondent] to re-offend. The [appellant]  also  relies  on  a
            lack of  evidence  of  rehabilitation  courses  (which  I  have
            considered above) although at the same time accepting that even
            if the  [respondent]  had  provided  such  it  would  not  have
            persuaded him...."

     15. At [30] the judge stated:


            "I find that  the  [respondent]  is  a  man  of  previous  good
            character. It appears that, purely for personal gain, he  chose
            to  involve  himself  in  a  serious  and  organised   criminal
            operation without any regard to the consequences for his family
            or the harm that his conduct would cause to the general public.
            Further, I find that he is a man whose honesty has  been  found
            wanting in the Crown Court, and who continued,  before  me,  to
            lie. However, I understand that he wants to be able  to  remain
            in the UK with his family, and that he  does  not  want  to  be
            responsible for forcing his family to leave  the  UK.  Although
            this does not excuse his conduct it does, in my view,  mitigate
            his actions before me, in so far as I find them relevant to the
            risk that he currently presents to the public."


     16. At [31] the  judge  found  that  the  OASys  report  carried  "very
         significant weight" in her assessment of  the  risk  posed  by  the
         respondent  to  the  public  given  that  it  was  prepared  by   a
         professional expert in such work and that its conclusion  that  the
         respondent presented a low risk of reoffending  took  into  account
         the respondent's refusal to accept responsibility for his  actions.
         The judge noted that the respondent had not committed any  offences
         since leaving prison in March 2019, that he  had  returned  to  his
         family and that his family's well-being was  his  "primary  focus."
         The judge was also satisfied that both "the term  of  imprisonment"
         and the threat of deportation would have a deterrent effect on  the
         respondent in the future.


     17. At [32] the judge stated:

             "I find that Schedule 1(3) of the 2016 Regs is  clear  that  a
             person who has committed numerous criminal offences is  likely
             to present a greater threat to society,  and  I  am  satisfied
             that the appellant is not such a person. Further,  deportation
             cannot be justified under European Union law  for  reasons  of
             public  revulsion  at  acts  or  crimes  committed   (SSHD   v
             Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245)."

     18. At [33] the judge concluded:

             "Based  on  these  findings  I  am  not  satisfied  that   the
             [appellant] has persuaded me, to the civil standard, that  the
             [respondent] represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
             serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
             society (taking  into  account  that  the  risk  need  not  be
             imminent). I am therefore satisfied  that  the  [respondent's]
             deportation is not justified  on  serious  grounds  of  public
             policy and  public  security  in  accordance  with  Regulation
             23(6)(b) and Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations."

The challenge to the judge's decision

     19. The Grounds of Appeal, amplified by Ms Isherwood during the  remote
         hearing, take issue that the judge's conclusion that the respondent
         did not present a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.


     20. The appellant contends, firstly,  that  the  judge's  decision  was
         inadequately reasoned as she failed to take  account  of  the  harm
         that would be caused by the respondent if he did re-offend,  citing
         in support Kamki v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1715.

     21. Secondly, the appellant contends that the respondent's inability to
         comprehend that he did anything wrong and the motivation  of  greed
         suggests he would not address his  behaviour  and  would  therefore
         remain a threat to society.

     22. Thirdly, the judge's assertion that the respondent only  relied  on
         the seriousness of the  respondent's  convictions  failed  to  take
         account of the respondent's conduct both during the  commission  of
         the offences and since, a point  raised  at  paragraph  20  of  the
         deportation decision dated 30 September 2019.

     23. Fourthly, the judge only referred to  part  of  Schedule  1(3)  and
         failed to give reasons why the respondent did not fall  within  the
         terms of the provision.

     24. Fifthly, in relation to the judge's finding that the respondent did
         not provide evidence of rehabilitation because none  was  required,
         reference was made to Schedule 1.5 which provided that the  removal
         of a family member of an EEA  national  who  was  able  to  provide
         substantive evidence of not demonstrating a threat was less  likely
         to be proportionate.

     25. Ms Isherwood submitted that the aforementioned errors affected  the
         determination as they went "to the heart of the matter."

Discussion

     26. Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations provides, so far as material:


             Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security
             and public health


             (1) In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.


             (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.


             (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.


             (4) ...


             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-


             (a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;


             (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


             (c) the personal  conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;


             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;


             (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
             the absence of a previous criminal  conviction,  provided  the
             grounds are specific to the person.


             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.
             ...
             (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.). [Emphasis added}

     27. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations reads, so far as material:

             Considerations of public policy and public security


             1 The EU Treaties do not impose  a  uniform  scale  of  public
             policy  or  public  security  values:  member   States   enjoy
             considerable discretion, acting within the parameters  set  by
             the EU Treaties, applied where relevant by the EEA  agreement,
             to define their own standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.


             ...


             3 Where an EEA  national  or  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
             national has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

     28. In Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  (at  [40]),  and  more
         recently in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 at [41]),  the
         Court of Appeal  emphasised  that  it  is  not  permissible  for  a
         Tribunal to interfere with a decision merely because it would  have
         reached a different conclusion.


     29. I am not persuaded that the first ground is made out. To the extent
         that the appellant contends that the OASys report  failed  to  take
         account of the harm that would be caused by the  respondent  if  he
         does re-offend, this is inaccurate. At page 26 of 32 the author  of
         the OASys report  found  that  the  respondent's  offence  was  not
         indicative of a risk of serious harm. This sits in  stark  contrast
         to the situation in  Kazmi  where  the  OASys  report  found  that,
         although Mr Kazmi's risk of re-offending was  low,  the  harm  that
         would be cause if he did re-offend "would be very serious" so  that
         there was overall "a high risk of harm to vulnerable  females".  To
         the extent that the grounds contend that the judge failed  to  take
         account of the harm that may be caused should the respondent's  re-
         offend, this is not supported by reference to the decision  itself.
         The judge  was  demonstrably  aware  of  the  appellant's  concerns
         relating to the possibility that, if the respondent did  re-offend,
         his offending may cause serious harm (e.g.  [8],  [29]).  Moreover,
         the extensive citation of the Sentencing Judge's  remarks  indicate
         that the  judge  was  acutely  aware  of  the  seriousness  of  the
         respondent's offending and  the  effect  this  would  have  on  the
         public.  Given the conclusions of the  OASys  report  the  decision
         does  not  disclose  a  failure  by  the  judge  to  consider   the
         seriousness of the consequences if the respondent did re-offend.


     30. The second ground  amounts  to  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
         assessment of whether the respondent's conduct represent a genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  the  fundamental
         interests of society. Neither the written ground nor  Ms  Isherwood
         in  her  submissions  suggested  that  the  judge's  decision   was
         irrational in a Wednesbury sense. The judge was clearly aware  that
         the  respondent  continued  to  deny  his  culpability,  that   his
         motivation for his offending was greed, and that he had lied  about
         his asylum claim, but she was entitled to rely on  the  conclusions
         of the OASys report, which was prepared by a professional  Offender
         Supervisor, that the respondent was at low  risk  of  re-offending,
         and that the term of imprisonment and the threat of deportation had
         a sufficient deterrent effect on him such that he did not present a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat.  The  respondent
         disagrees with this finding, but it was not one outside  the  range
         of findings rationally open to the  judge  and  she  supported  her
         conclusion with adequate reasons.

     31. The third ground is difficult to comprehend.  It  claims  that  the
         judge failed to take account of the respondent's conduct during and
         since the commission of his offences and relies on paragraph 20  of
         the Decision to Make Deportation Order in support.  This  paragraph
         however sets out the general principles contained in Regulation  27
         of the 2016 Regulations (set out above  at  paragraph  26  of  this
         decision) but does not identify aspects of the respondent's conduct
         that the judge allegedly failed to take into account. The appellant
         has failed to identify, both in the grounds and in  the  Presenting
         Officer's oral submissions, what factors the judge failed  to  take
         into account. This ground is not made out.

     32. In respect of the fourth ground,  I  accept  that  the  judge  only
         referred to part of Schedule 1(3) of  the  2016  Regulations.  This
         Schedule relates both to persistent offenders and to those who have
         received custodial sentences. At [32]  the  judge  only  refers  to
         persons who have committed "numerous criminal offences". She  fails
         to note the respondent's position that the longer  a  sentence  the
         greater  the  likelihood  that  the  person's  continued   presence
         represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting of the fundamental interests of society. I am not however
         satisfied that this error is material. This is  because  the  judge
         was clearly aware of the length of the respondent's sentences [[6],
         [17], [18]), and she expressly factored this  into  her  assessment
         (at  [31]  the  judge  refers  to   the   respondent's   "term   of
         imprisonment" and takes that into account when assessing the threat
         he poses to society). It was ultimately a matter for the  judge  to
         determine the nature and seriousness of any  threat  posed  by  the
         respondent and she had to be  satisfied  that  there  were  serious
         grounds  of  public  policy  and  public  security  requiring   the
         respondent's deportation. She took into account the length  of  the
         respondent's sentence and she gave legally sustainable reasons  for
         concluding  that  the  respondent's  primary  focus  was  now   the
         wellbeing of his family [31] and that, by  reference  to  both  the
         OASys report and his  term  of  imprisonment,  the  respondent  was
         sufficiently deterred from committing further  offences  such  that
         his conduct did not represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat [supra]. The judge therefore  took  account  of  the
         consequences flowing from the length of the  respondent's  sentence
         in her overall decision.


     33.  The fifth ground relates to the judge's approach to the  issue  of
         rehabilitation.   Schedule 1(5) of the 2016 Regulation  relates  to
         the assessment of proportionality of  a  proposed  removal  in  the
         context of EEA decisions, not with whether the person  who  is  the
         subject of the removal decision constitutes a present, genuine  and
         sufficiently serious threat. But in any event, the  judge  properly
         noted, at [27], and with reference to the OASys  report,  that  the
         respondent was not considered in need  of  rehabilitative  courses.
         Moreover, the judge properly noted and  was  properly  entitled  to
         place weight on the conclusions of the OASys report which took into
         account the respondent's continued denial of culpability but  which
         nevertheless found that he was at low risk of re-offending. I  find
         this ground is not made out.

     34. I can only interfere with the  judge's  decision  if  the  decision
         discloses an error of law that requires  the  decision  to  be  set
         aside (i.e. is material). I cannot  overturn  the  decision  simply
         because I may disagree with  it.  Whilst  another  judge  may  have
         reached a different  conclusion,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
         judge's conclusions were marred by legal error.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside.

The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal (EG) is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify EG  or  any  member  of  EG's  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  D.Blum            date: 11 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

_____________________________________________________________
NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:
2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).
3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).
5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.
6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

