
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00235/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd September, 2014                       |On 8th October 2014          |
|Given extempore                               |                             |
|Signed 3rd October, 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DAVID LESLEY BROWN

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Mensa of Counsel instructed by Zacharia & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  to
    avoid confusion I shall refer to her as the claimant.   The  respondent
    is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 25th November, 1986.

2.   His immigration history is brief.  The respondent  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 4 July 2001, accompanied by his mother and two  sisters  and
    he was travelling on his own Pakistani passport which  contained  a  UK
    visit visa which had been issued to him in Pakistan on 8th June,  2001.



3.   On 28th August, 2002, the respondent  claimed  asylum  on  the  grounds
    that as a Christian he was at risk of  persecution  in  Pakistan.   His
    asylum claim was refused by the claimant on 2nd October, 2002  and  his
    appeal was subsequently dismissed on  19th  September,  2003.   On  6th
    December, 2004, further representations were made to  the  claimant  on
    behalf of the respondent asserting  that  his  human  rights  would  be
    breached by his removal from the United Kingdom but these were rejected
    by the claimant on  6th  May,  2005  and  they  were  dismissed  by  an
    Immigration Judge on 19th September, 2005.  The respondent has a  child
    born in the United Kingdom on 14th January, 2009.  On  10th  September,
    2009, the respondent's representatives made further representations  to
    the claimant that he should  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside  the  Immigration   Rules   on   humanitarian   or   compelling
    compassionate circumstances and on 10th February, 2010, he was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

4.   The respondent has several convictions. The most  recent  was  on  31st
    May, 2012, at Manchester Crown Court, when he was convicted  of  twelve
    offences of supplying class A drugs, (heroin and crack cocaine) between
    13th December, 2010, and 4th April, 2011, and sentenced to  39  months'
    imprisonment in respect of each of the twelve offences and sentenced to
    39 months' imprisonment concurrent  for  each  offence.   He  was  also
    sentenced to one  months'  imprisonment  for  having  dishonestly  used
    electricity and on  23rd  October,  2011,  for  offences  of  dangerous
    driving, using a vehicle without insurance, driving whilst disqualified
    and other associated motoring offences he was sentenced to six  months'
    imprisonment, making a total of 46 months' imprisonment.

5.   On 23rd January, 2014, the claimant made a  deportation  order  against
    the respondent under Section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007,  on  the
    ground that the respondent was a foreign criminal whose deportation  in
    the United Kingdom is conducive to the public good under Section 35A of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  The respondent appealed and his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin in Manchester  on  3rd  April,
    2013.  In his  determination  he  found  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances  such  that  they  outweighed  the  public  interest   in
    deporting the respondent.  He allowed the respondent's appeal.

6.   The claimant was dissatisfied with  the  judge's  decision  and  sought
    permission to appeal and on 6th May, 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Jonathan Holmes granted permission and in doing so said this:

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge's approach to  the  'exceptional
             circumstances' test was flawed for the reasons set out in  the
             grounds.  If the judge's finding was that the 'harassment  and
             discrimination' it was said the appellant would experience  as
             a Christian did not meet the Article 3 threshold, then  it  is
             difficult to see how it would play  any  proper  part  in  the
             'exceptional circumstances' test.   It  is  moreover  arguable
             that the judge's approach was not consistent with the guidance
             of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and
             the determination makes no reference to the guidance found  in
             either Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, or LH (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ
             26, or Rocky Gurung upon how to  approach  the  issue  of  the
             effect upon a family of deportation when balancing the  public
             interest in his deportation.  The relationship relied upon was
             one that had been commenced when both the appellant and  Ms  H
             knew his immigration status was precarious and whatever  their
             future plans they were not cohabiting at the date of decision,
             and Ms H's influence had not been sufficient  to  prevent  the
             appellant from offending.  Accordingly  it  is  arguable  that
             inadequate reasons were given for the decision  to  allow  the
             appeal."


7.   Mr Harrison relied on the grounds of appeal to which I will refer in  a
    moment.

8.   For the respondent, Ms Mensa reminded me that  the  respondent  entered
    the United Kingdom at the age of 14 and has a child  who  was  born  in
    2009.  She also reminded me that the judge heard oral evidence from the
    respondent from Ms H, from the respondent's mother, from Mrs B and from
    the respondent's two sisters and took that evidence into account.   The
    respondent and Ms H do not at the moment  live  together  but  that  is
    because he is on immigration bail and is  required  to  live  with  his
    mother.

9.   Ms Mensa referred me to paragraph 48 of the determination.  There,  the
    judge records the evidence of Ms H who said that  when  the  respondent
    was released from detention at the beginning of January 2014, they both
    agreed that their son would be their priority and she described her son
    as being a "broken child".  The judge appears  to  have  accepted  this
    description of the child without actually having any  further  evidence
    or any explanation as to what that was supposed to mean.  The judge did
    not specifically acknowledge that, at the time the respondent and Ms  H
    formed their relationship, his status within  the  United  Kingdom  was
    precarious.  He was of course granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in
    2014 following which his criminal activities appear to have started.

10.  Mr Harrison reminded me of the grounds of  appeal.   They  are  lengthy
    and not terribly well-drawn, but the first paragraph  points  out  that
    all the evidence regarding the  negative  effect  on  the  respondent's
    child appears to be self-serving and not supported by  any  independent
    evidence.  Mr Harrison suggested that the judge's determination appears
    to have been swayed by emotion and he appears to have ignored the wider
    interests  of  society.   He  told  me  that  there  was   insufficient
    consideration of the nature of the offences committed by the respondent
    and no consideration of the impact  of  these  offences  on  the  wider
    society.  There also appears to  have  been  no  consideration  of  the
    deterrent effect and no regard at all for the lives  which  would  have
    been affected and ruined by the respondent's dealing in class A  drugs.



11.  I  believe  that  this  (very  experienced)  judge  has  erred  in  his
    determination by taking into account in  the  proportionality  exercise
    that he was bound to undertake in  assessing  whether  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances are sufficiently exceptional to  outweigh  the
    public interest, the fact that as a Christian the appellant  will  face
    discrimination and harassment because of his religion on his return  to
    Pakistan.  He refers to it in paragraph 58  of  the  determination  and
    again in paragraph 54.  In paragraph 54 he sums up the matters he takes
    into account when considering whether the appellant's circumstances are
    such as to outweigh the state's interest in  deporting  the  respondent
    and says that he is  satisfied  that  the  respondent  "will  encounter
    serious problems and discrimination and  harassment,  albeit  short  of
    persecution, which will nonetheless  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the
    respondent's private life".  That I believe was an error of law.  I  do
    not believe that that was a matter  which  should  properly  have  been
    taken into account.

12.  There is no acknowledgment anywhere  in  the  determination  that  this
    respondent commenced his family life at a time when he and Ms  H  would
    have known that his status in the United  Kingdom  was  precarious.   I
    believe that this omission was a relevant  consideration.   I  am  also
    troubled by the judge's apparent acceptance that the appellant's  child
    was so affected by his  imprisonment  that  he  was  a  "broken  child"
    without an expert evidence that the child was adversely affected by his
    father's imprisonment and without explaining precisely what  was  meant
    by the word, "broken".

13.  For these reasons  I  have  concluded  that  the  determination  cannot
    stand.  Both representatives agreed that in the event that  I  find  an
    error of law I should remit the appeal to be heard afresh by the First-
    tier Tribunal in accordance with paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's
    Practice Statement.  This I do.  The matter will be heard afresh by the
    First-tier Tribunal by a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Levins  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brookfield.   No  interpreter
    required.  A time estimate of four hours should be allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
