
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00166/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 June 2015                      |On 4 August 2015                     |
|Prepared 17 June 2015                |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          abdulaziz hassan mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
                    Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on  12  December  1962.   He
    entered Britain in May 1990 and claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused
    but he was granted exceptional leave to remain  until  July  1993  and,
    after successive grants of exceptional leave,  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 2 November 1999.

2.   On 28 March 2007 he was convicted of  the  offence  of  threatening  to
    kill and occasioning actual bodily harm.   On  25  April  2007  he  was
    sentenced to an indeterminate sentence of  imprisonment.   He  did  not
    appeal against either conviction or sentence.   He  was  released  from
    prison on 6 March 2015.

3.   Following his conviction an official of the UK Border Agency  wrote  to
    him stating that he would be subject  to  automatic  deportation  under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 unless he fell within  one  of
    the exceptions set out in Section 33 of  that  Act.   In  response  his
    solicitors asserted that his rights under the  Refugee  Convention  and
    under Articles  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR  would  be  infringed  by  his
    deportation.  Those representations were considered by  the  respondent
    who refused the representations and, on 14 January 2014  wrote  to  the
    appellant enclosing a decision notice setting out the reasons to make a
    deportation order on the basis that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007.

4.   Detailed reasons for the decision were given.   These  dealt  with  the
    appellant's immigration history, set out  the  sentencing  remarks  and
    conclusions of the sentencing judge who had sentenced the appellant  to
    an indeterminate sentence with a requirement to serve a minimum fifteen
    months' imprisonment and dealt in detail with  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim, noting that he belonged to  the  Hawiye  tribe,  sub-clan  Habar
    Gidir Saad and that he claimed to be a  member  of  the  Sufi  sect  of
    Islam.  It was  noted that his brother had been killed  in  Somalia  in
    April 2012 and it had been claimed by the appellant  that  his  brother
    had been killed when he was in a Sufi mosque in the Hodan  district  of
    Mogadishu and that eight other people had been  killed  at  that  time.
    They noted that the appellant was separated from his wife and  that  he
    had three British children.  It was  not  considered  that  either  the
    appellant's tribe or his religion as a Sufi Muslim would mean  that  he
    would be in danger on return.  It was not considered that he  would  be
    at risk of ill-treatment on return from Al-Shabaab whom he  had  stated
    would target him and the improvement in conditions  in  Mogadishu  were
    highlighted.

5.   It was not accepted that  he  would  face  treatment  contrary  to  his
    rights under the ECHR.

6.   It was considered  that  the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the
    provisions of Article 33(1) of the 1951 United  Nations  Convention  on
    the Status of Refugees  because  he  had  been  convicted  by  a  final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime and, moreover, it  was  stated
    that Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    would apply for the purpose of the construction of that Article.

7.    Reference  is  made  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  398  of   the
    Immigration Rules and it was stated that neither paragraph 399 or  399A
    applied and furthermore that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    which would outweigh the public interest  in  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant.

8.   The appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by a panel of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and allowed, it appears, because they  accepted  that  he
    would face  persecution  on  return  to  Somalia.   That  decision  was
    appealed further to the Upper Tribunal and on 28 April 2015 I,  sitting
    with the Honourable Mrs Justice McGowan, set aside the determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal having found material errors  of  law  therein.
    That decision is annexed to this determination.

9.   I directed that the appeal proceed to a hearing  afresh  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In these circumstances the appeal came before me on 16  June
    2015.

10.  At the hearing of the appeal the appellant, his mother  and  a  brother
    gave evidence.  The appellant relied on three witness  statements.   In
    his initial statement dated 8 July 2014 he had referred to the  various
    victim awareness and other courses which he had  undertaken  in  prison
    and said that he had been appointed to do the work of an  Imam  at  HMP
    Kingston, leading Friday prayers.  He had been given the trusted job as
    a "Redband Orderly".  He stated that he suffered from asthma,  diabetes
    and had a recurring TB problem and that he had reduced movement in  his
    right arm.  He emphasised that he had been involved, before being  sent
    to prison, with the Edmonton Mosque where people have objected  to  his
    relationship with his wife and his lifestyle as he  drank  alcohol  and
    had said that he was non-Islamic and that being a Sufi was the same  as
    being an infidel.  Some of those who had so accused him had returned to
    Somalia.  He emphasised that Islamic extremists  in  Somalia  were  not
    Sufi and that they had demolished Sufi mosques and said that  he  would
    not be able to practice Sufism anywhere anymore.

11.  In his statement dated 20 April 2015 he referred to his ties  with  his
    family and stating that he hoped to  make  contact  with  his  children
    although he accepted that it was their choice if they  wanted  to  have
    contact with him.  He stated that violence  in  Somalia  had  escalated
    over the last three months.  In  a  statement  dated  8  June  2015  he
    asserted that Al-Shabaab were still present  in  Somalia  and  that  he
    would not be protected there as he would not have money.

12.  In his oral evidence the appellant said  that  he  had  three  children
    here, Aideed Abdulaziz Hasan born on 16 November 1993, a daughter Hasan
    Abdi Asis Ladan who was born on 9 April 1995  and  a  son  Abdul  Basil
    Mohamed born on 15 November 2004.  He had married his wife, whom he had
    known in Somalia, when she came to Britain  in  1991.   They  had  been
    divorced in 2008.  He said that he was hoping to make contact with  his
    children.

13.  It was put to him that  he  was  a  member  of  a  majority  clan.   He
    initially denied this although he stated that by birth he is  a  member
    of the Hawiye clan, but said that no one in the clan would  assist  him
    because he would not be recognised by them  as  he  had  no  family  or
    extended family members left in Somalia.

14.  In cross-examination he stated that he hoped  to  enter  a  restorative
    justice scheme and make contact with his children - the victims of  the
    crime - as it was a programme for compensating such victims.  He  could
    not obtain a contact order because of the ages  of  his  children.   He
    accepted that there was a prohibitive steps order still  in  force  and
    said that he had lost contact with his children in  2006  when  he  had
    threatened to kill his wife when  the incident which led to  his  being
    convicted of actual bodily harm had been committed.

15.  He said that since release from prison he was supported by  his  family
    although he was trying to get paid work or voluntary work.  His  family
    would give him financial, psychological and emotional support  as  well
    as money and clothes and a place to sleep.  He was living with  one  of
    his brothers at present.

16.  He said that he had worked here as a taxi driver but  had  also  worked
    in a hotel,  in  a  warehouse  and  in  factories  and  worked  in  the
    community.

17.  It was put to him that on his child's birth certificate his  occupation
    was given as that of a fisherman.   It  was  then  put  to  him  by  Mr
    Whitwell that his family  would  be  able  to  provide  some  financial
    support if he were returned to Somalia.  He said he  did  not  know  if
    that would be possible and he did not know how it was possible  to  get
    money through to Somalia.  He confirmed that his  family  had  had  two
    properties in Mogadishu but said that these  were  occupied  by  people
    from his clan who had claimed the properties as their own.  His younger
    brother who had been killed had not been living at  the  property.   He
    said that if he returned people would think that he had a lot of  money
    and he would be considered to be a spy.

18.  He stated that his brother's wife was now in Kenya  and  his  brother's
    children were in Sweden: they had  been  there  for  many  years.   His
    brother had been living with friends when he had been killed.

19.  He repeated that he was a Sufi.

20.  The appellant's brother Abdul Rahim Hasan Mohammed gave  evidence.   He
    is a British Telecom engineer.  He said that he  had  left  Somalia  in
    1999.  He referred to his brother who had been killed as a teacher  who
    had lived in the school - he had not lived at either of the two  family
    properties.  The family had sent money to his brother in Somalia  using
    the money transfer agency "Dhabshill".  The family would not be able to
    guarantee support for the appellant if he were  returned  but  and  all
    they could really do would be to help him to flee again.

21.  He said that the children of his  brother  in  Somalia  were  still  in
    Somalia but he did not know how they were supported.

22.  In his witness statement he said that they were a  Sufi  Muslim  family
    but that he had "by choice left that behind me since coming to the UK".
     He asserted that the appellant had spoken out about extremism and  Al-
    Shabaab at the Edmonton Islamic Centre.

23.  The appellant's mother gave  evidence  stating  that  she  was  a  Sufi
    Muslim like her son and referring to the death  of  her  other  son  in
    Mogadishu.  She referred to her own health issues.

24.  In summing up Mr Whitwell relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter  and
    asked me to take  into  account  the  terms  of  the  country  guidance
    determination in MOJ & Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC).  He emphasised that  in  that  determination  it  was
    stated that there had been a durable  change  in  Mogadishu  after  the
    withdrawal of Al-Shabaab, the level of civilian casualties had  reduced
    substantially, largely due to the cessation of confrontation of warfare
    within the  city  and  asymmetrical  warfare  as  Al-Shabaab  attacking
    carefully selected targets.  The conclusion in that  determination  was
    that the present level of casualties did not  amount  to  a  sufficient
    risk to ordinary civilians such as to represent an Article 15(c)  risk.
    He argued that the appellant's  clan  would  provide  potential  social
    support mechanisms.  Moreover, there was clear evidence of an "economic
    boom" in Mogadishu and there were  increased  opportunities  for  those
    with work experience, including  that  of  a  taxi  driver,  which  the
    appellant had.  The reality was that the appellant would not suffer  by
    being placed into an IDP camp and money could be sent  to  him  by  his
    family.  He stated that in terms of the appellant's private and  family
    life it did not appear that he was exercising  those  rights.   He  was
    divorced from his wife and estranged from his children.  Moreover there
    was no obstacle to his re-integration into Mogadishu.  He asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

25.  In reply Mr Trevelyan relied on a detailed skeleton argument  in  which
    he made it clear that he no longer relied on the expert  report  of  Dr
    Hoehne dated 19 July 2014.  However he submitted that  the  deportation
    of the appellant would breach his rights under Articles 2, 3 and  8  of
    the ECHR and 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

26.  He argued that the appellant should not  be  excluded  from  protection
    under the Refugee Convention as Section 72 no longer  applied  given  a
    decision of the parole board dated 28 November 2014 which had  referred
    to the positive work which he  has  undertaken  in  detention  and  had
    concluded it was no longer necessary for the public protection that the
    appellant be confined.  He stated the appellant had complied  with  the
    conditions of his immigration bail.

27.  With regard  to  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  he  referred  to  the
    specific threat which was from members of the Edmonton Mosque  who  had
    returned to Mogadishu and would be aware that he had spoken out against
    Al-Shabaab.   The  appellant  would  therefore  be  targeted  by  them.
    Moreover it was stated that he would be at particular risk  as  a  Sufi
    Muslim - he referred to the  circumstances  in  which  the  appellant's
    brother had been killed.

28.  Turning to the determination in MOJ & Others he referred to the  length
    of time which the appellant had been in Britain but in any event stated
    that  the  circumstances  in  Somalia  had   deteriorated   since   the
    determination in MOJ had been written.  He said the appellant had  lost
    his family home and had no connections with  the  country  but  in  any
    event would be at risk because of his perceived  wealth  as  a  "Somali
    foreigner".  This was a distinct difference  from  the  danger  of  the
    appellant being perceived either as westernised, apostate or as an  Al-
    Shabaab supporter.  He stated that the appellant had no family to  whom
    he could turn in Somalia.

29.  He  also  argued  that  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  would  be
    infringed by his removal particularly given the potential of his  being
    able to rebuild his relationship with his children.

30.  In his oral submissions he  again  emphasised  the  importance  of  the
    parole board decision and the appellant's religion as  a  Sufi.   There
    was no way in which he would be able to rely on support from his family
    in Britain and the appellant had given clear reasons why he  would  not
    be assisted by his clan.

31.  He therefore asked me to allow the appeal.

Discussion

32.  I first considered whether or not  the  appellant  should  be  excluded
    from the benefits of the Refugee Convention  under  the  provisions  of
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

33.  I note that the appellant was sentenced to  an  indeterminate  sentence
    of imprisonment for public protection and the terms of  the  sentencing
    judge comments that the imprisonment for an  indeterminate  period  was
    for the protection of the public.  Moreover the judge referred  to  the
    appellant's "history of creating problems of one sort or another",  his
    drunkenness and the appellant's anger which had led to him  threatening
    his wife and the comment he made that "no one leaves this home alive".

34.  He referred to the fact  that  the  appellant  had  had  a  history  of
    violence in 1998 when he had held the children over a balcony  and  the
    fact that the appellant had  pushed  his  wife's  head  through  safety
    glass.

35.  The judge had referred to the injunction taken out by  the  appellant's
    wife and the fact that the appellant had broken the terms of that.

36.  I have considered the parole board  decision  dated  28  November  2014
    which stated that the appellant did not pose an  unacceptable  risk  of
    absconding.

37.  The risk factors had  been  noted  by  the  parole  board  as  being  a
    "violent  lifestyle;   alcohol   abuse;   an   unstable   relationship;
    irresponsibility  and  callous  emotional  traits".   His  history   of
    perpetrating domestic  violence  which  had  been  underpinned  by  his
    "attitude supportive of sexist roles and abuse of women...".

38.  The report did, however, set  out  some  evidence  of  changes  in  his
    attitude  by  the  appellant  and  the  various  programmes  which  the
    appellant had undertaken while  in  prison.   They  refer  to  positive
    reports from  the  staff.   The  report  stated  that  the  appellant's
    offender manager had placed him in a  low  risk  category  for  further
    general and violent re-offending but assessed his risk of serious  harm
    to a known adult - the appellant's wife - as being high  on  the  basis
    that he was yet to be tested in the  community  but  his  risk  to  the
    public, including any new partner and the children was now  reduced  to
    medium.  It is of  note  that  the  panel  advised  additional  licence
    conditions for the management of his risk and stated that he should not
    attempt to contact or communicate with his wife or children without the
    prior approval of his  supervising  officer  and  the  social  services
    department.  Moreover, he is still not to enter the London  Borough  of
    Enfield without the prior approval of his supervising officer.

39.  While I have taken into account the terms of the parole board report  I
    still conclude that as  the  appellant  has  committed  a  particularly
    serious crime and that there is still a danger to the community  which,
    notwithstanding the positive remarks  of  the  parole  board  is  still
    evident from their report, the appellant should not be entitled to  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention: Section 72(2) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies.

40.  I would add that, in any event, I have come  to  the  conclusion  below
    that the appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution for
    a Convention reason on return to Mogadishu and therefore the Section 72
    exercise is academic.

41.  I have considered the terms of Section 117B and  Section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I refer to Section  117B
    merely because that was raised by Mr Trevelyan.  He appeared  to  imply
    that because the appellant was not a burden on the state here and  that
    he spoke English  meant  that  he  was  entitled  to  leave  under  the
    provisions of Section 117B.  That,  of  course,  is  incorrect  as  the
    reality is that the factors in Section 117B are a  minimum  requirement
    for it  to  be  found  that  the  removal  of  an  applicant  would  be
    disproportionate.  They fact  that  they  do  exist  does  not  prevent
    removal.

42.  The relevant provisions are those in Section  117C  and  in  particular
    the two exceptions.  The appellant cannot benefit from exception  2  as
    he does not have a genuine subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying
    partner or with a qualifying child.  Moreover, again for the reasons to
    which I have referred below I do  not  consider  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Somalia nor, indeed, that
    he is socially and culturally integrated into this country.

43.  Again turning to the provisions of  paragraphs  398  and  399A  of  the
    Rules I do not consider that these paragraphs assist the  appellant  in
    that he has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
    years and none of the qualifications in paragraphs 399 or  399A  apply.
    The reality is that I cannot consider that the appellant is  exercising
    family life here albeit that he has relationships with his brothers and
    mother and I find that  he cannot be said to be exercising private life
    here to any extent other than his relationships with his family.  There
    is no employment record before me  although  I  will  accept  that  the
    appellant has had a number of jobs here over the years.

44.  I now turn to the issue of whether or not the appellant would face ill-
    treatment contrary to his  rights  under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if
    returned to Somalia.  These issues are effectively the  same  as  those
    which would be considered should I not have found that he was  excluded
    from the benefits of the Refugee Convention.

45.  The central issue is that of the appellant's  particular  circumstances
    on return.  It is of note that he is a  member  of  the  Hawiye  -  the
    majority clan.  It is clear from the determination in MOJ & Others that
    he would benefit from that connection.  I do not accept that in a clan-
    based society such as that in Somalia the appellant would not  be  able
    to access the protection of the majority clan  merely  because  he  has
    been out of  the  country  for  some  time.   His  clan  membership  is
    effectively immutable.  Moreover, the appellant has  clearly  not  lost
    cultural ties with Somalia.  It is of note that  his  mother  does  not
    speak English and clearly the appellant,  whose  English  while  giving
    evidence was clearly not particularly proficient, will speak Somali  to
    her.  Moreover he has continued to have ties with  Mogadishu  over  the
    years and  had a brother who was living there until  he was  killed  in
    2012 and it appears that it may well be the  case  that  his  brother's
    children are still  in  Mogadishu  -  that  was  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's brother although the appellant  himself  stated  that  they
    were in Sweden.

46.  He would be able to receive some  funds  from  Britain  -  his  brother
    referred to the ability to remit funds through  "Dhabshill"  and  given
    that his family are giving him some support here, they would be able to
    support him in Mogadishu.

47.  In any event it is clear, again from  the  determination  in  MOJ  that
    there is something of an economic boom in  Mogadishu  and  that  trades
    such as those of working in hotels, restaurants  and  even  as  a  taxi
    driver would possibly be available  to  the  appellant  let  alone,  of
    course, the fact that he worked as  a  fisherman  in  Mogadishu  before
    leaving Somalia: I note, of course, that he left Somalia at the age  of
    28 and therefore would have worked for  some  considerable  time  there
    before leaving.

48.  It is again evident  from  the  determination  in  Mogadishu  that  Al-
    Shabaab are no longer in control of Mogadishu.  While I accept,  as  is
    evident from the documentary evidence placed before me  shortly  before
    the hearing by the appellant's solicitors that there are still  violent
    incidents in Mogadishu, I note that many of  the  articles  which  were
    enclosed within the latest bundle related to the same incident.  I note
    moreover that those returning can minimise the likelihood of injury  by
    taking appropriate avoiding action and the overall  conclusion  of  the
    Tribunal that it cannot be said that living in Mogadishu for those  who
    return would lead to an Article 15(c) risk.  I would  again  point  out
    that there is no indication that the appellant would be forced into  an
    IDP camp.  The family clearly has property in Mogadishu and although it
    is claimed that that has been taken by others there appears  no  reason
    why the appellant might not be able to attempt to reclaim it but in any
    event there is nothing to indicate that he would not be  able  to  find
    accommodation for himself.

49.  The appellant states that  because  of  his  brother  being  killed  it
    indicates that he himself would be at danger principally because he was
    a Sufi Muslim.  However the reality is that the appellant's brother was
    killed while at a Sufi mosque, with others.  It was a direct attack  by
    Al-Shabaab who are no longer in control in Mogadishu and the attack was
    not specifically  directed  at  the  appellant's  brother.   I  do  not
    consider the appellant's brother's  fate  is  one  which  it  would  be
    reasonably likely to befall to the appellant.

50.  With regard to the appellant's Sufi Muslim faith the evidence,  as  set
    out in the deportation decision  makes  it  clear  that  a  very  large
    proportion of  the  Muslim  population  of  Mogadishu  are  of  a  Sufi
    tradition and there is no evidence whatsoever  to  indicate  that  Sufi
    Muslims, per se, would be singled out by any group in Mogadishu now let
    alone that the appellant would be so singled out.  It is of  note  that
    the letter from Canon Richard Hind at HMP Kingston  which  referred  to
    the appellant's support for Muslim newcomers in the jail did not  refer
    to the appellant's Sufi faith.   While  I  therefore  accept  that  the
    appellant is a member of the Sufi tradition I do not consider that that
    is a matter which would single him out for ill-treatment.

51.  It was the appellant's assertion that he had spoken against  Al-Shabaab
    while in prison.  The reality must be, however, that the vast  majority
    of those resident in Mogadishu are not  supporters  of  Al-Shabaab.   I
    therefore do not consider that the appellant would therefore  face  any
    particular ill-treatment because he had, while in Britain, stated  that
    he did not support  Al-Shabaab.   In  any  event  the  chances  of  the
    appellant, while in  Mogadishu,  coming  across  any  Somalis  who  had
    returned to support Al-Shabaab is clearly remote.

52.  I therefore do not consider that the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
    either persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason  or  for  treatment
    contrary to his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR on return.

Notice of Decision

52.  I therefore having set aside the decision of the First-tier  Judge  re-
    make this decision and dismiss this appeal.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
Annex

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew and  Mr  G  F
    Sandall (non-legal member)), who in a determination promulgated  on  16
    September 2014 allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Abdulaziz  Hassan  Mohamed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 January 2014 to
    deport the appellant to Somalia and  further  concluding  that  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant  before  us  we  will,
    for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly we will refer to Mr  Abdulaziz
    Hassan Mohamed as the appellant as he was the appellant in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on  12  December  1962.   He
    arrived in Britain in May 1990.  He claimed  asylum.   That  claim  was
    refused but he was granted exceptional leave to remain until July  1993
    and,  after  successive  grants  of  exceptional  leave,  was   granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 2 November 1999.

4.   On 28 March 2007 he was convicted of  the  offence  of  threatening  to
    kill and occasioning actual bodily harm.   On  25  April  2007  he  was
    sentenced to an indeterminate sentence of  imprisonment.   He  did  not
    appeal against  either  conviction  or  sentence.   The  appellant  was
    released from prison on 6 March 2015.

5.   Following the appellant's conviction  an  official  of  the  UK  Border
    Agency wrote to him stating that he would be the subject  to  automatic
    deportation under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  unless  he
    fell within one of the exceptions set out in Section 33  of  that  Act.
    He was asked for any reasons he  might  have  for  stating  that  those
    exceptions might apply.

6.   The appellant's solicitors responded,   in  effect  claiming  that  his
    rights under the Refugee Convention and Articles 3 and 8  of  the  ECHR
    would be infringed by his deportation.  The  appellant  was  thereafter
    interviewed and in August 2013 the Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  him
    stating that it was not accepted that he could qualify  for  asylum  as
    the provisions of Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 applied.  The decision to make a deportation  order  was  then
    made  and  on  13  January  2014  the  Deportation  Order  was  signed.
    Detailed reasons for the decision that he could not qualify  under  the
    provisions of Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR were served  in  a  decision
    letter dated 15 January 2014.

7.   That letter is 24 pages long. Having set out the appellant's crime  and
    the sentence, it was noted that he was a member of the Hawiye tribe and
    it was stated that this was recognised  as  a  majority  clan.  It  was
    accepted that he was a Muslim claimed to be  a Sufi. It was stated that
    it was not accepted that he would be at risk on return to  Somalia  and
    it  was  emphasised  that  the  situation  in  Mogadishu  had   changed
    significantly in the past few years.

8.   With regard to the appellant's claim that he was a Sufi  it  was  noted
    that a large  majority  of  citizens  were  Sunni  Muslims  of  a  Sufi
    tradition but it was stated that he had failed to demonstrate  that  he
    had been an active member of  the  Sufi  community  in  Britain  beyond
    attending Friday prayers even though he had been free  here  to  be  as
    active in and engaged with the community  as  he  wished.  It  was  not
    considered that being a  Sufi  was  of  particular  importance  to  his
    religious  identity  or  practice  or  that  it  would  stop  him  from
    manifesting his faith openly in Somalia.  The letter stated:-

         "As such whilst it is accepted that you may  have  been  born  Sufi
         Muslim, it is not accepted that you continue to  actively  practise
         this religion.  Therefore, it is not considered  that  you  are  at
         risk on return to Somalia because of your faith."

9.   It was not accepted that the appellant would  be  of  any  interest  on
    return.  The terms of the country  guidance  case  of  AMM  and  others
    (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    00445 (IAC) were considered in pages 5 through to  14  of  the  letter,
    particularly with regard to the appellant's claim to  fear  Al-Shabaab.
    A large number of newspaper articles and other documentary evidence was
    considered and it was concluded that the  situation  in  Mogadishu  had
    dramatically  changed  since  the  determination  in   AMM   had   been
    promulgated.  It  was  considered  that  the  appellant  would  have  a
    sufficiency of protection within Somalia.

10.  The final conclusion was that:-

         "In conclusion, whilst it is accepted that you are  a  national  of
         Somalia, you have failed to  demonstrate  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood that you would be at risk as consequence of being from a
         Sufi Muslim (sic) and from the Al-Shabaab on account of  your  race
         and/or religion if returned to Somalia."

11.  The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  on  19  August
    2014.  The determination is short.  The Tribunal noted the  appellant's
    fear of persecution from Al-Shabaab stating that that  was  because  of
    his faith as a Sufi Muslim and because of the length  of  time  he  had
    spent in the United Kingdom and that he had  claimed  that  he  had  no
    familial protection in Somalia.  They noted that he had claimed that he
    was entitled to humanitarian protection and that that claim  was  based
    on the same fears.

12.  In paragraph 8 they noted that the appellant had produced a  bundle  of
    documents  including an expert report from  Dr  Marcus  Hoehne  and  in
    paragraph 13 they stated that they had given careful  consideration  to
    all the evidence before them.  They accepted that the appellant  was  a
    practising Sufi Muslim and stated that he had  become  westernised  and
    that he no longer had family in Somalia.

13.  Having noted the  appellant's  offences  they  found  that  Section  72
    applied and that therefore the  appellant  could  not  succeed  in  his
    asylum claim.  However,  they  then  said  that  they  found  that  the
    appellant's claim engaged Article 3.

14.  Their reasons for so finding were merely that:-

         "Having considered the expert's report we are satisfied that  there
         are continuing problems with Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu and indeed  in
         central and southern Somalia."

    They did comment, however, that many of the references  in  the  report
    were not to sources which could be described as having a great deal  of
    reliability but they noted that the expert had referred to reports from
    the UN General Secretary, who had stated that he  was  concerned  about
    the current security  situation  in  Somalia  and  that  the  political
    progress made over the past year (2013) and the military gains  against
    Al-Shabaab that had  been  achieved  were  at  serious  risk  of  being
    reversed.  They stated that they  had  seen  reports  produced  by  the
    respondent which suggest that Somalia was safe  for  Sufi  Muslims  and
    "Sufism may well make a comeback" and stated that that did not  suggest
    that it had already done so or that Sufism could  be  practised  freely
    and openly in Somalia.


15.  They stated that they bore in mind that the appellant was a  member  of
    a majority clan but that he had no family left in  Somalia  to  support
    him and said that he would be unfamiliar with Mogadishu having been out
    of that city for some time.

16.  In paragraph 32 they said that:-

         "We also have to take account of the fact that  the  appellant  has
         been out of Somalia for 24 years and that  he  has  adopted,  to  a
         large extent, a westernised lifestyle.   Even  if  this  does  not,
         alone, amount of Article 3 we have noted what is said in  the  case
         of AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
         Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).  The  first  paragraph  of  the
         headnote Country Guidance, Mogadishu states

             'Despite the withdrawal in early  August  2011  of  Al-Shabaab
             conventional forces from at least  most  of  Mogadishu,  there
             remains in general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm  for  the
             majority of those returning to that city after  a  significant
             period of time abroad.  Such a risk does not arise in the case
             of a person connected with powerful actors or belonging  to  a
             category of middle class or professional persons, who can live
             to a reasonable standard in circumstances  where  the  Article
             15(c) risk,  which  exists  for  the  great  majority  of  the
             population, does not apply.'


         We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  not  a  middle  class
         professional person who is able to live to a reasonable standard."

17.  They then said that they were satisfied that the appellant would be  at
    risk if he were returned to Somalia and that they allowed the appeal.

18.  It is not entirely clear from the determination  whether  or  not  they
    allowed the appeal against the refusal of  humanitarian  protection  as
    well as that relating to the rights of the appellant under Article 3.

19.  The Secretary of State appealed referring to the decision in K.A.B.  v.
    SWEDEN that Al-Shabaab was no longer in power in the city,  that  there
    was no frontline fighting or shelling any  longer  and  the  number  of
    civilian casualties had gone down.  It was claimed that the  court  had
    not established whether the appellant's  personal  situation  was  such
    that a return to Somalia would contravene the  relevant  provisions  of
    the Convention.  The grounds refer to the fact that the  appellant  had
    spent many years in Somalia before coming to Britain and that he was  a
    member of a majority  clan.   The  application  on  those  grounds  was
    refused in the First-tier.  When the application  was  renewed  in  the
    Upper Tribunal it was stated that the Tribunal  had  not  engaged  with
    reasons given in the reasons for deportation  letter  about  change  in
    circumstances in Somalia since the promulgation of the determination in
    AMM and that that was an error of law.

20.  Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  granted  permission  referring  to  the
    determination in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  (CG)  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC), (which, of course, had  not  been  promulgated  until
    after the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  in  this  case  had
    been promulgated)  but he stated that it might  well  reflect  material
    that the respondent had relied on in this appeal.  He also referred  to
    the concerns that the Tribunal had not properly taken into account  the
    fact that the appellant was a member of a majority clan  nor  had  they
    properly considered the appellant's faith as a Sufi Muslim.

21.  At the hearing of the appeal  before  us  Mr  Clarke  argued  that  the
    Tribunal had simply not engaged the matters set out in the refusal  nor
    indeed with further evidence which had been submitted  at  the  hearing
    relating to the resurgence of Sufi Muslims in Somalia.   In  particular
    he referred to evidence that the fighting in Mogadishu  had  ended  and
    stated that it was clear that the evidence put forward by the Secretary
    of State in the letter of refusal had  been  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the country guidance of MOJ and that it had been  concluded
    that there been a fundamental change in Mogadishu.

22.  In reply Mr  Trevelyan  argued  that  following  the  decision  in  VHR
    (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT  00442  (IAC)  it  was  not
    necessary for the Tribunal to go into all the detail on which they  had
    based their reasons for allowing the appeal.  In his skeleton  argument
    he quoted from that determination, which stated:

         "It is not necessary for judges to record,  analyse,  rehearse  and
         repeat the entire interstices of the evidence.   The  task  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal is to make reasoned findings on the key  issues
         in the case and a clear decision."

23.  He stated  that  the  Tribunal  had  based  their  conclusions  on  the
    appellant's lifestyle and not simply on the fact that he was a Sufi and
    that that alone was a reason why he should not be expected to return.

24.  He referred to the headnote in AMM and stated that that indicated  that
    even members of majority  clans  would  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment
    sufficient to entitle them to humanitarian protection pointing  to  the
    fact that the Tribunal were correct to say that the appellant  did  not
    come from a professional or  a  middle  class  background.   He  argued
    moreover that there was nothing to  indicate  that  the  Tribunal  were
    wrong to rely on the conclusions in AMM, particularly given the  report
    from Dr Hoehne, and the evidence in his report which indicated that the
    situation, although it had at one stage improved,  had deteriorated  by
    2014.  In his detailed skeleton argument he  referred  to  the  various
    sections of the report and other  evidence  which  indicated  that  the
    situation in  Mogadishu  had  not  substantially  improved.   While  he
    accepted that the  Tribunal  had  not  engaged  with  the  respondent's
    evidence he argued that it was entitled to prefer the  evidence  placed
    before them on behalf of the appellant and it was quite clear that they
    had considered the evidence and placed weight on what they preferred.

Discussion

25.  It is unclear what the decision of  the  Tribunal  actually  was.   The
    only matter on which they state that they allowed the  appeal  appeared
    to be on the basis that the appellant's rights under Article 3  of  the
    ECHR would be infringed by his removal.  They did refer to the headnote
    in the determination in AMM insofar as it gave country  guidance  on  a
    real risk of Article 15(c) harm but they do not, in terms,  state  that
    they found that the appellant qualified for humanitarian protection.

26.  Leaving that issue to one  side,  however,  the  reality  is  that  the
    Tribunal did not give the "reasoned findings" on the key issues in  the
    case and did not give the clear decision to which reference is made  in
    the decision in VHR.

27.  They simply did not  engage  with  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the
    respondent in the letter of refusal and indeed did not engage with  the
    evidence put forward on behalf of the appellant.  They made no  attempt
    to weigh up all the evidence before them and say  what  they  accepted,
    what they did not and why they would prefer certain evidence  to  other
    evidence.

28.  Moreover, they appear to rely on the headnote in AMM but do not  appear
    to have engaged with the  statement  at  paragraph  2  of  the  section
    relating to Mogadishu which said that:-

         "The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not,  however,  pose  a  real
         risk of Article 3 harm in respect  of  any  person  in  that  city,
         regardless of circumstances."


    They simply did not weigh up the appellant's circumstances and did  not
    appear to take into account the fact that he was from a majority  clan.
    Moreover, their findings regarding the claim by the appellant  that  he
    was a Sufi Muslim are not in any way considered.   There  is  no  clear
    engagement by them with the assertions of the letter  of  refusal  that
    the large majority of Somali citizens were  Sunni  Muslims  of  a  Sufi
    tradition and that there was nothing  in  the  appellant's  faith  that
    would mean that he would stand out  for  ill-treatment.   However,  the
    principal error of law of the Tribunal is that they did not engage with
    the up-to-date evidence put forward by the Secretary of State  to  show
    that  circumstances  had  changed  since  the   promulgation   of   the
    determination in AMM three years before despite the  fact  that  it  is
    clear from that determination that when the country guidance was  given
    in 2011 it was not considered by the Tribunal  that,  given  the  fluid
    situation in Somalia, that country guidance would endure for any length
    of time.

29.  For these reasons we have set aside the  determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and direct that the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh.

Directions

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  the  appeal
      will proceed to a hearing afresh in the Upper Tribunal.

   2. 21 days before the date of hearing both the appellant's representative
      and the representative  of  the  respondent  will  lodge  indexed  and
      paginated bundles of all documents on which they wish to rely  at  the
      hearing together  with  skeleton  arguments  cross-referenced  to  the
      evidence in their respective bundles.

