

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00211/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 January 2016                    |On 15 March 2016                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Angelo Demyter
                                     aka
                               ANDRZEJ DEMYTER
                           ANGELO ANDZELO DEMYTER
                               ANDREJ DEMYTER

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Steve Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Gaisford of Counsel, instructed by Nandy &
Co, solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision to deport him from the United Kingdom pursuant to Regulation  21
   of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (as
   amended).  The appellant is a citizen of Poland and thus an EEA citizen.

Background

2. The claimant is a Polish man of Roma ethnicity. He describes  himself  as
   a Polish Gypsy.  He was born in Hamburg, Germany, on  6  April  1993  but
   returned to Poland in 1994 where he was raised by his  grandparents.   He
   left Poland again in 1996,  travelling  with  his  grandparents  and  his
   uncles, but the family returned again to Poland  during  that  year.   In
   1998, travelling with his grandmother, the claimant came  to  the  United
   Kingdom.  He was a dependant in her asylum claim. The  claimant  says  he
   fears racial mistreatment in Poland by white supremacists,  and  that  he
   speaks no Polish at all and has neither family or friends there  now.  On
   29 March 2004, the claimant was granted indefinite leave to remain  under
   the Family ILR exercise.

3. The claimant first came to adverse attention on 20 January 2010, age  16,
   when he was convicted at Stratford Juvenile Court of burglary and  theft.
   He was given a 3  months'  Referral  Order.  Two  months  later,  he  was
   convicted  of  possession  of  a  Class  A  drug  (heroin)  at  Stratford
   Magistrates' Court and received another 3 months' Referral Order.

4. On 19 August 2010, now age 17, he  was  convicted  at  Hammersmith  Youth
   Court  of  attempted  theft  from  the  person,   and   given   a   Youth
   Rehabilitation Order (YRO) until 19 August 2011,  together  with  a  drug
   treatment order and a requirement for drug testing for the next 6 months.
    The claimant did not manage to comply with his YRO.  In October 2010, he
   was convicted again, an offence of attempted theft from the  person,  for
   which he was given another  YRO,  together  with  2  offences  of  common
   assault, for which a 3-month curfew was imposed.  This time the  YRO  was
   to last until 28 October 2011.

5. The claimant did not succeed in staying away from  crime,  because  on  3
   February 2011, still age 17, he was convicted again at Stratford Juvenile
   Court, and again, at Stratford Magistrates' Court on 22 March 2011,  this
   time for burglary and theft, for which he was sentenced to 18 months in a
   Youth Offenders Institution (YOI) and a non-residential drug and  alcohol
   program. That was his final offence as a minor.

6. The claimant's adult offending began  with  the  index  offence  for  the
   deportation order, a conviction on 10  September  2013,  age  20,  for  3
   counts of burglary and theft.   He  was  sentenced  at  the  East  London
   Magistrates' Court to 9 months' drug rehabilitation, supervision  for  12
   months, and 4 months in a YOI (suspended for 2 years), together with  100
   hours unpaid work in the community.

7. On 20 May  2015,  after  giving  the  claimant  an  opportunity  to  make
   representations, the respondent  decided  to  deport  the  claimant.  The
   claimant was released from detention from June-mid July 2015, then  taken
   into immigration detention.  He was released on bail in December 2015.

8. The claimant  claimed  asylum:  on  23  September  2015,  the  respondent
   refused his claim, and at the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  the  claimant
   through his  representatives  indicated  that  the  asylum,  humanitarian
   protection and Article 3 ECHR claim was not pursued.

First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
   claimant was entitled only to the basic level of protection  provided  by
   Regulation 21(1), (2), and (5).  He could not demonstrate that 5 years of
   his time  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  been  'in  accordance  with  the
   Regulations'  because  while  a  minor,  he  could  not  show  that   his
   grandmother was working or otherwise a qualified person, and he  had  not
   been an adult, nor worked legally, for 5 years before the  index  offence
   occurred.  The claimant speaks English fluently, and also Roma,  but  not
   Polish.   His connections with Poland were now tenuous.

10.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the   claimant,   his
   grandmother, and from his uncle. The Judge considered the  OASys  report.
   He noted that the  burden  of  showing  that  it  was  unlawful  for  the
   respondent to remove the claimant lay on the claimant.  He  set  out  the
   requirements of the Regulations and relevant jurisprudence and considered
   all of the claimant's circumstances as advanced.

11.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  proposed  deportation  was
   unlawful under the Regulations and also, if applicable, under  Article  8
   ECHR.  He allowed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

12. The respondent challenged the First-tier Tribunal  as  having  conflated
   Article 8 ECHR with the Regulations, contrary to the  guidance  given  by
   the Upper Tribunal in Badewa (sections 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015]
   UKUT 000329 (IAC). She asserted that rehabilitation should not have  been
   taken into account in assessing whether the claimant still represented  a
   threat and that the support of his family  had  not  prevented  him  from
   offending in the past.

13. The claimant was not advanced in his rehabilitation and his  removal  to
   Poland would be proportionate.

14. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  that  basis,  with  particular
   reference to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Greenwood  (No.2)
   (paragraph 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC).

15. There was no Rule 24 Reply from the claimant or his representatives.

16. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

17. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell for the Secretary of  State  relied  on  his
   skeleton argument.  The claimant had been in the United Kingdom since  he
   was 5, and was now 22 years old.  For the majority of that time, he was a
   minor and the respondent did not accept that the claimant had established
   a permanent right of residence. Poland did not join  the  European  Union
   until 1 May 2004, when the claimant was 10 years old,  so  he  could  not
   have  been  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  'in  accordance  with   the
   Regulations' before that.

18. Mr Whitwell in his oral argument maintained that the  claimant  remained
   a threat.   The  OASys  report  assessed  him  on  12  February  2014  as
   presenting a medium risk of reconviction (51%) and a medium risk  to  the
   public in the community. The claimant had 16 offences giving rise  to  10
   convictions. The claimant had stopped using drugs only in April 2014, age
   19, after having a drug problem since he was 14 years old.  The  claimant
   had not been tested for drug use since March 2014.

19. The claimant had spent only a short time  in  the  community  (3  weeks)
   before being returned to immigration detention and  had  been  bailed  in
   December 2015.  The hearing before me was on 18 January 2016 and that was
   insufficient time to show a change in  his  habits  or  in  the  risk  of
   reconviction or harm in the community.

20. It was right that, as set out in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,
   the claimant had undertaken  various  programs  in  prison  and  produced
   certificates in relation to them.  The First-tier Tribunal had relied  on
   the claimant's family support, but that had not been sufficient to  deter
   him in the past. The medical evidence was limited, consisting of a letter
   from University  College  London  Hospitals  concerning  his  undescended
   testicle on the right side at the age of 3 and a psychiatrist's letter of
   15 May 2014, dealing with his detoxification which was said to have  been
   completed on 1 March 2014.

21. The oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal consisted of the  claimant's
   mother, grandmother and uncle, and also reference to a family member  who
   was said to have rehabilitated and  moved  to  Essex,  but  who  was  not
   present.

22. Mr Whitwell asked me to allow the respondent's appeal.

23.  For the claimant, Mr Gaisford relied on the OASys  report  and  on  the
   psychiatrist's letter. There had  been  no  subsequent  conviction.   The
   First-tier Tribunal had accepted that the claimant  was  drug  free  from
   March 2014.  The claimant had been outside prison for 3 weeks but was re-
   detained in July 2015 on reporting. He had persuaded a judge, without any
   representation, that he  was  fit  for  bail.   His  record  of  juvenile
   offending was linked to his drug use. The First-tier Tribunal  had  heard
   evidence  from  multiple  witnesses  who  spoke  of  differences  in  the
   claimant's behaviour.  The claimant had  already  been  contrite  at  the
   sentencing hearing and was no longer a genuine, present and  sufficiently
   serious risk to the United Kingdom community.

24. The claimant would rely on MC (Essa principles recast)  Portugal  [2015]
   UKUT 00520 (IAC) at [3] and [29(j)] and on Greenwood,  in  particular  at
   (v) in the judicial headnote.

25. In relation to the Secretary of State's contention that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had conflated the question of Article 8 with the power to remove
   under the Regulations, if that was an error of law,  it  was  immaterial.
   EEA rights are declaratory and the  judge  had  made  clear  findings  on
   family support, and on  the  claimant's  change  in  behaviour  while  in
   prison.  The respondent's decision  was  based  only  on  the  claimant's
   previous offending and, save for the OASys report,  he  would  have  been
   found to have rehabilitated himself.  The offences were mostly  committed
   as a minor and the Tribunal should bear  in  mind  the  decision  of  the
   European Court of Human Rights in  Maslov v.  Austria  -  1638/03  [2008]
   ECHR 546.  He asked me to dismiss the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and
   uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Discussion

26. The claimant has resided in the United Kingdom lawfully since  29  March
   2004, but not in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations:  he  was  granted
   indefinite leave to remain in the Family ILR Exercise. Poland joined  the
   European Union on 1 May 2004, by which time the claimant was not  an  EEA
   migrant but settled in  the  United  Kingdom  with  indefinite  leave  to
   remain. That is relevant to the Article 8 element of his  claim,  if  the
   EEA Regulations claim fails.

27. The correct approach in cases where there is an  EEA  Regulations  claim
   and an Article 8 ECHR claim, as here, is set out in the judicial headnote
   to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Badewa:

        "The correct approach to be applied by tribunal judges in  relation
        to ss.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  2002  (as
        amended) in the context of EEA removal decisions is:
        (i)                  first  to  decide  if   a   person   satisfies
              requirements of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
              Regulations  2006.  In  this   context   ss.117A-D   has   no
              application;
        (ii)               second where a person has raised Article 8 as  a
              ground of appeal, ss.117A-D applies."

28. I begin, therefore, by considering the EEA Regulations  element  of  the
   appeal.  Towards the end of his submissions, Mr  Gaisford  conceded  that
   the claimant could not qualify for Regulation 21(3) protection.   He  was
   right to do so: on any view, the  claimant  has  not  shown  that  he  is
   entitled to  the  Regulation  21(3)  'serious  grounds'  protection.   He
   cannot show that in any 5-year period after 1 May 2004 he resided in  the
   United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations, either in reliance  on
   his grandmother's exercise of Treaty rights on his  behalf  after  1  May
   2003 and before his majority on 1 April 2011, or by a combination of  his
   grandmother's exercise of Treaty rights during his minority and  his  own
   exercise of Treaty rights between 1 April 2011 and  his  first  custodial
   sentence on 12 April 2012.  There was no such evidence before the  First-
   tier Tribunal and nothing before me meets that test.  The claimant cannot
   claim the higher protection under Regulation 21(3) and has only the basic
   protection afforded by Regulations 21(1) (2), and (5).

29. After the hearing, and without leave or any application under  paragraph
   15A of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the claimant's
   solicitors submitted two letters purporting to confirm his attendance  at
   Langdon Academy from 1 September 2004 to 24 November 2008, and at Eleanor
   Smith School from 11 November 2008 to 17 July  2009.   Having  regard  to
   Regulation 4 of the EEA Regulations, that is not sufficient to  make  the
   claimant a 'student' because it is not suggested that at any time he  had
   comprehensive sickness insurance or was able  to  demonstrate  sufficient
   resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  United  Kingdom's  social
   assistance system.  Unless therefore  his  grandmother  was  a  qualified
   person during that period, the claimant's attendance at school  does  not
   entitle him to the 'serious grounds' level of  protection  in  Regulation
   21(3).

30. I move therefore to consider whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
   law, having  regard  to  the  principles  drawn  together  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal's decision in MC (Essa Recast), as follows:

         "1.       Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to  decisions
             taken on public policy,  public  security  and  public  health
             grounds under regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.
         2.           It is only  if  the  personal  conduct  of  the person
             concerned  is  found  to  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
             sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the  fundamental
             interests of society (regulation  21(5)(c))  that  it  becomes
             relevant to consider whether  the  decision  is  proportionate
             taking into  account  all  the  considerations  identified  in
             regulation 21(5)-(6).
         3.            There  is  no  specific  reference  in  the expulsion
             provisions of either Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA
             Regulations to rehabilitation, but it has  been  seen  by  the
             Court of Justice as an aspect of integration, which is one  of
             the factors referred to in Article 28(1) and regulation  21(6)
             (Essa (2013) at [23]).
         4.            Rehabilitation is not an  issue  to  be  addressed in
             every  EEA  deportation  or  removal  decision   taken   under
             regulation 21; it  will  not  be  relevant,  for  example,  if
             rehabilitation has already been completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-
             [33]).
         5.             Reference to  prospects  of  rehabilitation concerns
             reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to commit crime (Essa
             (2013) at [35]), not the mere possibility  of  rehabilitation.
             Mere capability of rehabilitation is not to  be  equated  with
             reasonable prospect of rehabilitation.
         6.              Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a
             factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  the  proportionality
             assessment required by regulation 21(5) and (6)  ((Dumliauskas
             [41]).
         7.           Such prospects are to be taken into  account  even  if
             not raised by the offender (Dumliauskas [52]).
         8.              Gauging  such  prospects   requires   assessing the
             relative prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State
             as compared with those in the Member State of origin, but,  in
             the absence  of  evidence,  it  is  not  to  be  assumed  that
             prospects are materially different in that other Member  State
             (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-[53] and [59]).
         9.               Matters  that  are  relevant  when   examining the
             prospects of the rehabilitation of  offenders  include  family
             ties and responsibilities, accommodation, education, training,
             employment, active membership of  a  community  and  the  like
             (Essa (2013) at [34]). However, lack of access to a  Probation
             Officer or equivalent in the other Member State should not, in
             general, preclude deportation (Dumliauskas [55])
         10.       In the absence of integration and  a  right  of permanent
             residence, the future prospects of  integration  cannot  be  a
             weighty factor (Dumliauskas [44] and  [54]).  Even  when  such
             prospects have significant weight they are not a  trump  card,
             as what the Directive and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is
             a wide-ranging holistic assessment. Both  recognise  that  the
             more serious the risk of reoffending, and the offences that  a
             person may commit, the greater the right to interfere with the
             right of residence (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54])."

31.  The  self-direction  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  by   this
   experienced  judge,  and  the  analysis  at  [88]-[95]  are  careful  and
   thorough.  They are not legally erroneous and I reject  the  respondent's
   contention to that effect.

32. Turning to the Article 8 consideration, in this  decision  that  appears
   at [96].  Although robustly expressed, again I find that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal did not err in  law  in  the  manner  in  which  Article  8  was
   approached and that its  conclusions  were  open  to  the  judge  on  the
   evidence.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Date:         3 March 2016              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




