
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00666/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2015                        |On 20th January 2016          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     P A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mold (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of  State  has  appealed,  with  permission,   against  a
    decision of a panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge  Dineen
    and Mrs L R Schmitt,  JP  (hereinafter  the  "panel"  unless  otherwise
    stated) promulgated on 30th March  2015  following  a  hearing  on  1st
    October 2014, by which the panel allowed the appeal of P A (hereinafter
    the "Claimant") against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  of  9th
    April 2014 to make a deportation order by virtue of Section 3(5)(a)  of
    the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  decision  followed  the  Claimant's
    conviction of 7th July 2013 of an offence of causing death by dangerous
    driving and which led to her receiving, on 27th August 2013, a sentence
    of sixteen months' imprisonment.

Immigration History and Background Facts

 2. The Claimant is an Indian national and she was born on 4th  July  1982.
    She lived her early life in India but, on 4th  November  2007,  entered
    the UK with valid entry clearance as the spouse of a man I shall simply
    refer to as K who, himself, hailed form India but who had  entered  the
    UK in 2002 as a work permit holder  and  had  subsequently  received  a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  20th  June  2006.
    Subsequently, in fact  on  2nd  July  2007,  he  had  obtained  British
    nationality.  On 7th October  2008  the  Claimant  gave  birth  to  the
    couple's child who I shall simply refer to  as  D.   That  child  is  a
    British citizen.  On  22nd  December  2009  the  Claimant  was  herself
    granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   It  was  clearly
    anticipated that the family would remain in the UK for the  foreseeable
    future.  Since the date of the hearing before the panel,  the  Claimant
    has given birth to a further child who has also been fathered by K.

 3. There is no dispute about the fact that the Claimant was  a  person  of
    previous good character.  However, she decided to learn  how  to  drive
    and passed her driving test on 1st September 2012.  Thereafter, on  5th
    October 2012, she lost control of a car which she was driving and, as a
    result, two pedestrians, a married couple,  were  struck  and  injured.
    Very sadly indeed the male member of that couple died in consequence of
    his injuries.  It is that which  led  to  the  conviction  referred  to
    above.

Relevant Legal Provisions

 4. The relevant legal provisions are Section 117B to D of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act")  and  paragraphs  398,
    399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.  There is, however, an issue  as
    to whether the version of the Immigration Rules in force at the date of
    the decision under appeal or the version in force as at the date of the
    hearing before the panel apply.  The way I  have  set  them  out  below
    illustrates the relevant differences between the two versions.

 5. Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act, which came into effect on 28th  July
    2014, along with the second of the  two  versions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules referred to above, provides as follows;

         "I17A    Application of this Part.

                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
                    required to determine whether a decision made under  the
                    Immigration Acts -

                    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for  private
                        and family life under Article 8, and

                    (b)    as a result would be unlawful under Section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                    court or Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                    (a)    in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in
                        Section 117B, and

                    (b)    in cases concerning the  deportation  of  foreign
                        criminals, to the considerations listed in  Section
                        117C.

                (3)    In sub-Section (2), 'the  public  interest  question'
                    means the question of whether  an  interference  with  a
                    person's right to respect for private and family life is
                    justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: Public Interest Considerations  Applicable  in  all
                Cases.

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,
                        that is established by a person at a time when  the
                        person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  Additional  Considerations  in  Cases  Involving
                Foreign Criminals.

                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                    interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                    criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public   interest   in
                    deportation of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years
                    or more, the public interest  requires  C's  deportation
                    unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                    (a)    C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
                        Kingdom for most of C's life,

                    (b)    C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
                        United Kingdom, and

                    (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's
                        integration into the country to which C is proposed
                        to be deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                    subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a
                    genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
                    qualifying child, and the effect of C's  deportation  on
                    the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four
                    years, the public interest requires  deportation  unless
                    there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
                    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.




                (7)    The considerations in sub-Sections (1) to (6) are  to
                    be taken into account  where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is
                    considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                    to the extent that the reason for the decision  was  the
                    offence or offences for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                    convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

                (1)    In this Part -

                    'Article 8' means Article 8 of the  European  Convention
                    on Human Rights;

                    'Qualifying child' means a person who is under  the  age
                    of 18 and who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous
                        period of seven years or more;

                    'Qualifying partner' means a partner who -

                    (a)    is a British citizen, or

                    (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the
                        meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 -  see  Section
                        33(2) of that Act).

                (2)    In this Part "foreign criminal" means a person -

                    (a)    who is not a British citizen,

                    (b)    who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of
                        an offence, and

                    (c)    who -

                        (i)     has  been  sentenced   to   a   period   of
                             imprisonment of at least twelve months,

                        (ii)   has been convicted of an  offence  that  has
                             caused serious harm, or

                        (iii)  is a persistent offender."

 6. Given that, as noted above, an issue which has arisen in this  case  is
    whether the panel applied the correct version of the Immigration Rules,
    it is necessary to note that HC 352 amended  paragraphs  398,  399  and
    399A of the Immigration Rules with effect from  28th  July  2014.   The
    words added by HC 352 are in bold  below  and  the  words  deleted  are
    crossed and in square brackets.  As at the date  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision on 9th April 2014, the Rules  that  applied  were  the
    same as those in force on 27th July 2014, i.e. immediately prior to  HC
    352 coming into effect.

         "A.398.  These Rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention and

             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                  years;

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less  than  four
                  years but at least twelve months; or

             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A  applies  and  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A  [it
                  will only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public
                  interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
                  factors].

         399. This paragraphs applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the seven years immediately preceding the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case.

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported [it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
                           the child to leave the UK]; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported.  [There is no other family  member  who
                           is able to care for the child in the UK];

 7. The rest of the wording is not relevant for the purposes of this appeal
    bearing in mind the decision which I have ultimately reached.

The Decision of the Panel

 8. The panel summarised the arguments presented on behalf of the  Claimant
    and those presented on behalf of the Secretary of State in this way;

              "The Appellant's Case

         13. Oral evidence was given by the  appellant,  her  husband,  and
                 [AG], independent social worker.  Reliance was placed on an
                 appeal bundle of 158 pages.


         14. The material points of the appellant's case are as follows.


         15. She had passed her driving test on  1st September 2012,  and
                 began to drive in mid-September in a second-hand  car  with
                 automatic gears which her husband bought for  her,  and  in
                 which she displayed "P" plates at all times.


         16. The accident occurred due to  "unintended  acceleration"  when
                 she was pulling out into  a  major  road  and  her  husband
                 shouted at her to apply the  brakes.   It  seems  that  she
                 wrongly pressed the  accelerator.   The  circumstances  are
                 described in a report by [Dr AS], which appears at pages 55-
                 79 of the appeal bundle.


         17. The result of this split second error was that, her car having
                 gone out of control as noted above, it struck [the couple].


         18. The  effect  on  the  appellant  herself  is  described  in  a
                 psychological report by [MG], which appears at pages 88-93
                 of the bundle. She has suffered from hypervigilence,  sleep
                 disturbance, intrusive images, flashbacks,  nightmares  and
                 avoidance.  She had  great  distress  in  relation  to  the
                 bereaved family, felt  terrified  about  the  impact  of  a
                 custodial  sentence  on  herself  and  her  daughter,   and
                 believed that she would not be able to  face  her  parents,
                 friends or family again.  She was preoccupied and tormented
                 by thoughts of her daughter's unmet needs  should  they  be
                 separated.  The report, dated 4th July 2014 describes the
                 appellant as suffering from severe depression  and  anxiety
                 including  societal   withdrawal   and   isolation,   sleep
                 disturbance,  appetite  difficulties,  recurring   negative
                 thoughts, rumination and worry.


         19. The report concludes that in the opinion of [MG], an  enforced
                 separation  from  her  daughter  and   husband   would   be
                 detrimental to  the  appellant's  mental  health  and  have
                 negative implications for the mental health  and  wellbeing
                 of her daughter.


         20. [AG], who gave oral evidence and adopted the contents  of  her
                 written report at pages 79-86 of the appeal bundle, states
                 with regard to [D], that:-


                  '[D] is a young girl who has suffered emotional harm  due
                       to separation from her  mother  who  is  her  primary
                       attachment relationship.  In addition she witnessed a
                       traumatic car accident and  severe  deterioration  in
                       her mother's mental health following  this  accident.
                       She has been reunited with her mother and is  clearly
                       benefiting from this; however [D] and her family face
                       further trauma and  upheaval  should  her  mother  be
                       deported to  India.    If  [D]  and  her  father,  as
                       British citizens, choose  to  remain  living  in  the
                       United Kingdom where [D's]  health  and  educational
                       needs will be best  met,  she  will  have  to  endure
                       separation once again from her  mother,  who  is  her
                       primary attachment figure.  Whilst some  relationship
                       can be maintained, this will not, in my view, prevent
                       her from suffering significant emotional harm ...'


         21. The appellant and her  husband  made  it  clear  that  if  the
                 appellant has to return to India, they will  not  accompany
                 her.  [D] has some special health needs.  She has  multiple
                 food allergies, suffers from eczema and asthma, and  has  a
                 problem with the alignment of her feet, for  which  she  is
                 receiving  physiotherapy.   She  needs  a  high  level   of
                 consistent and attentive care, and  a  special  diet.   She
                 requires an 'epi-pen' to be available at all times in  case
                 she goes into anaphylactic shock due to her allergies.  She
                 cannot therefore easily be cared for  by  a  succession  of
                 carers.  Her father found it difficult to prepare food  for
                 her and attend all  her  hospital  appointments  while  the
                 appellant was in custody.


         22. [D] has been to India on two occasions with the appellant, but
                 on both occasions she had to be  taken  into  hospital  for
                 treatment of acute bronchitis due to  pollution  there.   A
                 letter from the medical superintendent at  Aditya Hospital
                 Hyderabad, at page 126 of the bundle, confirms this.


         23. Separation of the appellant from her husband and  child  would
                 be a terrible experience for all of them.   This  is  borne
                 out by a report from the head teacher at [D's]  school,  at
                 page 133 of the appeal bundle.  This states that since her
                 mother's release from custody, [D] has  been  much  happier
                 and more confident.  Without any  doubt  she  would  suffer
                 greatly if her mother was to  be  deported  as  the  family
                 would be broken up.  [D] needs her mother to help  her  get
                 over the trauma  she  has  experienced  with  her  mother's
                 sentence.


         24. At the  time  of  the  appeal  hearing,  in  addition  to  her
                 responsibilities to [D], the appellant was pregnant.


         25. The appellant  has  been  greatly  supported  by  friends  and
                 others.  At page 97 there is a strong  letter  of  support
                 from Councillor [B]of the [the  Ward  in  which  he  is  a
                 Councillor], which is where the accident  took  place,  and
                 where the appellant and her family  live.   He  states  his
                 deep sadness for the victims of the accident, and also  for
                 the appellant and her family.


         26. There is also a letter of strong support from the  appellant's
                 MP in [the  relevant  constituency  which  he  represents],
                 which is at page 95.


         27. A letter dated 18th August 2014 from the appellant's temple,
                 which is at page 99 of the appeal bundle, also attests  to
                 her good character.


         28. Letters of support from seven friends of  the  appellant  also
                 appear in the bundle at pages 101-115.


         29. The appellant's OASys Report shows, unsurprisingly, a low risk
                 of re-offending, as indicated in  a  letter  from  National
                 Probation Service at page 75  of  the  bundle.   While  in
                 custody, the appellant has pursued a number of constructive
                 educational courses.


          30.  The  appellant's  Counsel  submitted  a  skeleton  argument,
                 containing reference to the Immigration  Rules  current  at
                 the  time  of  the  respondent's  decision,  and   to   the
                 applicable provisions of the Immigration Act 2014.  It was
                 submitted that the  requirement  of  proportionality  under
                 Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  does
                 not require the appellant's deportation.


         The Respondent's Case


         31. The respondent relied on the reasons letter referred to above.


         32. The Tribunal was reminded that the appellant  was  subject  to
                 automatic deportation provisions.


         33. It was submitted that it was not relevant that the  sentencing
                 judge did not recommend deportation.


         34. The family has the option of  relocating  to  India  with  the
           appellant.


         35. Although [D] was unwell in  India,  the  treatment  which  she
                 received there appeared to have been successful.


         36. As to schooling of [D] in India, her parents  would  obviously
                 do their best for her.


         37. Her parents well know how to deal with her  medical  problems.
                 They could make life work in India for the family.


         38. Both the appellant and her husband have spent their  formative
                 years in India.  [K] has a good skill  set  and  could  re-
                 establish himself in that country.


         39. Return to India would not be unduly harsh for  any  member  of
                 the family.


         40. If the appellant were to be separated from  her  family,  that
                 would  also  not  be  unduly  harsh.   The  'single  parent
                 phenomenon' is not unknown. [K] made a good job of  looking
                 after [D] when his wife was in prison.


         41.  There  is  a  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  the
                 appellant.  A  clear  message  must  be  given  to  foreign
                 criminals.


          42.  The  respondent  also  made  reference  to  the   applicable
                 Immigration Rules and the Immigration Act 2014."


 9. The panel considered that it was obliged to decide the appeal under the
    version of the Immigration Rules which was in existence as at the  date
    of the decision under appeal.  That is to say  it  had  regard  to  the
    wording shown with a line through it above and not to  the  wording  in
    bold.  On  that  version  of  the  Rules  it  was  persuaded  that  the
    Claimant's appeal ought to succeed on the basis that, having regard  to
    her relationship with D she satisfied  paragraph  399(a)(i)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  That was on the basis that D is a  British  citizen
    and that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  D  to  leave  the  UK.
    Additionally, the panel considered it had  to  take  into  account  the
    content of Section 117 of the 2002 Act, as set out above, and, in  that
    context, it decided that the Section 117 considerations did not require
    her deportation and that, in particular, Exception  2  as  set  out  in
    Section 117C(5) applied to the Claimant.  It's key reasoning is set out
    below;

          "49.     It was suggested that as a British  citizen  who  has  as
                 such been required to  surrender  his  Indian  passport,  K
                 could not return to live and work in India, but there is no
                 basis for finding that he could not  be  admitted  to  that
                 country as a spouse, or that he would not be able to obtain
                 an Overseas Citizenship of India ('OCI') card.


             50.  This is however an immaterial matter because it is  clear
                 from the evidence of herself  and  her  husband,  which  is
                 accepted because it is consistent and credible, that if the
                 appellant were to be removed to India, her  family  members
                 would not accompany her.


              51.   In  any  event,  pursuant  to  the  decision   of   the
                 Upper Tribunal at paragraph 95 in the appeal of Sanade and
                 Others [2012] UKUT 00048, where a child or remaining spouse
                 is a British citizen, it is not possible to require them to
                 relocate outside the European Union, or to submit  that  it
                 would be reasonable for them to do so.


             52.  It is clear that the removal of the  appellant  to  India
                 would constitute an interference with the  family  life  of
                 all concerned.


              53.   That  interference  would  be  for  a  lawful   purpose
                 contemplated by Article 8.2.


             54.  The issue then arising is that of proportionality.


             55.  That issue is in part dealt with by the Immigration Rules
                 current at the time of the respondent's decision.


             56.  Paragraph 396 of the Rules provides that it  is  in  the
                 public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must
                 make a deportation order in accordance with Section 32  of
                 the UK Borders Act 2007.


             57.  The appellant falls within paragraph 398(b), because she
                 was sentenced to more than twelve  months,  but  less  than
                 four years imprisonment.


             58.  It is thus necessary to consider whether paragraphs 399A
                 or 399 apply.


             59.  She is not within paragraph 399A, because neither she nor
                 her husband fulfil the requirements of that  paragraph  for
                 length of time living continuously in  the  UK  immediately
                 preceding the date of the immigration decision giving  rise
                 to the present appeal.


             60.  As to paragraph 399, the appellant does not satisfy (b)
                 which is concerned with her relationship with her  husband,
                 because he had not lived in the UK with valid leave for  at
                 least the fifteen years immediately preceding the  date  of
                 the immigration decision.


             61.  However, the appellant does satisfy  paragraph 399(a)(i)
                 to the  extent  that  she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                 parental relationship with her daughter who  is  a  British
                 citizen.


             62.  To bring herself within paragraph 339, however, she also
                 needs to satisfy sub-sub-sub-paragraph (a)(ii)(a)  to  the
                 effect that it would not be reasonable to expect her  child
                 to leave the UK.  As to that:-


                  (i) [D] has health problems which are referred to above.


                  (ii)     She has been to India on two occasions when  she
                       fell ill there, as described above.


                  (iii)    The fact of British citizenship itself makes her
                       removal unreasonable pursuant  to  the  principle  in
                       Sanade.


                  (iv)     Regard has to be had  to  [D's]  best  interests
                       under Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
                       Immigration Act 2009, which requires that, in  making
                       a decision in relation to immigration matters, regard
                       has to be had to the need to  safeguard  and  promote
                       the   welfare   of   children   who   are   in    the
                       United Kingdom.


             63.  Taking into account the above considerations and all  the
                 circumstances of the case, it would not  be  reasonable  to
                 expect [D] to leave the UK.


             64.  Therefore, the appellant falls within paragraph 339, and
                 so far as the applicable Immigration Rules  are  concerned,
                 it is not necessary to show exceptional  circumstances  for
                 the public interest in  deportation  to  be  outweighed  by
                 other factors.


             65.  However, it is also necessary to consider Section 117 of
                 the  Nationality,  Immigration   and   Asylum   Act 2002,
                 introduced by the Immigration Act 2014.


             66.  Section 117C(3) states that in the  case  of  a  foreign
                 criminal  who  has  not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                 imprisonment of four years or  more,  the  public  interest
                 requires deportation unless one of two exceptions applies.


             67.  The first exception set out in Section 117C(4) does  not
                       apply.


              68.   As  to  whether  the  second  exception  contained   in
                 paragraph 117C(5) applies,  the  appellant  satisfies  the
                 first part of the requirement in  sub-Section  (5)  because
                 she has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  British
                 citizens who are respectively a qualifying  partner  and  a
                 qualifying child.  It is then necessary to consider whether
                 the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on either
                 of them.  Dealing with both husband and child together,  it
                 would be unduly harsh because:-


                  (i) There is a clear dependency by both husband and child
                       on the day-to-day care provided by the appellant.


                  (ii)     [D] has certain special requirements as a result
                       of her health issues referred to above.


                  (iii)    It was hard for the appellant's husband to  cope
                       while she was in custody.


                  (iv)     There is no evidence of a suitable quantity  and
                       quality of care being available from other sources.


                  (v) In any event the separation  of  a  mother  from  her
                       family in the  circumstances  contemplated  would  in
                       itself amount to undue  harshness,  given  the  clear
                       closeness of the family relationships which exist.


             69.  It is therefore  not  the  case  that,  pursuant  to  the
                 statutory provisions,  the  public  interest  requires  the
                 appellant's deportation.


             70.  It is nevertheless still  necessary  to  consider  public
                 interest    comprised    within    the    requirement    of
                 proportionality under Article 8.


              71.   In  this  connection  the  Tribunal  is   required   by
                 Section 117A to consider Section 117B, and Section 117C sub-
                 Section (1) and (2).  Without reciting the provisions  set
                 out in the legislation, the material factors applicable  in
                 the appellant's case under those provisions are as follows:-




                  (i) The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is
                       in the public interest.


                  (ii)     Deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the
                 public interest.


                  (iii)    The more  serious  the  offence  committed,  the
                       greater is the public interest in deportation.


                  (iv)     The appellant is an English speaker, which is in
                       the public interest.


                  (v) She and her husband are financially independent.


                  (vi)     The appellant and her husband married before her
                       entry as the spouse of a British  citizen.   Thus  no
                       question arises of any private life  or  family  life
                       being  formed  while  any  immigration   status   was
                       unlawful or precarious.


             72.  The above is however not necessarily an  exhaustive  list
                 of factors relevant to the question of public interest.


             73.  Drawing the threads together and distilling  the  various
                 requirements of primary and delegated  legislation,  it  is
                 necessary to consider the question of  the  proportionality
                 of the interference with family or private life which would
                 be caused by the appellant's deportation,  without  needing
                 to show there are exceptional circumstances  in  order  for
                 the public interest in  deportation  to  be  outweighed  by
                 other factors.  As to that:-


                  (i) The factors set out above under Section 117B and 117C
                       weigh in favour of the appellant.


                  (ii)     Although causing death by dangerous driving is a
                       grave offence with tragic consequences, it is not  an
                       offence of deliberate intent, and in the present case
                       was  a  result  of  a  catastrophic  error,  probably
                       committed in panic, in a matter of no more than a few
                       seconds.


                  (iii)    The appellant will not offend again.


                  (iv)     She is of good character.


                  (v) She has shown great remorse.


                  (vi)     She has suffered in her own mental health  as  a
                       result of the accident.


                  (vii)    The effect on  her  family  of  her  deportation
                       would be unduly harsh, as found above.


                  (viii)   The effect on the  appellant  herself  would  be
                       unduly harsh in the  light  of  separation  from  her
                       family; the  fact  that  she  has  already  served  a
                       sentence  for  the  offence;  the  distress  she  has
                       already experienced apart from the sentence; and  the
                       conditions of living in  India  which  clearly  would
                       contrast unfavourably with her current  life  in  the
                       UK.


             74.  In the light of all the above, we find that it would  not
                 be proportionate to the respondent's lawful  aims  for  the
                 appellant to  be  deported.   Thus,  as  indicated  to  the
                 appellant, the appeal succeeds under Article 8."



10. Hence, the Claimant's appeal succeeded.

The Permission Stage

11. The Grounds of Appeal filed on behalf of the Secretary of State ran  to
    some 25 paragraphs.  Some of what was said clearly amounted to no  more
    than disagreement with the outcome but it was asserted that  the  panel
    had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  apply  the  wrong  test  in   its
    consideration  of  the  position  under  the  Immigration  Rules   and,
    specifically, in failing to consider whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for D to leave the UK or  for  D  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Claimant.  Permission was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    and the salient part of that grant reads as follows;

         "2.   The  Tribunal  found,   for   the   purposes   of   paragraph
             399(a)(ii)(a) of the Immigration Rules, that it would  not  be
             reasonable to expect the Appellant's child to leave the United
             Kingdom.

         3.   Grounds 1 to 12 contend that the Tribunal  erred  because  the
             correct test under  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b)  was  whether  it
             would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom and  that  the  Tribunal  also  erred  in  failing  to
             consider paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) which  required  that  it  be
             unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
             without the person to be deported.

         4.   In fact, contrary to what the grounds contend, at the date  of
             decision, which is generally the relevant date for determining
             the applicable Immigration  Rule  (see  MD  (Jamaica)  and  GE
             (Canada) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 213), the test under paragraph
             399(a)(ii)(a) was, as  the  Tribunal  rightly  indicated,  the
             reasonableness test.

         5.   It is nevertheless arguable that the Tribunal erred in failing
             also to consider paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) -  not  because  that
             test involved  undue  hardship  as  the  grounds  contend  but
             because it required the Appellant to show that  there  was  no
             other family member who was able to care for the child in  the
             UK and  that  was  not  a  specific  issue  addressed  by  the
             Tribunal.

         6.   Although, in  the  light  of  the  Tribunal's  findings  under
             Section 1117C of the 2002 Act, any error under paragraph   399
             may  well  be  immaterial,  that  is  open  to  argument   and
             accordingly permission  is  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
             Tribunal arguably erred in accepting that  the  Appellant  met
             the  requirements  of  paragraph  399,   without   considering
             399(a)(ii)(b).  I do not refuse permission  on  the  remaining
             grounds."

12. Permission having been granted there was a  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to consider whether the decision of the panel ought to be  set
    aside and, if so, whether the decision could be remade without the need
    for a further hearing.

Assessment

13. Mr Whitwell relied  upon  the  grounds  and  addressed  me  briefly  to
    elaborate upon them.  His main contentions were to the effect that  the
    panel had erred in applying the wrong version of the Immigration  Rules
    notwithstanding  what  had  been  said  in  the  grant  of  permission.
    Specifically, he said that the Rules which had to be applied were those
    in force as at the date of the hearing before the panel not the version
    which applied as at the date of the decision.  He cited, in particular,
    in support of that proposition the judgment in YM (Uganda) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  1292  but  also  upon
    Chege (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 (IAC) and
    AB (paragraph 399(a)) Algeria [2015] UKUT 00657  (IAC).   He  contended
    the version of the Rules applicable  from  28th  July  2014,  which  he
    argued the panel should have  applied,  required  it  to  look  at  the
    situation of the child if that child were to live  in  the  country  to
    which the Claimant would be deported (India) and also the  position  if
    the child were to remain in the UK without the Claimant but  that  this
    exercise had not been performed by the panel as a  consequence  of  its
    error in applying the wrong Rules.  He also submitted that the  panel's
    findings regarding Section 117C(5) were  unsafe  because  it  had  been
    considering the question of Exception 2 against a  background  test  of
    "reasonableness" as opposed (as I understand it) to  a  test  of  undue
    harshness.

14. Mr Mold, for the Claimant, argued that Mr  Whitwell  had  misunderstood
    YM, that YM was also misunderstood by those deciding AB and  Chege  and
    that the panel correctly applied the Rules in force as at the  date  of
    the decision under appeal.  He went on to say that whilst the panel did
    not specifically refer  to  the  requirement  at  399(a)(i)(b)  of  the
    earlier version of the Rules, any such error stemming from that was not
    material because if the panel, given  its  other  findings,  had  asked
    itself whether there was any other family member able to care  for  the
    child in the UK it  would  inevitably  have  concluded  there  was  not
    bearing in mind observations it had made in a passage from paragraph 21
    to paragraph 23 of its determination.  Those  paragraphs  are  set  out
    above.  Anything else in the  grounds,  submitted  Mr  Mold,  was  mere
    disagreement and  were  the  sorts  of  points  heavily  criticised  in
    Greenwood (2) (paragraph 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629.  Further, the
    content of Section 117, which had come into force  on  28th  July  2014
    along with the new Immigration Rules, was only to be taken into account
    if it was decided that the requirements of paragraph 399 or 399A of the
    Immigration Rules were not met.

15. I accept Mr Whitwell's submission to the effect that the panel erred in
    failing to consider the position under the version of  the  Immigration
    Rules which was in force as at  the  date  of  the  panel  hearing,  as
    opposed to the version which was  in  force  as  at  the  date  of  the
    deportation decision under appeal.  I bear in mind all that Mr Mold has
    to say about that but it seems to me that the Court of Appeal,  in  YM,
    was clearly laying down the general principle that, in the  context  of
    deportation, and bearing in mind what is said in Rule A362, it  is  the
    case that the Rules to be applied at a first instance  appeal  are  the
    Rules in force as at the date of the hearing of that appeal.  I  really
    cannot see how paragraph 39 of the judgment can be read  in  any  other
    way.  I also note that the Upper Tribunal in Chege and in  AB  had  the
    same view of YM.  That is not by any means the end of the matter though
    because it is necessary  to  consider  whether  any  such  error  is  a
    material one bearing in mind the other findings and  conclusions  which
    the panel had reached.

16. In this context, despite its taking the view that it should not look at
    the Rules which came into force on 28th July 2014, the panel  did  take
    into account the new statutory provisions now contained in the  amended
    Section 117 of the 2002 Act which also came into force  on  that  date.
    Of course, those statutory provisions and the Immigration  Rules  which
    came into force on 28th July  2014  substantially  mirror  each  other.
    Indeed, it would be very odd indeed if they did not do  that.  That  is
    because they are both to be considered when a deportation  decision  is
    appealed and they both seek to lay down the same sorts  of  principles.
    In this context, I reject Mr Whitwell's  submission  that  the  section
    117C(5) consideration  was  conducted  against  the  background  of  an
    application of an incorrect test being that of "reasonableness".  It is
    clear from what the panel said at paragraph 68 that it was  considering
    the Section 117C(5) requirements on the basis of  the  applicable  test
    being one of undue  harshness.   To  recap,  the  second  Exception  in
    Section 117C(5) of the  2002  Act  applies  in  circumstances  where  a
    Claimant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child and the effect of the Claimant's deportation on that child  would
    be unduly harsh.  There are similar provisions relating to partners but
    I focus, here, upon the child.  There is little  practical  difference,
    it seems to me, between Exception 2 as it relates  to  a  child  within
    Section  117C  and  the  post  27th  July  2014  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules appearing at paragraph  399(a)(i)(a)  and  (b).   The
    panel's reasoning at paragraph 68 of the determination  to  the  effect
    that Exception 2 does apply is, it may be seen from  a  plain  reading,
    very much focused upon the situation of the child.  Reference  is  made
    to the child being  dependent  upon  the  Claimant,  the  child  having
    special requirements as a result of health concerns, the difficulty the
    Claimant's husband had in coping with the child, the lack  of  evidence
    of available care and the gravity of a separation of mother and  child.
    It seems to me that in looking at what it had to say,  the  panel  was,
    there, effectively deciding that it would be unduly harsh for the child
    to live in India and unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
    without it's mother.  Were it not so deciding it is  difficult  to  see
    why it would conclude that the effects of the Claimant's deportation on
    the child would be unduly harsh.  As to the question of whether it  was
    open to the panel to so decide, it seems to me that that was  a  matter
    for it on the basis of the facts as it found them to be.

17. I conclude, therefore, in light of the above, that  if  the  panel  had
    asked itself the correct question with respect to the  current  version
    of paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) and (b) it would have concluded in favour  of
    the Claimant on the basis of the child.  The error  it  made  was  not,
    therefore, a material one.  Accordingly, its decision is not set aside.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law and its decision  shall  stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  order  which  applied  to  the
Claimant and members of his family.  I  continue  such  order  in  the  same
terms.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Claimant  or  any  members  of  the  Claimant's  family.   This
Direction applies both to the  Claimant  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State.
Failure to comply  with  this  Direction  may  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



