
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00948/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th March 2014 & 3rd November    |On 16th November 2016                |
|2016                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
          (and Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on 11th March 2014 only)


                                   Between

                                  CRAIG [K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill instructed by Peer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Subsequent to a hearing on 11th March 2014,  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal was set aside to be  remade  in  the  following
         terms:

             "1.  The  appellant  appeals  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal which dismissed his appeal against a decision made by
             the  respondent  pursuant  to  the   "automatic   deportation"
             provisions of section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007. That  was
             because, as the appellant had been convicted of  2  counts  of
             using false instruments and 1 count of dishonestly failing  to
             disclose information and sentenced to 15 months  detention  he
             was a foreign criminal in respect of whom the  respondent  was
             required to make deportation  order,  such  deportation  being
             deemed to be conducive to  the  public  good  because  of  the
             provision of section 32(4) of the 2007 Act.

             2.   In a lengthy and in  places  meandering  determination  a
             First-tier Tribunal panel of FtTJ  Molloy  and  Mrs  Cross  de
             Chavannes dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
             on Article 8 grounds.

             3.   Stylistic considerations aside, there  are  a  number  of
             substantive failings in the panel's  determination,  the  most
             significant of which are as follows:

                  a.   The panel took account of confidential documents from
                  the family court that  had  been  produced  to  the  panel
                  without the consent or knowledge of the family court;

                  b.   Those  family  court  documents  were  of  themselves
                  incomplete as they did not include critical material  such
                  as the judgment of the family judge whereby the  appellant
                  was granted a residence order in respect of his son [E] or
                  any welfare reports produced to  the  family  court  which
                  were considered by the family judge;

                  c.   That if the appellant were deported his son would  be
                  left  with  no  blood  relative  with  whom  he  has   any
                  meaningful or significant relationship whatsoever;

                  d.   That the decision that the child [E] could stay  with
                  Ms [M] was made in total ignorance of whether  and  if  so
                  what role she had played in the court's  deliberations  in
                  making the residence order;

                  e.   That Ms [M]'s suitability as a foster parent has  not
                  been considered by anybody with any authority or skill  to
                  draw any conclusion;

                  f.   The panel failed to take account of the fact that  Ms
                  [M] and her and the appellant's other  children  were  the
                  subject of administrative removal decisions which although
                  withdrawn have not resulted in the grant of any  leave  to
                  remain in the UK; all are therefore unlawfully present and
                  their  immigration  status  is  precarious.  There  is  no
                  consideration of the effect  of  leaving  [E]  (a  British
                  citizen aged 11)  in  the  care  of  someone  who  may  be
                  removed;

                  g.   The finding that Ms [M] could  and  would  adequately
                  look  after  a  child  with  whom  she   has   no   formal
                  relationship; is not a step-parent as recognised under the
                  Rules; where the panel concluded that  the  appellant  was
                  not living with Ms [M]; where the  child  lives  with  the
                  appellant  is  inadequately  reasoned,  is  based  on   an
                  incomplete assessment of the  available  evidence  and  as
                  such is irrational.

                  h.   The panel failed to reach a finding  on  whether  the
                  appellant is or should be considered to be the [E]'s  sole
                  parent in the UK.

                  i.    The  panel  failed  to  reach  adequately   reasoned
                  findings why the appellant should not remain in the UK  as
                  [E]'s sole parent given their finding that it is the  best
                  interests of all the other children to remain  in  the  UK
                  with their respective mothers.

             4.   Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of  State  confirmed
             that he had some anxieties about both the use  of  the  family
             documents that were produced and the lack of orders sought for
             the production of other relevant family proceedings documents.

             5.   We are satisfied, and Mr Walker agreed with this finding,
             that the failures referred to above amount to  errors  of  law
             such that the determination is set aside to be remade.

             6.   It was agreed with the parties  that  a  request  by  the
             Upper Tribunal for disclosure of  documents  from  the  family
             court would be made and, on receipt, a Case Management  Review
             hearing would be listed to determine  future  conduct  of  the
             resumed hearing.

      2. There has been considerable delay in the remaking of  the  decision
         because of the lack of receipt of  relevant  information  from  the
         family court, for which they apologise. A copy of the  final  order
         in the family proceedings dated 22nd May 2009 and the  NYAS  report
         prepared for the family court for the purpose of those  proceedings
         was received by the Upper Tribunal on 10th August 2016; there  then
         followed a case management review hearing and  the  appeal  finally
         came before me on 3rd November 2016. On conclusion of the hearing I
         allowed the appeal and gave very brief reasons

      3. The appellant relies upon the grounds of appeal as set out  in  s84
         Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  unamended  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014 on the basis that the decision the subject  of
         the appeal and the appeal as filed pre-dates the 2014 Act.




         Appellant's personal and family situation

      4. The appellant arrived in the UK in  December  1999;  his  leave  to
         remain expired in 2001  and  he  did  not  leave  the  UK.  He  was
         sentenced to a total  of  15  months'  imprisonment  involving  the
         production of a  false  indefinite  leave  to  remain  vignette  on
         conviction on 29th May 2012; he served about four  months  and  was
         then released to his home on curfew.

      5. There is no challenge by the respondent to the family situation and
         personal history as put forward by the appellant and  supported  by
         witness statements and  court  reports.  The  appellant  has  seven
         children:

             K, born 2001 (mother: Ms L [M])

             E, born 2002 (mother: Ms A [R])

             Eb, born 2002 (mother: Ms [P])

             T, born 2007 (mother: Ms L [M])

             L, born 2012 (mother: Ms L [M])

             Ds, born 2012 (mother: Ms K [S])

             Dc, born 2012 (mother: Ms K [S])

      6. The appellant has direct contact with E, Ds and Dc. Ds and Dc  live
         with their mother and see  the  appellant  regularly  at  weekends.
         Their mother is a citizen of Trinidad  and  Tobago.  She  has  held
         discretionary leave to remain  and  on  16  October  2016  made  an
         application for her and the twins to be granted indefinite leave to
         remain.

      7. E, a British citizen, lives  with  the  appellant  full  time.  His
         mother, a Jamaican citizen, was removed from the UK in 2006 and  is
         now living in the USA. Although she was a party to the family court
         proceedings she did not participate in them. She is  in  occasional
         telephone contact with E. Although the court  order  made  in  2009
         stated that there should be telephone contact every Friday that has
         not occurred. The report prepared for  the  Family  Court  in  2009
         concluded:

          i) It would not be in E's interest for E to be  returned  to  his
             mother's care who does  not  appear  to  have  had  an  active
             parental influence upon him; the address she gave to the court
             was a post box address belonging to her mother in a  different
             town to where she was then living and the social worker was of
             the view that this may bear some relation to the violence that
             E said he had sustained when he was with her.

         ii) E was initially cared for by his mother, then by Ms F [L].  Ms
             [L] took him to Jamaica when he was aged  4  and  he  remained
             with his mother there after she was removed there  until  2007
             when he returned to the UK with Ms [L]. In June  2008  he  was
             found alone at Ms [L] address. A prohibited  steps  order  was
             made preventing him from being left unsupervised but  that  he
             should reside and sleep at Ms [L] address. A variation of that
             order was made such that E commenced living with his father on
             20th January 2009 and he has remained with him since then.

        iii) The social worker report to the family court states that E has
             developed an  emotional  attachment  to  his  father  and  his
             physical and emotional needs are being met; he was a happy and
             settled little boy and the school were aware of his  education
             and family history but were confident  he  would  be  able  to
             'catch up'.

         iv) Despite being given an opportunity for  the  purposes  of  the
             court report, E did not indicate that he missed his mother  or
             Ms [L]. He did say he did not like 'the shootings'  which  the
             social worker found of concern given the age of the child.

          v) Any  significant  changes  to  the  child's  main  carer  (the
             appellant) or location may result in  emotional  harm  to  the
             child. He will have suffered  emotionally  from  his  mother's
             circumstances and her decision to leave him  in  the  care  of
             another (Ms [L]) at an early age and he was taken to  Jamaica.
             The circumstances are not indicative of a strong bond  between
             mother and son.

         vi) E is happy and thriving and there  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant is less than capable of meeting his needs.

      8. The appellant has an elderly grandmother  (E's  great  grandmother)
         and an aunt in the UK, neither  of  whom  were  considered  by  the
         family court as potential carers for E. Both are  British  Citizens
         and have lived in the UK for many years.  There  is  no  suggestion
         that they could care for E.

      9. The appellant, E, T, K and L and Ms [M] lived  together  from  2001
         until 31st  October  2015.  They  had  'ups  and  downs'  in  their
         relationship but essentially they  were  together  throughout  that
         time. On 31st October 2015 Ms [M] left the address  without  notice
         or reason  with  T,  K  and  L.  Although  the  appellant  has  had
         occasional telephone contact with the children  he  does  not  know
         where they are living. E is said, understandably, to be very  upset
         by  their  sudden   departure.   The   appellant   reported   their
         disappearance to the police who have said they cannot assist. K  is
         now registered as a British citizen.

     10. If he can trace the children, the appellant states that  if  he  is
         not deported he will try to get contact arranged through the courts
         to enable not only him to see his children but also for  E  to  re-
         establish his relationship with them.

     11. Ms [M] looked after E during the period of time the  appellant  was
         detained serving his sentence - approximately four months.




         Grounds

     12. The appellant asserts, in essence:

          i) Because he is the primary carer of his 14-year-old child E who
             is a British Citizen, E would have no  reasonable  alternative
             but to follow him to Jamaica if the  appellant  were  removed.
             This would  deprive  him  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of his rights as a British and European Citizen. The
             mere existence of a criminal record cannot by  itself  justify
             deportation  unless  his  personal   conduct   constitutes   a
             'genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  adversely
             affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interest  of  ...society'
             which, it is submitted, he does not - Article  20  TFEU,  Ruiz
             Zambrano and SSHD  v  CS  Grand  Chamber  Case  C-304/14.  The
             deportation of the appellant would therefore be  a  breach  of
             these rights under Article 20 TFEU as the family member of  an
             EEA family member and/or is not in accordance with the  law  -
             s84 Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (prior  to
             amendment by the Immigration Act 2014).

         ii) The phrase in paragraph 399(a) Immigration Rules and  s117C(5)
             'unduly harsh' requires that the effect of deportation on  the
             person's child be  weighed  against  the  public  interest  in
             deportation  -  the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in
             deportation, the harder it will be to show that the effect  on
             the child would be unduly harsh; what is duly or unduly  harsh
             requires  an  analysis  of  all  the  circumstances  including
             criminal and immigration history as well as the impact on  the
             child (MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450). It is submitted  that
             it would be unduly harsh for E to live in Jamaica -  he  is  a
             British citizen aged 14; he has had a troubled life  which  it
             is acknowledge by the family court has had order  and  support
             brought to it by the appellant who is a good,  supportive  and
             important   role   model   and   father;    the    appellant's
             rehabilitation reduces  the  public  interest  in  deportation
             because the protection of the public from serious harm is  not
             engaged; if the appellant were deported and E remained in  the
             UK he would be left in the care of social services  which,  in
             the context of his previous experiences and his age  would  be
             extremely damaging to him. It was submitted that the appellant
             in any event met the 'very compelling   circumstances'  taking
             into account the cumulative effect of his derivative right  of
             residence under Ruiz Zambrano principles, E's  best  interests
             lie in remaining in  the  UK  with  the  appellant,  the  best
             interests of the appellant's two daughters  who  do  not  live
             with him but with whom he has  a  close  relationship  looking
             after them each weekend, his lengthy residence in the UK,  his
             social and cultural integration, his fluency  in  English  and
             his ability and willingness to work (even though he was not at
             present working that is because he is not permitted to do  so;
             he has previously worked albeit illegally), his  good  conduct
             since conviction and since  completing  his  licence  and  the
             unlikelihood that he will re-offend.




         Ground 1 - Article 20 TFEU and  s84  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

     13.  It is plain that E would have no choice but to go to Jamaica  with
         the appellant if the appellant were deported there. Social Services
         and the family court have made clear that E should remain with  his
         father and that any  interference  in  that  arrangement  would  be
         detrimental to E given particularly his troubled  previous  history
         and the stable and advantageous environment that he now lives in. E
         is now 14years old. He is at  secondary  school.  Although  he  has
         previously lived away from his father in Jamaica, the circumstances
         of that were adversely commented upon in the report to  the  family
         court. It is to be expected  that  the  possibility  of  moving  to
         Jamaica, even with his father, would reignite  anxieties  that  the
         family court was anxious to avoid.

     14. E has not exercised his freedom of movement within Europe. Nor  has
         he lived in the UK the whole  of  his  life,  spending  1  year  in
         Jamaica when he was aged 4/5. The appellant is, without  doubt  the
         primary carer of E - there is no-one else  available  to  care  for
         him. If his father were deported E would have to leave the UK  thus
         depriving him of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  his
         rights  conferred  by  the  EU  Treaties.  The  appellant   plainly
         satisfies the criteria in regulation  15A(4A)  of  the  Immigration
         (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  as  amended;  he  is
         entitled to a derivative right of residence.

     15. The question of whether and how a person with a derivative right of
         residence may be expelled from the UK was considered in CS.

     16. CS states:

             "19. ... the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)
                  decided to stay proceedings and  to  refer  the  following
                  questions to the Court for a preliminary ruling:

                  '1.  Does EU law,  and  in  particular  Article 20  TFEU,
                      preclude a  Member  State  from  expelling  from  its
                      territory to a non-Union country a non-Union national
                      who is the parent and primary carer of a child who is
                      a citizen of that Member State (and, consequently,  a
                      citizen of the Union), where to do so  would  deprive
                      the Union citizen child of the genuine  enjoyment  of
                      the substance of his or  her  rights  as  a  European
                      Union citizen?

                  2.   If  the  answer  to  Question  1  is  "No",  in  what
                      circumstances would such an  expulsion  be  permitted
                      under EU law?

                  3.   If the answer to Question 1 is "No", to what  extent,
                      if any, do Articles 27 and 28 of Directive [2004/38]
                      inform the answer to Question 2?'

             ...

             29.  In this connection, the Court has already held that there
                  are very specific situations in which,  despite  the  fact
                  that the secondary law on the right of residence of third-
                  country nationals does not apply  and  the  Union  citizen
                  concerned has not made use of his freedom of  movement,  a
                  right of residence must nevertheless be granted to a third-
                  country national who is a family member of his  since  the
                  effectiveness of citizenship of the Union would  otherwise
                  be undermined, if, as a consequence of refusal of  such  a
                  right, that citizen would be obliged in practice to  leave
                  the territory of the  European  Union  as  a  whole,  thus
                  denying him the genuine enjoyment of the substance of  the
                  rights conferred by virtue of his  status  (see,  to  this
                  effect, judgments of  8 March  2011, Ruiz  Zambrano,  C-
                  34/09, EU:C:2011:124, paragraphs 43 and 44; of 15 November
                  2011, Dereci  and   Others,   C-256/11, EU:C:2011:734,
                  paragraphs 66 and  67;  of  8 November  2012, Iida,  C-
                  40/11, EU:C:2012:691, paragraph 71; of 8 May 2013, Ymeraga
                  and Others, C-87/12, EU:C:2013:291, paragraph 36; and of
                  10 October   2013, Alokpa    and    Moudoulou,    C-
                  86/12, EU:C:2013:645, paragraph 32).

             30   The  above  situations  have  the  common  feature  that,
                  although they are governed by legislation which  falls,  a
                  priori, within the competence of the Member States, namely
                  legislation on the right of entry and residence of  third-
                  country nationals  outside  the  scope  of  provisions  of
                  secondary legislation which provide for the grant of  such
                  a right under certain conditions, they nonetheless have an
                  intrinsic connection with  the  freedom  of  movement  and
                  residence of a Union citizen, which prevents the right  of
                  entry and residence being refused to  those  nationals  in
                  the Member State of residence of that  citizen,  in  order
                  not to interfere with that freedom (see, to  this  effect,
                  judgments    of    8 November    2012, Iida,    C-
                  40/11, EU:C:2012:691,  paragraph 72,  and  of  8 May
                  2013, Ymeraga  and   Others,   C-87/12, EU:C:2013:291,
                  paragraph 37).

             ...

             50.  In the light of all  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
                  answer to the questions referred is that Article 20  TFEU
                  must be interpreted as precluding legislation of a  Member
                  State which requires a third-country national who has been
                  convicted of a criminal offence to be  expelled  from  the
                  territory  of  that  Member  State  to  a  third   country
                  notwithstanding the fact that that national is the primary
                  carer of a young child who is a national  of  that  Member
                  State, in which he has been residing since  birth  without
                  having exercised his right of freedom  of  movement,  when
                  the expulsion of the person concerned  would  require  the
                  child to  leave  the  territory  of  the  European  Union,
                  thereby depriving him of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
                  substance of his rights as a Union  citizen.  However,  in
                  exceptional circumstances a  Member  State  may  adopt  an
                  expulsion measure provided  that  it  is  founded  on  the
                  personal conduct of  that  third-country  national,  which
                  must  constitute  a  genuine,  present  and   sufficiently
                  serious threat adversely affecting one of the  fundamental
                  interests of the society of that Member State, and that it
                  is  based  on  consideration  of  the  various   interests
                  involved, matters which are  for  the  national  court  to
                  determine."

     17.  The issue to be  determined  is  therefore  whether  the  personal
         conduct of the appellant, "which must constitute a genuine, present
         and sufficiently serious threat  adversely  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interest of the society of that Member State, and  that
         it is based on consideration of the various interest  involved"  is
         such as to merit his deportation.

     18. The appellant remained unlawfully in the  UK  after  2001.  He  has
         resided in the UK  for  17  years  of  which  15  years  have  been
         unlawful. During the period of his unlawful residence he  committed
         a serious crime, which undermined the integrity of immigration  law
         for which he was sentenced to 15 months in prison.  The  sentencing
         judge stated:

             "You have been found guilty of serious offences, offences that
             involve the use  of  false  indications,  false  vignettes  or
             stamps in  official  documents,  particularly  passports,  are
             particularly serious, not least of all because  the  including
             of fake vignettes such as the one  you  have  used  completely
             undermines the integrity of important  identity  documents  in
             which government agencies and indeed many other people have to
             put their faith in order to make proper  decisions,  not  only
             about immigration, but about national  insurance  entitlements
             and employment. It is true to recognise that you did not use a
             false document such as this passport to gain  entry  into  the
             country, but it must also be  recognised  that  you  were  not
             lawfully in the country either at a time when you  took  steps
             to obtain not only this false or fake vignette, but  you  took
             steps to also acquire this faked Home Office letter".

     19. The seriousness and gravity of the offence cannot be underestimated
         and were it not for E there is  no  doubt  but  that  he  would  be
         deported. The appellant has not committed any further crimes. There
         is no suggestion that he is at all likely to commit further  crime.
         But he remains unlawfully in the UK. Mr Walker did not submit  that
         this  appellant's  unlawful  residence,  even  combined  with  past
         serious and grave criminality, constitutes  a  genuine  present  or
         sufficiently serious threat to society which  adversely  affects  a
         fundamental interest of society.

     20. I am satisfied that deportation of the appellant would be a  breach
         of the appellant's rights under Article 20 TFEU.

     21. As such his deportation would not be in accordance with the law.




         Ground 2: paragraph 399(a) Immigration Rules and s117C  Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     22. There can be no doubt but that it would be unduly harsh  for  E  to
         live in Jamaica. Although he is a  dual  British/Jamaican  citizen,
         all bar one year of his life has  been  in  the  UK;  his  time  in
         Jamaica appears, as reported to the  Family  Court,  to  have  been
         marred by violence and moving to live in Jamaica  would  result  in
         him being deprived of the substance of  his  rights  as  a  British
         Citizen and EU national.

     23. If E remains in the UK without his father, there is no-one to  care
         for him or provide him with support; he would  have  to  enter  the
         care system. Although the care system does its best  for  children,
         it cannot be said that for this child, with his troubled past, that
         it would be a remotely  satisfactory  arrangement  when  considered
         against the criminality and sentence of his  father.  Although  his
         father has been convicted of a serious and grave offence for  which
         he was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment, this  child  now  only
         has his father. His stepmother has abandoned him and he  no  longer
         has contact with his siblings with whom he has  spent  the  last  7
         years.

     24. I drew the attention of the parties to AJ  (Zimbabwe)  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ1012 and in  particular  that  unless  the  specific  exceptions
         apply, there must be very compelling reasons to outweigh the public
         interest  in  deportation;  the  very  strong  public  interest  in
         deporting foreign criminals is not diluted where the  rights  of  a
         child are affected. In [17] Elias LJ says

             "These cases show that it will be rare for the best  interests
             of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
             deporting foreign criminals. Something  more  than  a  lengthy
             separation  from  a  parent  is  required,  even  though  such
             separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.  That
             is commonplace  and  not  a  compelling  circumstance.....Rule
             399(a) identifies the particular  circumstances  where  it  is
             accepted that the interest of  the  child  will  outweigh  the
             public interest in deportation. The conditions are onerous and
             will only rarely arise. They include the requirement  that  it
             would not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK and that
             no other family member is available to look after the child in
             the UK. In many, if not most, cases where  this  exception  is
             potentially engaged there will be the normal  relationship  of
             love  and  affection  between  parent  and  child  and  it  is
             virtually always in the best interest of the  child  for  that
             relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
             deportation a disproportionate interference with family  life,
             it would drain the rule  of  any  practical  significance.  It
             would   mean   that    deportation    would    constitute    a
             disproportionate  interference  with  private  life   in   the
             ordinary run of cases where children  are  adversely  affected
             and the carefully framed conditions in rule  399(a)  would  be
             largely otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very  compelling
             justification  overriding  the   high   public   interest   in
             deportation, there must be some additional feature or features
             affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take
             the case out of the ordinary."

     25. The relationship between E and his father is  a  relationship  that
         has enabled E to overcome his previous troubles.  There  is  no-one
         available to look after him or care for him in the  UK.  There  are
         three main and significant  facets  in  the  consideration  of  the
         public interest in deportation: the need to deter foreign criminals
         from  committing  serious  crimes;  an  expression   of   society's
         revulsion  at  serious  crimes  and  building  confidence  in   the
         treatment of foreign criminals who have committed such crimes;  and
         the risk of re-offending. The risk of re-offending is  accepted  as
         low. But the crime for which he was convicted was very serious  and
         grave and, as said by the sentencing judge,  completely  undermines
         the integrity of important identity documents. To enable a  finding
         that it would be unduly harsh for E to be in  the  UK  without  his
         father requires proper and full effect to be  given  to  deterrence
         and revulsion but at the same time to consider and weigh the actual
         effect of that separation on E.

     26. It goes almost without saying that the other matters referred to by
         Ms Revill (appellant's language ability,  rehabilitation,  that  he
         will more than likely seek and obtain employment and that his  twin
         daughters will suffer from loss of physical contact) would not  and
         do not elevate this case  to  one  where  deportation  is  not  the
         appropriate course of action. The important, rare  and  exceptional
         factor when considered in the context of  the  public  interest  in
         deportation is the serious, significant and substantial  practical,
         physical and emotional  effect  that  the  appellant's  deportation
         would have on E. Although of course  communication  could  continue
         through facetime/Skype/WhatsApp and so on, E would  not  be  looked
         after in a loving home but by strangers, at the  beginning  of  his
         adolescence when the stability provided by his father  has  enabled
         him to recover from his troubled and traumatic early years.

     27. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for E to remain in  the  UK  without  his  father,  his  only
         available family member.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    There was no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason  for
    there to be one. The children in the decision are referred to by  their
    initials only in any event.


[pic]

     Date 16th November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
