


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00021/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 5 February 2014                          |On : 10 February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     PVV
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Kadic, instructed by Trott & Gentry LLP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born on 5 August  1994.  Following  a
grant of permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  deport
him from the United Kingdom, I found, at an error of law hearing on 11  July
2013, that the Tribunal  had  made  errors  of  law  in  their  decision.  I
directed that the decision be set aside and re-made by  the  Upper  Tribunal
with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2005 and  first  came  to
the attention of the UKBA following his conviction  on  22  March  2012  for
production of a controlled drug, cannabis, for  which  he  received  a  four
month Detention and Training Order. On 20  June  2012  a  National  Referral
Mechanism (NRM) referral was made from a police officer who had  interviewed
the appellant, which was allocated to  a  Competent  Authority  on  26  June
2012. On  4  July  2012  the  respondent  advised  the  appellant  that  the
Competent Authority had concluded that  there  were  reasonable  grounds  to
believe that he had been trafficked.  The  appellant  was  not  granted  any
leave as a result, but on 27 July 2012 he made an  application  for  asylum.
As part of his application he also claimed  to  have  established  a  family
life with his partner, LNL, and her daughter, A, a British  citizen.  On  18
December 2012 the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  and  human
rights claim and made a decision to deport him by virtue of section 5(1)  of
the Immigration Act 1971.

In the reasons for deportation letter, the respondent noted  that  paragraph
398(c) of the immigration rules applied to the appellant on the  basis  that
the nature of his offending was considered to pose a risk  of  serious  harm
to the public. The respondent went on to consider the appellant's Article  8
claim, accepting that  he  had  developed  a  close  relationship  with  his
partner's daughter,  A,  but  concluding  that  he  had  not  established  a
parental relationship with her for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  and  that
accordingly paragraph 399(a) did not apply. It was considered  further  that
he could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399(b) because  his  partner
had only discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and he  himself
had never had valid leave to remain. Paragraph 399A was  not  considered  to
apply because he had not spent at least half his life in the United  Kingdom
and it was not unreasonable for him to return to Vietnam and  build  a  life
for himself there. The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were  any
exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case and accordingly  concluded
that his deportation would not breach Article 8.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal by a panel consisting of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Davda and Mr P Bompas. By that time the appellant and his partner  LNL
had had a baby together, JV, who was less than three months old.  LNL's  own
immigration  status  was  uncertain,  as  she  had  initially  been  granted
discretionary leave to 14 May 2005  and  had  made  an  application  for  an
extension of that leave but  her  application  remained  outstanding.  LNL's
daughter, A, had acquired her British nationality  from  her  father,  LNL's
former partner, who was a British citizen. The Tribunal did  not  find  that
the appellant would be at risk on return to Vietnam and considered that  his
deportation would not breach Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  They  dismissed  the
appeal on all grounds.

Permission was subsequently granted to the appellant to appeal to the  Upper
Tribunal and the appeal came before me on 11 July 2013 for the error of  law
issue to be determined.  At  the  hearing  a  letter  of  grant  of  further
discretionary leave to LNL was produced, which confirmed that she  had  been
granted further leave  under  Section  EX.1.  (a)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules on the basis of her parental relationship with her  child.
I found the First-tier Tribunal's determination  to  be  materially  flawed,
for the following reasons:

    "Mr Deller indicated that  he  found  himself  unable  to  support  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  given  the  inadequacy  of  their
    findings on the relationship between the appellant and LNL and  on  the
    best interests of the children. In the light of his concession and  for
    the reasons that follow, I set aside the decision with respect  to  the
    Tribunal's findings on Article 8.

    At paragraph  42  of  their  determination  the  Tribunal  referred  to
    inconsistencies in the evidence as to the  length  of  the  appellant's
    cohabitation with LNL. However they did not go on to make any  specific
    findings as to whether, or to what extent, the evidence was accepted or
    rejected. As Ms Thirumaney pointed out,  the  reasons  for  deportation
    letter accepted the relationships between the appellant and LNL and her
    daughter and thus indicated an acceptance that  family  life  had  been
    established between them. Mr Deller agreed that that was the  case  and
    indicated that the area of uncertainty  appeared  therefore  to  be  as
    regards the longevity of the relationship between the appellant and LNL
    rather than the subsistence of the relationships. To  the  extent  that
    the Tribunal failed to make any proper findings in  that  regard,  they
    erred in law and their decision  would  have  to  be  re-made  in  that
    respect.

    Furthermore, the Tribunal plainly failed to undertake  a  complete  and
    proper assessment of the  effect  on  the  family  of  the  appellant's
    deportation. At paragraph 48  they  considered  the  situation  of  the
    family returning  to  Vietnam  as  a  unit,  but  failed  to  give  any
    consideration  to  the  fact  that  LNL  had  previously  been  granted
    discretionary leave, which was claimed to have been  on  the  basis  of
    having been a victim of  trafficking,  and  that  her  application  for
    further leave was outstanding. There was no  attempt  to  consider  the
    reasonableness of LNL having to leave the United Kingdom  to  keep  the
    family intact, other than a consideration of the effect on her daughter
    of being separated from her biological father. Neither  was  there  any
    analysis of the alternative situation, of the  family  being  separated
    through the appellant's departure and the effect that that  would  have
    on LNL's child and his own child. Whilst they went on, at paragraphs 51
    to 53, to refer to the principles established in case  law  as  to  the
    best interests of the child, they did not undertake any proper analysis
    of the appellant's circumstances in the light of those principles. They
    therefore failed to make findings on material matters and as such  they
    again erred in law.

    Accordingly, I find that the Tribunal's assessment  of  Article  8  was
    fundamentally flawed and that their decision has to be  set  aside.  Ms
    Thirumaney was  in  agreement  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  did  not
    challenge the Tribunal's decision with respect to asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and Article 3. Thus the decision falls to  be  re-made  with
    respect only to Article 8.

    Neither Ms Thirumaney nor Mr Deller considered  that  they  were  in  a
    position to proceed immediately to the re-making of  the  decision.  Ms
    Thirumaney, for her part, wished to prepare a  supplementary  statement
    for the appellant including the recent change  in  circumstances  as  a
    result of the grant of  further  leave  to  LNL.  Mr  Deller  was  also
    concerned  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  were  to  consider  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT
    393 the following week and that the outcome of that appeal could have a
    direct bearing on the appellant's case, given his inability to meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules. Furthermore, both parties wished
    to give further consideration to the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal
    (Criminal Division) in the case of L; HVN; THN; T -v-  R   [2013]  EWCA
    Crim 991  which I  had  produced  and  which  I  considered  to  be  of
    potential relevance in assessing proportionality.

    Accordingly, it was agreed that  the  appeal  would  be  listed  for  a
    resumed hearing at a later  date.  It  was  agreed  that  none  of  the
    Tribunal's findings in regard to Article 8 could be preserved and  that
    the appeal would be  heard  afresh  on  those  grounds,  including  the
    hearing of oral evidence. Mr Deller accepted that  the  starting  point
    would be that the subsistence of the appellant's relationship with  LNL
    was accepted and that clarification would be  sought  only  as  to  the
    longevity of that relationship."

The appeal came before me for a resumed hearing on 9 October  2013  but  had
to be adjourned again, at the request of Mr Parkinson who  was  representing
the respondent at the time, on the grounds that no further  action  appeared
to have been taken to refer the case to the  Criminal  Casework  Directorate
to consider the impact of the judgment in L & Others. He  had  since  spoken
to the CCD team who had agreed to review the deportation decision.  However,
following the hearing, Mr Parkinson advised the Upper Tribunal, in a  letter
dated 15 November 2013, that the Secretary of State had decided that  unless
and until the appellant successfully challenged his criminal  conviction  in
the courts it would not be appropriate to review the deportation  order  and
that he therefore remained liable for deportation action.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me again on 5 February  2014.  Ms  Kadic  advised  me
that  the  appellant  had  instructed  criminal  solicitors  to  appeal  his
conviction and that the appeal was due to have been lodged in January  2014.
However she understood that it would take a long time to be dealt  with  and
she preferred that the deportation appeal proceeded without  further  delay.
Mr Saunders  acknowledged  that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  against  the
conviction may be significant to the appellant's case but  was  nevertheless
content to proceed.

After some discussion as to the issues before me, it  was  agreed  that  the
relevant facts were not in dispute. Mr Saunders agreed that  the  respondent
had accepted that the appellant was  a  victim  of  trafficking  inside  the
United Kingdom and that it was accepted by the respondent, in the  grant  of
discretionary leave to LNL, that it was not reasonable to expect her or  her
child to leave the United Kingdom;  that  the  appellant  had  a  subsisting
relationship with LNL and her child; that  he  had  a  child  with  LNL  and
another was expected shortly; and that LNL's daughter was a British  citizen
and regularly saw her British father who was living in the  United  Kingdom.
It was agreed by all parties  that  there  was,  accordingly,  no  need  for
further oral evidence.

Mr Saunders said that there was little he could say by  way  of  submissions
and had nothing to add to the refusal letter. He  asked  me  to  regard  the
appellant's conviction as not quashed but accepted that that was  a  weighty
factor in the appellant's favour in the Article 8 proportionality  balancing
exercise. He accepted that the facts were  uncontentious,  aside  from  when
the relationship between the appellant and  LNL  commenced,  but  he  agreed
that that was of little relevance. He accepted that circumstances had  moved
on,  particularly  with  the  grant   of   discretionary   leave   and   the
clarification of the basis for that grant.  He  asked  that  the  appeal  be
dismissed.

Ms Kadic submitted that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  outweighing
the  public  interest  in  deportation,  namely  the  circumstances  of  the
appellant's conviction, the fact that he had been a  victim  of  trafficking
in the United Kingdom and the  fact  that  his  family  life  could  not  be
continued in Vietnam. His deportation would accordingly breach Article 8  of
the ECHR and his appeal should be allowed.

Consideration and findings

It is not disputed that the appellant is unable to meet the requirements  of
the immigration rules. Paragraph 399(a) does  not  apply  because  there  is
another family member, namely LNL, who  could  care  for  A  in  the  United
Kingdom  and  paragraph  399(b)  does  not  apply  because  LNL   has   only
discretionary leave and the appellant has never had valid  leave  to  remain
here. Paragraph 399A does not apply because he has not spent at  least  half
his life  living  continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Accordingly,  and
pursuant to paragraph 398, it will  only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances
that the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
factors.

In MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 1192 the Court of Appeal considered what was meant  by  "other  factors"
and "exceptional circumstances" and found, at paragraph 39, that

    "the rules expressly contemplate a weighing of the public  interest  in
    deportation against "other factors".  In  our  view,  this  must  be  a
    reference to all other factors which are  relevant  to  proportionality
    and entails an implicit requirement that they  are  to  be  taken  into
    account."

and at paragraphs 43 and 44 that
    "The word "exceptional" is often used to denote a departure from a
    general rule. The general rule in the present context is that, in the
    case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399 and 399A do not apply,
    very compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation. These compelling reasons are the "exceptional
    circumstances".
    We would, therefore, hold that the new rules are a complete code and
    that the exceptional circumstances to be considered in the balancing
    exercise involve the application of a proportionality test as required
    by the Strasbourg jurisprudence."
This view was endorsed in Kabia (MF: para 398 -  exceptional  circumstances)
(Gambia) [2013] UKUT 569, where the Upper Tribunal  held  at  paragraphs  17
and 18 that

      "The new rules speak of "exceptional circumstances" but, as  has  been
      made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality is a
      likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather than  a
      legal  test  to  be  met.  In  this  context,   ""exceptional"   means
      circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh
      consequences  for  the  individual  or  their  family  such   that   a
      deportation would not be proportionate".

      The new rules  relating  to  article  8  claims  advanced  by  foreign
      criminals seeking to resist deportation are a complete  code  and  the
      exceptional circumstances to be considered in the  balancing  exercise
      involve the application of a proportionality test as required  by  the
      Strasberg jurisprudence: MF (Nigeria) at para 43."

It seems to me that there are various factors in the appellant's  case  from
which  it  is  to  be  concluded  that  his  deportation  would  result   in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for himself and his family and  that  there
are very compelling reasons  which  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
deportation.

The public interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation  arises  out  of  his
criminal offending and lack of lawful status in  the  United  Kingdom.  With
regard to the former, there is a very high probability that  his  conviction
will be quashed on appeal, albeit that for the  time  being  the  conviction
still remains. As Mr Parkinson for the respondent previously  accepted,  the
appellant's case appeared to be on all fours with L & Others: in  that  case
the appellants had their  appeals  quashed  in  identical  circumstances  to
those of the appellant, where it was recognised that the  criminal  activity
was inextricably linked to them being  child  victims  of  trafficking.   In
this case, the appellant was a minor at the time the offence  occurred.  The
view of the Crown Court Judge in sentencing the appellant was  that  he  had
to a degree been exploited and that, as a "gardener", he had a  lesser  role
in the production of cannabis.  In  their  assessment  of  20  October  2012
Hackney Youth Offending Team,  whose  report  appeared  in  the  appellant's
appeal bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  made  it  clear  that  they
considered the appellant to be  a  victim  who  had  been  manipulated  into
offending. There is no question of any risk of re-offending. As Mr  Saunders
agreed, such circumstances weigh heavily in the appellant's  favour  in  the
balancing exercise and reduce the public interest in his deportation.

Other factors in the appellant's favour  are  his  age  on  arrival  in  the
United Kingdom and the length of time spent here, albeit without any  lawful
basis. He came here as a boy of nine years  of  age  and  has  been  in  the
United Kingdom for eight years. His claim to  have  few  remaining  ties  to
Vietnam does not appear to be  in  dispute  and  the  circumstances  of  his
arrival in the United Kingdom provide some response to his  lack  of  lawful
status. The appellant's offence was committed at a time when he was a  minor
and he has not offended since that  time,  nor,  according  to  the  reports
submitted, is he likely to. Clearly the principles in Maslov  v.  Austria  -
1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546 are applicable, as set out in paragraph  75  of  the
judgment: "... for a settled migrant who  has  lawfully  spent  all  or  the
major part of his or her childhood  and  youth  in  the  host  country  very
serious reasons are required to justify expulsion. This is all the  more  so
where the person concerned committed the offences underlying  the  expulsion
measure as a juvenile."

 Of particular weight are the appellant's family  life  ties  which,  whilst
not being such as to enable him  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraphs
399(a) and (b), are of a compelling nature.

It is not disputed that the appellant has established  a  family  life  with
his partner, nor, I believe, is it now  disputed  that  family  life  exists
between himself and his partner's daughter A. In any event I accept that  to
be the case. A is a British citizen who  retains  a  relationship  with  her
British father and, on that basis, it has been accepted by the Secretary  of
State, in granting LNL discretionary leave, that it would not be  reasonable
to expect A (and thus  also  LNL  herself)  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
Furthermore, the appellant and LNL have, together, a one year old child  and
another baby expected in the next two months. Given the basis of  the  grant
of the discretionary leave and considering the family life  ties  between  A
and her biological father it would clearly not be possible  for  the  family
to relocate to Vietnam  as  a  family  unit.  Accordingly,  the  appellant's
deportation would split the family  and  separate  him  not  only  from  his
partner and her daughter, but also from his  own  child(ren).  There  is  no
doubt that the children's best interests lie in the appellant being able  to
remain in the United Kingdom. Clearly, as found by the Court  of  Appeal  in
Lee v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA  Civ  348  the
splitting up of a family may well be considered  as  proportionate  in  some
cases, particularly those involving serious criminality. However  it  cannot
be considered to be the  case  here,  when  taking  into  consideration  the
circumstances of the appellant's conviction.

In the circumstances, it seems to me that the  proportionality  balance  has
to fall in  the  appellant's  favour.  There  clearly  are  very  compelling
reasons amounting to exceptional circumstances in this case  such  that  the
public interest in deportation is outweighed. Accordingly, I find  that  the
appellant's deportation would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations  under
Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and that, certainly in  so  far  as
his partner has leave to remain here, he should  not  be  removed  from  the
United Kingdom.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set
aside. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.







                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
