
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00310/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 May 2018                                     |On 8 May 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               LOVPREET SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision
        of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E.M.M.  Smith,  promulgated  on  30
        November 2017, in which the Judge allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
        against an order for his deportation from the United Kingdom.
     2. There was no attendance by Mr  Singh,  who  was  removed  from  the
        United Kingdom in June 2017, a representative, or  his  family  who
        live in the United Kingdom. The Tribunal  is  satisfied  there  has
        been proper service of  the  notice  of  hearing  and  that  it  is
        appropriate and in the interests of justice and  fairness  for  the
        matter to proceed in Mr Singh's absence.






Background


     3. Mr Singh is a citizen of Portugal born on 22 May 1994  who  entered
        the United Kingdom in 2013 with his parents  and  siblings.  On  21
        December 2016, at the Teesside Crown Court, Mr Singh  admitted  two
        offences of sexual assault committed on 1 November 2016. The  Judge
        noted at [5] of the decision under challenge  that  on  19  January
        2017 Mr Singh was sentenced  to  22  weeks  imprisonment,  given  a
        Sexual Harm Prevention Order for 10 years and required to sign  the
        Sex Offenders Register for 7 years.
     4. The Judge sets out his findings of fact from [14] of  the  decision
        under challenge including noting that very little  information  had
        been provided in relation to Mr Singh's  history,  other  than  the
        fact his parents live in Smethwick, West  Midlands,  and  that  his
        father is in employment. The Judge  noted  that  Mr  Singh  has  no
        previous convictions.
     5. The core findings are set out between [27] - [29] in the  following
        terms:

             "27.     I have no doubt that the impact upon the two  victims
                  was considerable. They were followed in the dark  and  one
                  was accosted. They must both have feared what would befall
                  them at that time. Whilst I have not  been  provided  with
                  any further information in regard to the facts I must take
                  those  aggravating  features  as  those  set  out  in  the
                  unhelpful and confusing sentencing remarks.  There  is  no
                  suggestion that other than that evening the appellant  had
                  come to the attention of  the  authorities  for  any  such
                  previous conduct. The evidence before me and  accepted  by
                  Mr Evans is that the appellant  falls  to  considered  for
                  these two offences only. I have not been provided with any
                  prison reports or pre-sentence reports. I have no evidence
                  to suggest that the appellant did not behave in prison for
                  the duration of  the  three  months  that  he  would  have
                  served. I have not been told that following his release in
                  about March 2017 he did not  conform  to  the  Orders  the
                  court had imposed.


             28.  Those Orders were stringent and imposed to  keep  a  very
                  close reign on this appellant; he is the subject of a  10-
                  year Sexual Harm Prevention Order  and  a  requirement  to
                  sign on the Sex Offenders  Register  for  7  years.  These
                  Orders  were  imposed  to  provide  the  public  with   an
                  assurance that close supervision of this  appellant  would
                  avoid the risk of further offences. Mr Evans  acknowledges
                  that there is no  evidence  this  appellant  would  offend
                  again over and above the two offences he has committed. If
                  the appellant returns to the UK he would be  subjected  to
                  these Orders.


             29.  Upon material before  me  I  cannot  conclude  that  this
                  appellant is a risk to society and therefore the  decision
                  to  deport  him  is  disproportionate  having  taken  into
                  account  the  provisions  of  section  21  (5-6)  of   the
                  Regulations."

     6. The respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable the findings the appellant presented  no  risk  is  not  a
        finding open to the Judge in light of the requirement to  sign  the
        Sex Offenders register for seven years and  Mr  Singh  having  been
        made the subject of a Sexual Harm Prevention Order for 10 years.





Error of law


     7. I find the Judge has erred in law in  the  manner  pleaded  by  the
        Secretary of State in the application seeking permission to  appeal
        and identified in the grant of permission. Whilst signing  the  Sex
        Offenders Register enables those in the criminal justice system  to
        know where a  sex  offender  is  living  and  the  opportunity  for
        interaction,  it  was  always  recognised  that  that  system  only
        provided  a  limited  supervisory  regime.  Accordingly,   the   UK
        government introduced a  more  stringent  provision  known  as  the
        Sexual Harm Prevention Orders (SHPO) which can be made in  relation
        to a person who has been convicted, found not guilty by  reason  of
        insanity or found to be under a disability and to have done the act
        charged, or cautioned etc. for an offence listed in either Schedule
        3 or Schedule 5 to the Sexual Offences Act 2003 either in the UK or
        overseas. This includes offenders whose convictions  etc.  pre-date
        the commencement of the 2003 Act.
     8. Whilst acknowledging the fact that such order had  been  made,  the
        Judge makes no reference in the decision  under  challenge  to  the
        circumstances which must be established before an individual can be
        made the subject of such provision. In order to make  a  SHPO,  the
        court must be satisfied that the offender presents a risk of sexual
        harm to the public (or particular members of the public)  and  that
        an order is necessary to protect against this risk. The details  of
        the offence are likely to be a key factor in the court's  decision,
        together  with  the  offender's  previous   convictions   and   the
        assessment of risk presented by the national probation  service  in
        any pre-sentence report. The court may take into consideration  the
        range of other options available to it in respect of protecting the
        public.
     9. In this case, the Judge had available to him  at  page  A3  of  the
        Secretary of States bundle a copy of the Trial Record  Sheet  which
        contained the following information:

             6 months imprisonment consecutive to serving  sentence  SOR  7
             years. Sentence Amended under to the Slip Rule. Judge  ordered
             time  served  to  be  taken  into  account.  SOR  7  years  as
             previously ordered on 18.1.17.


             This disposal has been amended.

    10. The above  is  a  reference  to  an  error  made  in  the  original
        sentencing exercise when it was  thought  Mr  Singh  had  committed
        offences whilst on bail which was later shown to not be  the  case;
        as  the  information  relating  thereto  applied  to  a   different
        individual with the same name as Mr Singh.
    11. In relation to the Sexual Harm Prevention Order  the  Trial  Record
        before the Judge reads:

             Sexual Harm Prevention Order (SHPO) for a period of  10  years
             under s.103 of the Sexual Offences  Act  2003.  1  having  any
             contact or communication directly or  indirectly  by  whatever
             means  with  [MY],  19/10/1994  2.  Having  any   contact   or
             communication directly or indirectly by  whatever  means  with
             [HW], 29/09/1997 3. Residing or staying for more than 12 hours
             at a household or other private place where a female over  the
             age of 16 years resides or stay, unless that female  is  fully
             aware of your convictions and this  has  been  verified  by  a
             Police risk management officer within  the  Public  Protection
             Unit (or equivalent Department)  within  the  Force  Area  she
             resides.

    12. Prohibitions such as those set out above can only be imposed  by  a
        SHPO which are  those  which  are  necessary  for  the  purpose  of
        protecting the public from sexual harm from the  defendant.  It  is
        the  offender's  previous  offending   behaviour   and   subsequent
        demonstration that they may pose a risk of further such  behaviour,
        which will make them eligible for an order.
    13. The Sentencing Judge  noted  aggravating  features  present  in  Mr
        Singh's offending which are recorded in the following terms:

             "On the night I am concerned with,  you  set  about  stalking,
             that is following, young women. You were determined to  follow
             and to approach attractive young women. By acting in  the  way
             that you did, you caused two women to be frightened. Women are
             entitled to be able to walk the streets at night without being
             followed by people like you, and molested by people like  you,
             and frightened by people like you, and there are a  number  of
             aggravating features in this case. Before I come to  them,  it
             is right to point out that the assault involved  you  touching
             this lady over her clothing and you did not  touch  her  naked
             flesh nor any part of her genitalia.


             That being said, and that placing it in category 3B, there are
             a number of aggravating  features.  Firstly,  the  persistence
             involved in this  case;  your  determination  to  commit  this
             offence. Most significantly, you were stopped  and  warned  by
             the Police at about  10  o'clock,  and  having  received  that
             advice and that warning by the  Police  in  relation  to  your
             conduct in respect of the first  girl,  you  then  followed  a
             second girl, the victim of this offence. This was  an  offence
             committed at night. Selecting women who are on their own.  The
             offence  being  committed  in  the  streets  when  they   were
             vulnerable. At the time you are on bail in relation  to  those
             matters for in respect of which you received 13 months,  which
             is a significant aggravating feature in the case.

    14. As noted above, the reference to Mr Singh  committing  offences  on
        bail was erroneous but the other aggravating features did apply  to
        his offending behaviour.
    15. What the Judge did not have is any  explanation  for  what  led  Mr
        Singh to commit the offences or any report  indicating  that  those
        issues that led him to behave in the way in which he did  had  been
        properly addressed, such as to reduce the risk of further offences.
    16. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis
        the Judge does not appear to have properly or adequately considered
        the material available to that Tribunal or to have  given  adequate
        or sufficient reasons in support of the conclusion  that  Mr  Singh
        does not present a risk to the public.
    17. The Upper Tribunal is able to remake the decision today.
    18. There is no further evidence available, in particularly no evidence
        that Mr Singh has undertaken  any  rehabilitative  work  whilst  in
        custody or since his release either in the  United  Kingdom  or  in
        Portugal.
    19. There appears on the basis of the information to be a credible real
        risk to the public in the United Kingdom of further offences  of  a
        sexual nature being committed by Mr Singh.
    20. It has not been made out that if Mr Singh wishes to seek assistance
        from professionals to enable his rehabilitation this could  not  be
        undertaken in Portugal with the support of  family  members  living
        there. It is not made out that Mr Singh  needs  to  remain  in  the
        United     Kingdom     for     the     purposes     of     adequate
        rehabilitation/treatment.
    21. Mr Singh's situation is that he has not lived in the United Kingdom
        for a continuous period of five years exercising treaty  rights  as
        he has only been resident since 2013.  Although there  is  evidence
        of some  employment  there  is  not  sufficient  to  establish  the
        exercise of treaty rights for the  required  continuous  period  of
        five years required to secure a right of permanent  residence.  The
        level of protection available to Mr Singh is therefore at the lower
        level on the grounds of public policy or public security. There  is
        no public health issue that arises on the facts of this case.
    22. The assessment of  threat  is  clearly  based  exclusively  on  the
        personal conduct of Mr Singh which has been found on  the  evidence
        to represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
        affecting one of the fundamental interests of society,  namely  the
        prevention  of  crime  and  the  protection  of  the   public   and
        particularly young women from unwanted sexual advances  and  sexual
        assault by him.
    23.  In  relation  to  the  proportionality  of  the   decision,   when
        considering Mr Singh's rights as an EU national  to  exercise  free
        movement within the European Community, this  Tribunal  finds  that
        the respondent's decision is proportionate. Mr Singh  was  born  in
        1994 and is therefore 23, nearly 24 years of age.  He  entered  the
        United Kingdom in 2013. Mr Singh was born in India where  he  spent
        his formative years although spent part of  those  formative  years
        and his youth in Portugal. Mr Singh has family in the UK but it was
        not made out he would not be able to source accommodation and  seek
        employment in Portugal as he has in the United Kingdom.
    24. Mr Singh has failed to provide sufficient  evidence  to  warrant  a
        finding he is socially and culturally integrated  into  the  United
        Kingdom or to provide  evidence  that  he  has  made  any  positive
        contribution to the society and, other than to his family, there is
        no evidence of significant ties to  the  community  in  the  United
        Kingdom.
    25. Mr Singh's offence is directly against members of the community.
    26. There is insufficient evidence to warrant a finding there  will  be
        very significant obstacles to Mr Singh's integration into  Portugal
        where he and  his  family  have  significant  knowledge  of  living
        together with cultural links.
    27. The availability of rehabilitation in Portugal  is  commented  upon
        above where Mr Singh maybe able to undertake and complete  programs
        equivalent to the  UK  Probation  Service  Sex  Offender  Treatment
        Program which is a specific victim awareness course to address  the
        issues that led Mr Singh to commit the  offences  and  which  might
        reduce the risk of him reoffending  in  the  future.  There  is  no
        evidence Mr Singh has undertaken such a program to date,  as  noted
        above.
    28. This tribunal finds  that  the  decision  to  deport  Mr  Singh  is
        proportionate in accordance with the principles and regulations  27
        (5) and (6) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
        2016.
    29. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, it is not made out that Mr Singh  is
        able to satisfy the Immigration Rules and the  Secretary  of  State
        has discharged the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  the  required
        standard to establish that any interference with a protected  right
        in the United Kingdom is proportionate.
    30. It is accepted Mr Singh has formed a private  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom but has not made out there are very  significant  obstacles
        to  integration  into  Portugal.  Although  paragraph  398  of  the
        Immigration  Rules  and  section  117C(6)   of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 do not apply to Mr Singh  directly,
        as he is an EEA national, the  issue  of  whether  there  are  very
        compelling circumstances that warrant his  not  being  deported  is
        still a relevant factor as this informs the proportionality of  the
        decision.
    31. Mr Singh fails to establish that ties with his mother, father,  and
        siblings are sufficient to be recognised as family life pursuant to
        Article 8 as it is not made out that such  relationships  involving
        the further element of dependency beyond normal emotional ties.  Mr
        Singh has also not provided any evidence to show that other  family
        members could not join him in Portugal should they wish to  do  so.
        It is noted no family member attended the Upper Tribunal to support
        Mr Singh's case.
    32. The public interest based upon the need to protect the public  from
        the risk presented by Mr Singh tips the  balance  substantially  in
        favour of the Secretary of State warranting his  removal  from  the
        United Kingdom.
    33. The reasons for the making of a deportation order notice, dated  27
        April 2017, confirmed the Secretary of States intention  to  remove
        Mr Singh from the United Kingdom  before  the  appeal  process  was
        heard or finally determined. That  document  contained  information
        advising Mr Singh that  pursuant  to  regulation  41  of  the  2016
        Regulations he may  apply  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom  for
        permission to re-enter the UK  in  order  to  make  submissions  in
        person at his appeal hearing if the stated conditions set out  were
        met. There was no evidence that Mr Singh made any such  application
        or chosen to any extent to be involved in these proceedings.
    34. I therefore substitute a decision dismissing Mr Singh's appeal.


Decision

    35. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.






   Anonymity.


    36. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 May 2018












