
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00370/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2013                           |On 16 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                  FEI ZHANG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This matter came before us as an appeal from  a  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("The Tribunal") promulgated  on  3  July  2013  in
    terms of which it  had  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 11 February 2013 to the effect
    that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act applied to the  appellant  and
    that he was to be automatically deported from the United Kingdom  as  a
    foreign criminal, having been convicted on 14 May 2008 of  offences  of
    trafficking  and   prostitution   and   sentenced   to   eight   years'
    imprisonment.

Background

2.   The appellant is a national of the People's Republic of China  and  was
    born on 16 July 1968.  He is said to have entered the United Kingdom in
    1995 but, having entered illegally, the date and method of his entry is
    not clear.  On 26 September  1995  he  claimed  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom and on 6 August 2000 that claim was refused but he was  granted
    leave to remain on an exceptional basis until 6  August  2004.   On  25
    September 2000 he married Sho Juan Zhang and  on  29  January  2003,  a
    daughter was born to the appellant and his wife.  On 6  July  2004  the
    appellant, his wife and daughter applied for indefinite leave to remain
    and that was granted all three on 15 July 2005.   In  August  2006  the
    appellant's wife and daughter were naturalised as British citizens.  In
    the meantime, the appellant's wife's  son  and  daughter  were  granted
    entry clearance to join the family in the United Kingdom from China and
    they were granted indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom  on  15
    August 2007.  The wife's son and daughter are aged 18 and 22.

3.   On 23 March 2007 the appellant was arrested and  on  14  May  2008,  at
    Worcester Crown Court, he was convicted of trafficking and  controlling
    prostitution for gain.  He was sentenced to a  total  of  eight  years'
    imprisonment.  The appellant was notified on 27 June 2008 and again  in
    December 2009 that he was liable for deportation under Section  3(5)(a)
    of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   He  responded  to  this,   providing
    information about his circumstances.  On 11 February 2013 he was served
    with a decision which included a deportation order and reasons for  the
    deportation.

Submissions

4.   Mr Tan abandoned his first ground of appeal  which  asserted  that  the
    Tribunal had had regard to  the  wrong  legislation  and  as  a  result
    thereof had taken account of the wrong Immigration Rules.  He accepted,
    after a short discussion on this issue, that there was no merit in this
    ground of appeal.

5.   He did, however, maintain his second broad ground of  appeal  which  in
    summary was this: the Tribunal had failed to take account of the rights
    of the appellant's child as a primary  consideration,  failed  to  have
    proper regard to the fact that the child  was  a  British  citizen  and
    lastly failed to have regard to her best interests.

6.   In development of this argument Mr Tan contended that  when  addressing
    the issue of the Article 8 claim of the appellant.  The Tribunal  ought
    to have taken into consideration the best interests of the  child.   He
    submitted that there was ample  case  law  to  show  that  it  was  not
    reasonable and not in the best interests of a British child  either  to
    follow her parent to live abroad, or alternatively  to  expect  her  to
    live with just one parent in the United Kingdom (see: Sanade  &  Others
    [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC)).

7.   Moreover it was his position that in applying the relevant  Immigration
    Rules the Tribunal had failed to take into  consideration  that  "Rules
    are Rules", and that in Izuazu (Article 8  -  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00045 (IAC) and MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012]  00393  (IAC)
    clear concerns are expressed that the foregoing Rules  do  not  reflect
    the law relating to the best interests of children.  Thus he  submitted
    that where the criteria set out in the Rules concerning minor  children
    were not in  accordance  with  the  law,  it  was  not  lawful  in  the
    circumstances  for  the  Tribunal  to  rule  that  deportation  was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.

8.   He went on to submit that the Tribunal had erred in law  in  that  they
    had failed to put the interests of the appellant's  daughter  as  a  10
    year old British child as their primary  consideration  when  assessing
    the proportionality issue.

9.   He relied in support of his said argument on  certain  observations  in
    ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.   In  particular  he  referred  to  the
    following observations:

    Lady Hale:    "As citizens these children have rights which  they  will
               not be able to exercise if they  move  to  another  country.
               They will lose  the  advantages  of  growing  up  and  being
               educated in their own country, their own culture  and  their
               own language.  They will have lost all this when  they  come
               back as adults."
    and


    Lord Kerr:    "The  significance  of  a  child's  nationality  must  be
               considered in two aspects.  The first of  these  is  in  its
               role as a contributor to the debate as to where the  child's
               best interests lie.  It seems to me  self  evident  that  to
               diminish a child's right to assert his  or  her  nationality
               will not normally be in his or  her  best  interests.   That
               consideration must therefore feature in the determination of
               where the best interests lie.  It was also accepted  by  the
               respondent however, (and I think rightly so) that if a child
               is  a  British  citizen,  this  is  an  independent   value,
               freestanding of the debate in relation  to  best  interests,
               and this must weigh in the balance in any decision that  may
               affect where a child will live.  As Lady Hale has said, this
               is not inevitably a decisive factor but  the  benefits  that
               British citizenship brings, as so aptly  described  by  Lord
               Hope and Lady Hale, must not readily be discounted."


10.  On the basis of  these  observations  he  submitted  that  despite  the
    evidence that the 10 year old British daughter  of  the  appellant  had
    spent all  of  her  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Tribunal  had
    unreasonably noted that:

         "There is simply insufficient evidence or detail to show that it is
         not reasonable for the daughter to leave the  United  Kingdom  with
         her parents if necessary."


    He also submitted that in relation to this the Tribunal had taken  into
    account an irrelevant consideration  as  regards  how  this  child  had
    gained her nationality when it was  noted  at  paragraph  31  that  the
    "daughter's citizenship is recently acquired".


11.  In conclusion it was his position that the Tribunal's investigation  of
    a British child's best interests fell short of what was expected  of  a
    reasonable judicial process, and amounted to an error in law.

12.  The third leg of Mr Tan's argument was  this:  the  Tribunal  had  made
    unclear findings about parts of the evidence.  It was his position that
    the Tribunal had failed to discharge its obligations as set out in R  v
    Immigration Appeals Tribunal, ex parte Amin  [1992]  Imm  AR  367,  QBD
    where the following is said:

         "An Adjudicator should set out with some clarity what evidence  was
         accepted, what rejected, on what evidence no  conclusion  could  be
         reached and what evidence was irrelevant."


13.  He then turned to look at what he contended were the specific  failures
    of the Tribunal to meet that obligation.

14.  He first contended that the Tribunal had  failed  to  make  clear  what
    evidence it expected  from  the  appellant  when  it  observed  in  the
    determination:

         "There was nothing from her school that demonstrated that she is so
         established at the school, that she has  the  sort  of  ties  there
         (either social  or  educational)  that  would  render  her  removal
         unreasonable."


    and the further observation:


         "There is simply insufficient evidence or detail to show that it is
         not reasonable for the daughter to leave the  United  Kingdom  with
         her parents if necessary. "


    Both of these observations were at paragraph 25.


15.  It was, he submitted, also unclear what the Tribunal was  seeking  when
    it stated at paragraph 28:

         "We are not satisfied that the appellant  has  shown  that  he  has
         established a family as defined  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as
         argued...".


     The Tribunal went on to observe in the following sentence that:

         "we are satisfied of the existence of the family life."
    As we understood Mr Tan's position it was this: the two sentences  were
    contradictory.


16.  He further submitted  that  it  was  unclear  what  "real  evidence  of
    significant ties" the panel was expecting from the  appellant  when  it
    stated in the determination: at paragraph 31:

         "We have no real evidence of significant ties that [she] has in the
         United Kingdom at all...".


17.  He pointed to the fact that the  determination  itself  confirmed  that
    the child, who was now 10 years old, was born in  the  United  Kingdom,
    had never been to China, her biological mother and father were  in  the
    United Kingdom, she had two stepsiblings growing up with her in the  UK
    and she was in full-time school in this country.

18.  He submitted that such procedural defects amounted to an  unfair  trial
    and were therefore an error in law.

19.  What was described as the  sixth  issue  in  the  appellant's  skeleton
    argument was not  insisted  upon  by  Mr  Tan  in  the  course  of  his
    submissions to us.

Reply on behalf of the Secretary of State

20.  Mr Walker began by broadly submitting that  the  Tribunal  had  carried
    out a proper proportionality assessment.

21.  He reminded us that this was a case in which the appellant's  wife  had
    advised the Tribunal that if  the  appellant  were  removed  from  this
    country she intended to follow him with the child to China.

22.  In a concise submission he  argued  that  when  the  determination  was
    looked at as  a  whole  and  in  particular  when  regard  was  had  to
    paragraphs 25 and 30 there was a proper consideration of the  interests
    of the child by the Tribunal.  He submitted that there was no  material
    error of law.

Discussion

23.  Before turning to comment in detail on the specific grounds  of  appeal
    we would  generally  observe  that  the  Tribunal's  determination  is:
    detailed; well-constructed; has analysed the evidence before  it  fully
    and is well-reasoned.

24.  It seems to us that in particular between paragraphs 30 and 32  of  the
    determination the Tribunal carefully and fully considers the  issue  of
    proportionality which was the core matter before  it.   Its  reasoning,
    when considering this issue, is clear and cogent.  In the course of its
    consideration of proportionality the Tribunal  considers  all  relevant
    factors and considers no  irrelevant  factors.   It  gives  proper  and
    adequate reasons for the decision  which  it  ultimately  reaches.   We
    believe that the decision is unimpeachable.

25.   The  Tribunal  commences   its   consideration   of   the   issue   of
    proportionality by setting out the reasons why in the  public  interest
    the appellant's removal  is  required.   In  particular,  the  Tribunal
    highlights the nature and seriousness  of  the  offence  of  which  the
    appellant was convicted.  It is clear  from  their  findings  that  the
    offence was a very serious one and  that  moreover  the  appellant  had
    shown no remorse or even  acknowledgment  of  his  involvement  in  the
    offence.

26.  It is clear from  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  that  there  was  a
    pressing public interest for the  removal  of  the  appellant.   In  SS
    Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  550  Laws  LJ  at  paragraph  54  makes
    certain  observations  regarding  the  Article  8  assessment  and  the
    approach of the decision maker:

        "I said at paragraph 46 that while the authorities demonstrate that
        there is no rule of exceptionality for Article 8, they also clearly
        show that the more pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
        deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8  if  it
        is to prevail.  The pressing nature of the public interest here  is
        vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by   Parliament's   express
        declaration the  public  interest  is  injured  if  the  criminal's
        deportation is not effected.  Such a result could in  my  judgement
        only be justified by a very strong claim indeed."


    It appears to us that although SS (Nigeria) is not  expressly  referred
    to by the Tribunal  in the determination the  considerations  which  it
    had in mind were those as set out by Laws LJ.  It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the Tribunal having  held  there  is  a  strong  and
    pressing public interest has then turned to consider whether  there  is
    such a very strong claim in terms of Article 8.

27.  The Tribunal thereafter in their determination go  on  to  consider  in
    terms of the issue of proportionality the position of  the  appellant's
    child.

28.  At paragraph 31, the Tribunal reminds itself of both Section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD.
     Accordingly the Tribunal clearly had in mind the various  observations
    which Mr Tan had argued it had failed to  have  regard.   The  Tribunal
    goes on in that paragraph to state  that  citizenship  of  itself  was,
    however, not a trump card and in light  of  the  authorities,  both  ZH
    (Tanzania) and SS (Nigeria), this was a view  which  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to reach.

29.  The Tribunal then considers the best interests of the child and in  the
    course of that consideration has regard to the following factors:

    (a)  The child's mother's position that she would return to China  with
         the child if the appellant was removed (see: paragraph  19  of  the
         determination).

     (b) The child is able to  speak  and  understand  some  Mandarin  (see:
         paragraphs 17, 19 and 25 of the determination).

     (c) The child has family in China, namely her grandparents.  There  are
         cultural  ties  with  China  (see  paragraphs  25  and  29  of  the
         determination).

     (d) The Tribunal noted that there were no particular factors  regarding
         her schooling that would mean that her having her British education
         ended would be  a  material  factor  weighing  against  the  public
         interest.  In that context the Tribunal observed that she was about
         to leave the school which she  was  presently  attending  (i.e.  in
         2014).   They  also  pointed  to  there  being  no  other  evidence
         demonstrating particularly strong social or educational ties to her
         school.

     (e) The Tribunal stated that there was no real evidence  before  it  of
         significant ties that the child had to the United Kingdom.

     (f) The Tribunal referred to EA  [2011]  UKUT  00315  which  emphasised
         that it was in the best interests of a child to live with,  and  be
         brought up with their parents.

30.  All these factors to which the Tribunal had regard are in  our  opinion
    relevant factors to which it was entitled to have regard.  We  are  not
    able to identify any factors to which it should  have  had  regard  and
    which it has failed to consider.

31.  It has fully taken into account the question of the best  interests  of
    the child.  It has treated this as a  primary  consideration.   It  has
    considered  the  nationality  of  the  child.   We  believe  that   the
    substantial importance of the best interests of  the  child,  which  is
    affected by a removal decision has been put squarely into the  equation
    by the Tribunal when considering the issue of proportionality.

32.  Having had proper regard to the child's  best  interests  the  Tribunal
    has then weighed these up against what is clearly from their findings a
    powerful public interest case that the appellant  should  be  deported.
    Having weighed all of these  factors  the  Tribunal  has  come  to  the
    conclusion that the public interest prevails over the interests of  the
    child and the whole Article  8  case  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

33.  In summary it is our view that the Tribunal was  entitled  to  conclude
    as  it  did  with  respect  to  the  issue   of   the   assessment   of
    proportionality and where the balance should be struck.

34.  It was argued on behalf of the appellant  that  the  Tribunal  had  not
    followed the guidance in MF and Izuazu and in  particular  had  applied
    the Immigration Rules in circumstances where they did not  reflect  the
    law relating to the best interests of children.   In  our  opinion  the
    Tribunal has correctly approached this issue in light of  the  guidance
    given in Izuazu and MF.  Those two cases direct that the decision maker
    should first make a decision as to whether in a case of this  type  the
    applicant has fulfilled the Immigration  Rules  and  thereafter  should
    carry out a separate assessment in terms of Article 8.  When we turn to
    look at paragraph 28 of the determination it is clear that that is  the
    approach which the Tribunal has taken.  We are unable to  identify  any
    error in law in the way that the Tribunal has approached these matters.



35.  We believe that in looking at the whole circumstances of this  case  it
    has to be borne in mind that where an applicant's conduct  is  serious,
    as clearly the appellant's was in the instant case,  interference  with
    family life may be justified even if it involves the separation of  the
    claimant from his family who reasonably wish to continue living in  the
    United Kingdom (Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348) and SS (Nigeria).

36.  Turning to the appellant's second broad  ground  of  appeal,  criticism
    was made of certain of the Tribunal's findings at paragraph 25.

37.  We regard the criticism made in relation to paragraph 25 as  having  no
    proper basis.  It appears to us that when the whole evidence  regarding
    her schooling is looked at it does not go beyond  this:  the  child  is
    attending a particular school.  What the Tribunal, properly points out,
    is that there was nothing else in the evidence regarding her  schooling
    such as: the child was just about to sit exams which were critical  for
    her future and her no longer attending that school would  disrupt  this
    sitting of the exams or the school  for  some  educational  reason  was
    particularly suited to the child.  We believe  that  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to have regard to that type of evidence being absent  in  this
    case.

38.  As regards the two similar comments in paragraphs 25 and  31  which  Mr
    Tan criticised again we think that the Tribunal was  entitled  to  have
    regard to there being no evidence of significant ties  that  the  child
    had to the United Kingdom.  The Tribunal was  aware  and  had  observed
    that she was born in this country, that she was 10 years old  and  that
    she had two stepsiblings who had grown up with her in this country.  It
     was also aware and had noted that she was at school in  this  country.
    All the Tribunal was doing was saying that other than that  there  were
    no other significant  factors  put  forward.   They  were  entitled  to
    comment on this.  The Tribunal took account of  her  citizenship,  that
    she was brought up in this country and was at school here.  However  it
    found that this was not sufficient to  outweigh  the  public  interest.
    This was a view it was entitled to reach.

39.  With respect to the criticism of the findings at paragraph 28 there  is
    no contradiction in the findings as was asserted by  Mr  Tan.   In  the
    first sentence the Tribunal is looking at the matter in  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules and  it  then  turns  to  consider  the  freestanding
    Article  8  position.   As  we  have  already  said  earlier  in   this
    determination that is the correct approach to take.

40.  During the course of oral argument Mr  Tan  criticised  the  Tribunal's
    finding at paragraph 31 where it states:

         "The daughter's citizenship is recently acquired."

41.  He submitted that  the  reference  to  "recently"  showed  that  proper
    regard to the child's citizenship had not been taken.  The reference to
    the recent acquisition was an irrelevant consideration.  We  hold  that
    this is not a fair construction of the Tribunal's decision when  looked
    at as a whole.  We do believe that the  Tribunal  has  given  full  and
    proper consideration to the child's position and in particular  to  her
    citizenship for the reasons we give above.

42.  One final matter to which we should refer is that Mr  Tan  argued  that
    the Tribunal had failed  to  take  into  account  a  short  passage  of
    evidence in which the mother of the appellant had said that  the  child
    would not be able to get an education  nor  obtain  medical  or  social
    benefits in China (see paragraph 13 of the determination).  However, on
    looking to the determination it appears to us that at paragraph 26  the
    Tribunal hold that it did not accept that evidence.

43.  For all of these reasons we find there to be no material error  of  law
    and dismiss the appeal.






Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

