
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00588/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2018                       |On 21 March 2018                   |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        Mr Antonio Fernando Rodrigues
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ruth promulgated on 10 August 2017 in which  he  allowed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to deport him on the  basis  of  his  criminal  wrongdoing.   The
    appellant  is  a  European  citizen  and  accordingly  the  deportation
    decision was made in the context of a consideration of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (2006 No 1003).

 2. The particular Regulation  with  which  I  am  concerned  is  Reg.  21.
    Regulation 21(5)(c) requires that a relevant decision when it is  taken
    on grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security  shall  apply  the
    principle that the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society.   It  is  only  when  that
    requirement is met that  the  issue  of  proportionality  falls  to  be
    considered as an additional factor.

 3. The appellant's history  of  offending  is  set  out  in  the  relevant
    decision letter.  He entered into the United Kingdom some twenty  years
    ago although he failed to provide any  evidence  of  the  date  of  his
    arrival or of his exercising treaty rights.  However, it is known  that
    he has been in the United Kingdom since the first of  his  convictions.
    That took place on 31  October  2001  of  using  threatening,  abusive,
    insulting words or  behaviour  for  which  he  received  a  conditional
    discharge of twelve months.

 4. There were then offences in 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009.  I can summarise
    those offences by saying that they were of a relatively  minor  nature.
    They included travelling on the  railway  without  paying  a  fare  and
    assaulting a constable, another similar offence of battery against  the
    Metropolitan Police, a failure to  surrender  to  custody,  once  again
    assaulting a police constable and a count of shoplifting, breach  of  a
    community order and  using  racially  threatening,  abusive,  insulting
    words and behaviour.  They are all nasty antisocial or violent offences
    for which the appellant had no excuse.  He was born on 13 June 1975 and
    so the offending began when he  was  already  aged  26  and  indeed  it
    continued until he was aged 37.  There was  therefore  an  eleven  year
    period of offending where there were a number of offences which  showed
    a particular and simple disregard for  life  in  the  community.   They
    were, however, made the subject of minor  pieces  of  sentencing.   For
    example, in 2008 he was sentenced to twelve weeks' imprisonment,  which
    included assaulting a constable.  The other offences were  the  subject
    of community orders of one sort or another.

 5. It was the final offence, committed when he was aged 37, which resulted
    in his conviction on 20 September 2012, that prompted the  decision  to
    deport him.  For that offence he  was  sentenced  to  thirteen  months'
    imprisonment.   The  sentencing  judge  remarked   upon   the   curious
    circumstances of the offence.  They are dealt with in the determination
    in paragraph 48.  The crime  arose  from  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant's home was burgled.  He confronted the  thief  with  a  knife
    when he should have called the police.  The thief was not  injured  and
    appears not to have been frightened by the appellant despite  the  fact
    that he was carrying a knife.

 6. The remarks of the sentencing judge entirely support that view taken by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge:

         "Whatever happened before you  decided  to  take  a  knife  out  it
         certainly did not warrant you going back into your home,  taking  a
         kitchen knife and going into the street.  There were people on  the
         street, there were people in buses and traffic nearby,  there  were
         other people walking around, that is obvious from the CCTV.   I  am
         satisfied so that I am sure, in fact, that you were stolen from and
         that something went missing in your property that  meant  you  left
         and decided to confront [the thief].  You went out there,  you  got
         nowhere, no doubt he denied it and you went back home and  that  is
         the point you should have contacted the police but what you decided
         to do was carry on confronting  him  but  this  time  with  a  very
         offensive weapon, it was an unpleasant-looking knife,  to  say  the
         least.  I have read in the pre-sentence report that  you  said  now
         that you never said during the  trial  because  in  the  trial  you
         completely denied ever having the knife and actually said it was Mr
         Costa.  The reality is you now say that actually he had a knife but
         you managed to take it off him and run after one of them  with  it.
         I do not accept that at all - it was very strong evidence that that
         was you in the video."

 7. We do not have the  pre-sentence  report  but  there  was  very  little
    evidence of remorse and the writer took the view that the appellant was
    not particularly remorseful.  The judge said that the  offence  was  so
    serious that it could not be suspended but he  imposed  a  sentence  of
    thirteen months' imprisonment.   He  took  a  very  merciful  view  and
    reduced it to that sentence imposed because of the  circumstances.   On
    any view this was a very unusual offence.

 8. The principal point in favour of the appellant is  that,  whilst  there
    was a period between the age of 26 and 37 when he  was  involved  in  a
    series of nasty disorderly offences, since 2012 he  has  not  committed
    further offences.  That still appears to apply now.  Whilst,  when  the
    decision was made in 2015 that steps be taken to remove him, there were
    still no additional offences when the judge came to deal with it on  31
    July 2017.  Nor are there, as I understand it, today, which is now some
    five years after the offence.  It is submitted that the  fact  that  he
    has not reoffended is not determinative.  I entirely agree  with  that.
    That is particularly the  case  where  somebody  who  has  committed  a
    criminal offence knows that this is  likely  to  result  in  his  being
    removed and therefore his behaving properly is as  easily  attributable
    to the fact that he knows that he is under threat of deportation as  it
    is that he has seen the error of his ways.

 9. However, in this case it is noticeable that the decision letter  itself
    was made in October 2015.  It appears to have been prompted some  three
    years later by the conviction which took place on 20 September 2012, so
    there was evidence before the judge that he had  not  offended  in  the
    intervening period during which time he  was not under obvious  threat.
    It is submitted also on the part of the Secretary  of  State  that  the
    offending was, in part, related to the abuse of alcohol.   That  was  a
    matter which was mentioned by the judge but clearly he did not come  to
    the view that this materially altered the risk the appellant  posed  to
    the members of the public.  Indeed, since there  has  been  no  further
    offending  since  2012,  it  was  the  case  that  there  had  been  an
    opportunity to see whether  the  appellant  might  reoffend  under  the
    influence of alcohol, but no such incident has in fact taken place.  It
    was on that basis therefore that the judge did not attribute weight  to
    the fact that the appellant had not apparently demonstrated that he had
    addressed his alcohol abuse.  The judge concluded that this,  too,  was
    not a matter which established the risk that the Rules  require  to  be
    established.

10. Finally, it was said that there  was  escalating  behaviour.   That  is
    certainly true.  As a matter of  simple  fact,  the  offence  which  he
    committed in 2012 was a more serious offence than the other  pieces  of
    offending but  committed  in  very  unusual  circumstances.   Whilst  a
    material factor, it does not alter the fact that when one looks at  the
    projectory  from  which  this  appellant  started,  there  has  been  a
    cessation of criminal activity for the last  five  years.   That  is  a
    significant factor when  it  comes  to  consider  whether  the  conduct
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests  of  society.   For  these  reasons  I
    consider that the judge reached a decision that was open to him.

11. At an earlier hearing I was troubled by the fact  that  there  was  the
    clearest  finding  of  fact  that  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    approaching this case on the basis  of  the  EEA  Regulations  and,  in
    particular, that he was an individual who is protected from removal  by
    those Regulations, albeit the lowest level of  protection  set  out  in
    Regulation 21, namely, the decision had  to  be  taken  on  grounds  of
    public policy, public security  or  public  health  and  not  the  more
    formidable protection which is  provided  where  an  individual  has  a
    permanent right of residence on the  basis  that  there  must  then  be
    serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security  to  permit  his
    removal. The Secretary of State was on notice of my  preliminary  view.
    (There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant satisfies the third
    'imperative' ground, based on his having resided in the United  Kingdom
    for a continuous period of at least ten years  prior  to  the  relevant
    decision.)

12. In fact, during the course of the hearing it  appears  that  the  judge
    considered his working history and  took  the  view  that  he  was  not
    exercising Treaty rights and, indeed had not done so  for  many  years.
    His evidence was that he had arrived in the United Kingdom in 1996.  He
    only worked cash in hand in a Pound Shop as a cleaner between 1997  and
    1999 and had never worked since.  No protection is provided to a person
    who is not a qualified person.  Reg.  19(3)(a)  permits  removal,  (not
    deportation),  irrespective of wrongdoing, if a person 'does  not  have
    or ceases to have a right to reside under these Regulations'.

13. In those circumstances it seems to me he could certainly neither  claim
    to have a permanent right of residence nor to  be  able  to  claim  the
    particular protection which is provided on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    residence.  Further, I do not see the  basis  upon  which  he  had  any
    rights to remain  on  the  basis  of  exercising  Treaty  rights  as  a
    qualified person.  The effect of such a finding would be that it  could
    not be said to be a disproportionate breach to remove somebody who  has
    not worked since 1999.  However, the Secretary of State has decided not
    to use this route.   Instead,  she  took  the  view  that  the  correct
    approach was to treat this as a deportation appeal.  In doing  so,  she
    committed herself to make out the requirements of Reg.21.   I  make  it
    clear that I do not find the First-tier Tribunal Judge made a  material
    error of law in reaching the conclusion that the Secretary of State had
    not  satisfied  him  that  the  appellant  represented  a  present  and
    sufficiently serious risk to require his removal.

14. In those circumstances I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary  of  State
    and uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

DECISION

          i) I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State;
         ii) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of
             Mr Rodrigues  under  Reg.  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006 shall stand.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
