
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00404/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2015                            |On 16 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     AK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, of Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors (Bromley)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    appellant, a citizen of Iraq, born on 7  July  1981  as  the  appellant
    herein.

2.   The appellant arrived in May 2002 at the age of 20.  He is a Kurd  from
    Kirkuk.  His father had been a member of the Iraqi army and had  fought
    in battles against Kurdish fighters in the 1980s.  His father had  been
    killed in 1991 outside his home and it was the  appellant's  case  that
    this was because he had been in the Iraqi army.  The appellant had been
    a military reservist in 2002 and had  been  abused  by  other  soldiers
    because he was Kurdish and because of his  disability.   Photos  of  an
    opposition leader had been found in his  room  and  he  had  been  ill-
    treated and he  had  been  able  to  escape  and  his  uncle  had  made
    arrangements for him to leave the country.

3.   The appellant  had  been  granted  refugee  status  in  July  2002  and
    indefinite leave to remain.

4.   The appellant was convicted of rape  of  an  18  year  old  male.   The
    appellant  was  sentenced  to  five  years'  imprisonment.   The  judge
    observed that  the  appellant  had  been  of  good  character  and  was
    relatively young and that he was not dangerous within  the  meaning  of
    the legislation.

5.   The appellant was granted  immigration  bail  in  March  2012  but  was
    recalled to prison for breaching a licence condition on 12 April  2013.



6.   The Secretary of State decided to deport the appellant on 12 June  2012
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Secretary of State
    also found that in the light of the fact that the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime within the meaning of Section
    72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  it  was
    appropriate that his refugee status be revoked and that he  constituted
    a danger to the community.

7.   In the event that the certification  under  the  Borders  Act  was  not
    upheld the circumstances in connection with  which  the  appellant  had
    been recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist and accordingly it was
    appropriate to revoke or not renew the grant of asylum under  paragraph
    339A(v).

8.   The appellant appealed against the decision and the appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan on 23 July 2014.  In paragraph 26  of
    the decision the judge directed herself as follows:

         "In IH (s.72, 'Particularly Serious Crime') Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 12
         the Tribunal made clear that the presumptions contained in  section
         72 must be read to be rebuttable in order to be compatible with the
         Qualification  Directive  and  Article   33(2)   of   the   Refugee
         Convention.  The Court of Appeal in EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
         Civ 630 found that there was no need to put an express gloss on the
         wording of Article 33(2).  The phrase 'particularly serious  crime'
         is clear and drastically restricts the number of offences to  which
         the Article would apply.  South Africa far as the  'danger  to  the
         community' is concerned the danger must be real.  If  a  person  is
         convicted of a 'particularly serious crime', and there  is  a  real
         risk of its repetition, he is likely to constitute a danger to  the
         community.  Section  72  expressly  applies  for  the  purpose  and
         construction of Article 33(2) so where there is  any  ambiguity  it
         should be construed so as to accord  with  the  provisions  of  the
         Convention.  The court concluded that in order to construe  section
         72 in accordance with provisions of the Refugee Convention and  the
         Qualification Directive both presumptions must be  rebuttable  i.e.
         in relation to the seriousness of the crime and the danger  to  the
         community."


9.   The UNHCR had also made submissions in the case which the  judge  takes
    into account.

10.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  been  convicted   of   a
    particularly serious crime for the purpose of Section 2 of the 2002 Act
    and Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention.   There  has  been  no
    challenge to that aspect of her decision.

11.  The judge then turned her attention to  the  question  of  whether  the
    appellant was able to rebut the presumption  contained  in  Section  72
    that he constituted a danger  to  the  community  of  the  UK.   Having
    directed herself at some length over four pages  of  her  determination
    she concluded as follows:

         "43. The current risk assessment does raise concern as  to  whether
             the appellant poses a risk of reoffending and might  therefore
             constitute a 'danger to the community'.  However, in line with
             the guidance relating to the  interpretation  of  the  Refugee
             Convention that I  have  outlined  above  (paragraphs  24-30),
             there are a number of other factors that  I  have  taken  into
             account in considering whether the appellant is able to  rebut
             the  presumption  that  he  constitutes  a  'danger   to   the
             community'  under  section  72  if  it  is  construed  to   be
             compatible with Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.


             (i)  The offence is a particularly  serious  one  but  is  the
                  appellant's only conviction.  He does not have  a  history
                  of previous convictions for sexual offences, or any  other
                  crimes,  which  suggest  a  propensity  to   commit   such
                  offences.


             (ii) The appellant was on licence for a period  of  13  months
                  during which time he committed no further offences.


             (iii)    Although there are  concerns  about  the  appellant's
                  failure to accept responsibility for  the  offence,  which
                  lie at the heart of the risk assessment as it  relates  to
                  'males  against  whom  he  might  sexually  offend',   the
                  appellant has shown some  limited  progress.   The  Parole
                  Board was satisfied that the risk that the appellant poses
                  could be adequately managed in the community.


             (iv) The appellant appears to be willing to engage in  further
                  treatment and has now been assessed to be suitable  for  a
                  treatment programme in the community.  He has not yet  had
                  the opportunity to engage with the  programme  because  he
                  has been held in immigration detention.


             (v)   The  appellant   has   been   able   to   conduct   some
                  rehabilitation work on other issues that might have had  a
                  part to play in the offence such as his use of alcohol.


             (vi) The fact that the appellant has no  criminal  associates,
                  has generally led a stable lifestyle and has a  good  work
                  ethic  have  been  identified  as  potential   'protective
                  factors' against reoffending.


             (vii)     Whilst  I  take  into  account  that  the  test  the
                  sentencing judge  had  to  apply  was  a  slightly  higher
                  threshold  he  did  not  consider  the  appellant  to   be
                  sufficiently 'dangerous' to the community  to  require  an
                  indeterminate sentence.


         44.  After having considered all the circumstances in the  round  I
             conclude that despite the fact that the appellant is only  now
             taking limited responsibility for the offence, which increases
             the risk of reoffending, the appellant's background, taken  as
             a whole does not appear to show that  he  poses  the  kind  of
             serious level of risk  that  is  envisaged  would  engage  the
             operation of Article 33(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
             evidence indicates that  the  risk  that  he  poses  could  be
             managed in the community and it could not  be  said  that  the
             risk can only be managed only by his refoulement to Iraq.  The
             appellant's continued failure to take full responsibility  for
             the offence makes  this  a  very  borderline  decision  but  I
             conclude that the evidence, taken as a whole, shows that he is
             able to rebut the presumption that he constitutes a 'danger to
             the community' within the meaning of section  72  and  Article
             33(2) of the Refugee Convention."

12.  In relation to the appellant's refugee status  the  judge  acknowledges
    that the political situation had moved on since the appellant had  been
    recognised as a refugee in  2002.   She  took  into  account  the  then
    prevailing country guidance in HM (Iraq) [2012] UKUT 00409.

13.  The judge however found that the political and  security  situation  in
    Iraq had taken a dramatic turn for the  worse  in  the  course  of  the
    previous few months (the hearing was  in  July  2014).   There  was  an
    increase in violence as a result of ISIS insurgency.   ISIS  had  taken
    positions as close as 45  miles  from  Baghdad  and  militias  were  in
    effective control of much of Baghdad.  The appellant's home area  (near
    Kirkuk) was an area of longstanding conflict and  there  was  a  report
    that the Iraqi army had abandoned posts in and around  Kirkuk  and  had
    been replaced by the Peshmerga.

14.  The judge concluded her assessment of the appellant's asylum  claim  as
    follows:

         "49. I find that there is nothing inherently implausible about  the
             appellant's claim to have received  threats  from  his  family
             members in the name of family 'honour'.  The appellant  denies
             that he is gay but fears that he will be perceived  as  a  gay
             man because of the nature of the crime for which he  has  been
             convicted.  I accept that it is  at  least  reasonably  likely
             that the appellant's close family members  are  aware  of  the
             nature of the crime of  which  he  has  been  convicted.   The
             appellant has produced a copy of an Internet  print  out  from
             the Great Yarmouth Mercury dated 14 January 2009, which  names
             him as having been arrested for the rape of a man (pg.75 AB5).
              Although it seems unlikely that anyone would go  directly  to
             that particular website the information is  available  on  the
             Internet  if  any  serious  enquiries  were  made  about   the
             appellant's background on  return  to  Iraq.   The  background
             evidence shows  that  societal  attitudes  towards  actual  or
             perceived gay men in Iraq could give rise to a risk of serious
             harm (pg.B23-24 AB1 & pg.B93-94 AB2).  Although  the  evidence
             does not appear to show systematic abuse it does  support  the
             appellant's claim that his family is likely to see the  nature
             of his conviction as  something  deeply  shameful.   The  Home
             Office Operational Guidance Note on  Iraq  dated  31  December
             2013 states that 'honour' killings remain  a  serious  problem
             throughout all parts of the country and  that  the  penal  law
             permits 'honour' considerations to mitigate  sentences  (pg.69
             AB5).


         50.  After having considered  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  I
             conclude that the appellant has raised a  current  ground  for
             fearing to return to his home area of Iraq  that  could  still
             engage the operation of the Refugee Convention.  The  evidence
             shows that the authority of the Iraqi state  appears  to  have
             dissolved in his home area of Kirkuk  and  as  such  there  is
             unlikely  to  be  effective  protection  from  the  threat  of
             'honour' killing posed by  his  family.   When  the  appellant
             first made his claim for asylum in 2002 he  asserted  that  he
             would not be able to relocate to the  Kurdish  region  because
             his family background in the Iraqi army  would  place  him  at
             risk there as  a  perceived  traitor  to  the  Kurdish  cause.
             Although his father was killed more  than  20  years  ago  the
             appellant's own involvement in the Iraqi army was more recent.
               Issues  relating  to  family  honour  and  revenge  can   be
             remembered for many years.


         51.  The background evidence  before  me  shows  that  the  Kurdish
             Peshmerga is now likely to be in control  of  the  appellant's
             home area of Kirkuk.  If the appellant is returned to his home
             area or directly to the KRG area it is likely  that  enquiries
             would be made about his background, especially in view of  the
             fact that  he  would  be  returned  as  a  criminal  deportee.
             Although the appellant still had an outstanding appeal against
             the decision to cease his refugee  status  there  is  evidence
             before me to show that the respondent made a referral  to  the
             KRG authorities on 24 June 2014 to 'secure an  agreement'  for
             his return to that area (Monthly  Progress  Report  in  bundle
             RB2).  Despite the long  history  of  this  appeal  previously
             there had been no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  would  be
             returned to the KRG area.  The respondent has  now  given  the
             KRG authorities his details and they are likely  to  be  in  a
             position to make checks on his  background.   Aside  from  the
             passage of time the respondent has given  no  reason  why  the
             appellant would no longer be at risk in the Kurdish area  when
             in the past it appeared to have been accepted that his  family
             history would make it unreasonable for him to relocate to that
             area.  No response had been received from the KRG  authorities
             as to his admissibility to  that  area  at  the  date  of  the
             hearing.


         52.  At the hearing the Home Office representative  was  unable  to
             clarify whether there was even a realistic prospect of removal
             to Iraq at the current time.  The  location  of  his  proposed
             removal appeared to shift  from  Erbil  to  Baghdad  over  the
             course of the hearing.  It  seemed  that  the  respondent  was
             unclear where she is proposing to  deport  the  appellant.   I
             consider  that  it  makes  little   difference   whether   the
             appellant's removal is to Erbil or Baghdad.  The appellant  is
             likely to be at risk in his home area near  Kirkuk  where  the
             Iraqi state is unable to provide  effective  protection.   The
             appellant's family history indicates that  relocation  to  the
             KRG area could place him at risk.  In any event, the  volatile
             conflict situation in the north of Iraq does  not  necessarily
             ensure the security of the KRG area from  continuing  advances
             by ISIS.  The insurgent group has stated that it also  intends
             to take Baghdad and although it hasn't done so at the  current
             time the background evidence shows that it is within  striking
             distance of the capital.


         53.  In Baghdad there is a major political crisis and the  security
             situation is very poor.  The appellant has no  family  support
             or other connections to  Baghdad  that  would  assist  him  to
             survive.  It is reported that violence  in  Iraq  has  reached
             similar levels to 2008 and Baghdad is said to be  one  of  the
             areas with  the  highest  levels  of  indiscriminate  violence
             (pg.64 & 116 AB4(i)).  Thousands of Iraqis have been displaced
             by the violence and many are forced  to  survive  in  squatter
             settlements without access to basic necessities such as  clean
             water, electricity and sanitation (pg.96 AB4(i)).  Despite the
             efforts of the government and the international community  the
             majority of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)  in  Iraq  are
             said to face extremely harsh living  conditions  with  limited
             access  to  utilities,  inadequate  sanitation   and   limited
             education  and  employment  opportunities   (pg.131   AB4(i)).
             Baghdad hosts the largest  number  of  IDPs.   The  government
             failed to stem egregious and increasing violence by  non-state
             actors against Iraqi  civilians  (pg.40  AB4(i)).   For  these
             reasons I find that the conditions  in  other  areas  of  Iraq
             would either make  internal  relocation  from  his  home  area
             unfeasible or that it would be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh
             given the current security conditions: see AE and  FE  v  SSHD
             [2003] INLR 475, Januzi v SSHD [2006] 2 WLR 397 and SSHD v  AH
             (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49.


         54.  For the reasons given above I find that there is  evidence  to
             show that there is still a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
             that the appellant would be at risk of  serious  harm  in  his
             home area of Kirkuk for reasons of his perceived membership of
             a particular social group (Gay men).  The background  evidence
             shows that at the date of the hearing the Iraqi state  is  not
             in  a  position  to  provide  effective  protection  and  that
             internal relocation is not a reasonable option.  I make  those
             findings because the nature of the appellant's claim  to  fear
             returning to Iraq has now changed.


         55.  The appellant had already been recognised as a refugee and the
             core issue is whether Article 1(C)(5) is engaged.  The  burden
             is  upon  the  respondent  to  show  that  there  has  been  a
             significant and non-temporary change in the country  situation
             such that the circumstances that gave rise  to  the  grant  of
             protection no longer subsist.  I find that it is  insufficient
             to state that the regime that gave rise to his  original  fear
             of persecution is no longer in power.  In order to  cease  the
             appellant's existing status as a refugee the situation on  the
             ground in Iraq needs to be sufficiently stable and durable  to
             ensure that his removal would not  give  rise  to  a  risk  of
             persecution.  In light of the recent developments in Iraq  and
             the rapidly worsening political and  security  crisis  I  find
             that it could not possibly be said that the situation in  Iraq
             could  justify  the  cessation  of  the  appellant's  existing
             refugee status within the meaning of Article  1(C)(5)  of  the
             Refugee Convention.


         56.  In view of my finding that  Article  1(C)(5)  of  the  Refugee
             Convention does not apply it is not  necessary  to  go  on  to
             consider whether the appellant would qualify for  Humanitarian
             Protection.  I do  not  propose  to  make  any  more  detailed
             findings about the overall security situation and the risk  to
             civilians save to observe that the background  evidence  shows
             that the conclusions of the Tribunal in HM2  might  have  been
             overtaken by events on the ground in Iraq."


15.  The judge did not find it necessary to consider Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    in the light  of  her  findings  and  concluded  by  stating  that  the
    appellant had been able to rebut the presumption in Section 72 and that
    removal would be incompatible with the United  Kingdom's  international
    obligations.

16.  Permission to appeal was granted on 6 January 2015  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Keki?.  The respondent argued that the presumption had  not  been
    sufficiently rebutted by the appellant  and  the  judge  had  erred  in
    failing to look at the evidence in totality.

17.  In relation to the asylum claim the judge had erred in failing to  have
    regard to established case law on the country situation in  Iraq.   The
    judge had expressed a subjective view about the political and  security
    crisis in Baghdad.  The conclusion that the appellant would be known as
    a gay man in Kirkuk was informed by a  single  internet  article.   The
    appellant's case that his family were aware of his conviction was self-
    serving and uncorroborated.  The  appellant  had  been  found  to  have
    manipulated agencies with a view to achieve his own  goals.   This  had
    not been taken into account.

18.  Mr Avery submitted that the judge had  directed  herself  correctly  in
    paragraph 26 of the decision  by  reference  to  EN  (Serbia)  and  the
    position had  been  indicated  in  a  straightforward  manner  in  that
    paragraph.  While the judge had correctly found in  paragraph  31  that
    the appellant had been convicted of a particularly  serious  crime  she
    had erred in  her  analysis  thereafter  and  the  reasoning  had  come
    unstuck, as Mr Avery put it, in paragraph 43.

19.  It was quite clear that the appellant had acted deviously in the  light
    of what the appellant's offender manager, Mr Cooper, had been  told  by
    the appellant and this undermined the assessment of Mr Cordwell who had
    conducted an  independent  forensic  psychological  assessment  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant still posed a risk as had been found  in  the
    OASys assessment.  The judge had made an over-complicated  analysis  in
    paragraph 43.

20.  In relation to the asylum claim the appellant had been recognised as  a
    refugee  in  the  era  of  Saddam  Hussain.   The   issues   were   now
    fundamentally different.  There was no reason why the  appellant  would
    be  of  interest  today.   In  making  positive  findings   about   the
    appellant's case the judge had not taken into  account  the  assessment
    that had been made about the appellant's manipulative  behaviour.   The
    judge had not properly analysed the risks in the autonomous area or  in
    Baghdad.  The judge had depicted matters in the worst  possible  light.
    There was more recent country guidance that had been promulgated  on  5
    October 2015: AA (Article 15(C)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

21.  Article 8 had not been dealt with adequately.

22.  Ms Easty submitted that the judge had made no decision in Article 8  in
    the light of her conclusions on the other issues.  She pointed out that
    the appellant's asylum claim had been considered in paragraph 59 of the
    decision letter as raising three separate grounds - Kurdish  ethnicity,
    family involvement with the  Iraqi  army  and  fear  arising  from  his
    criminal conviction.  The judge grappled with the way the case had been
    put.  She was caught between the old and the new case  law.   Ms  Easty
    submitted she had got it absolutely right.  She had  been  referred  to
    background information and a skeleton  argument  and  many  bundles  of
    evidence.

23.  It was plain that the judge had  taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    manipulative behaviour as appeared from paragraph 37 of the decision.

24.   The  UNHCR  had  intervened  in  the  case  and  the  judge  had   not
    overcomplicated  matters  as  was  claimed  in  paragraph  43  of   the
    determination.

25.  Mr Avery in reply submitted that the judge had erred  in  finding  this
    to be a finely balanced case - it was not.  All the evidence pointed to
    the appellant being a risk to the community.  In  relation  to  asylum,
    the situation had changed beyond all  recognition.   The  determination
    was not sustainable.

26.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the points made on both sides.  The appeal is on a
    point of law only.

27.  In my view the determination is very  well  structured  and  the  judge
    dealt with each issue fully and fairly and  it  was  necessary,  as  Ms
    Easty points out, for the judge to acknowledge the contribution made by
    the UNHCR submissions.  No issue  was  taken  with  the  judge's  self-
    direction in paragraph 26 of the determination which  I  have  set  out
    above.  It is said that the judge neglected to take  into  account  the
    appellant's devious or manipulative behaviour but as  Ms  Easty  points
    out a full account of this behaviour is set out in the  decision.   The
    judge found the issue of risk to be  a  difficult  assessment  to  make
    (paragraph 42) and it was a borderline decision.  However  I  am  quite
    unable to find that the decision  to  which  the  judge  came  was  not
    properly open to her.  She approached the issues with extreme care  and
    meticulous consideration and what she said in paragraph 43 is perfectly
    appropriate in the circumstances of this case and by no means an overly
    elaborate analysis.  She was entitled to find that  the  appellant  had
    rebutted the presumption within the meaning of Section 72  and  Article
    33(2) of the Refugee Convention.

28.  The  judge  when  making  her  decision  in  relation  to  the  country
    situation could not ignore what was happening in northern Iraq  at  the
    material time and she had been equipped with a lot of information about
    it.  I do not find it arguable that she was focusing on the most  bleak
    picture so far as Baghdad was concerned.  It was open to  her  to  take
    the view that she did about the security situation in  the  appellant's
    home area and Baghdad.  Again in my view the judge's analysis was  very
    careful and thorough.  In the particular circumstances it was  open  to
    the judge to find that the respondent had failed to show that there had
    been a significant and non-temporary change in  the  country  situation
    such that the circumstances that gave rise to the grant  of  protection
    no longer subsisted.  She went on in paragraph 60 to observe  that  the
    appellant in any event was still likely to have a well-founded fear  of
    persecution albeit on different grounds to the ones that gave  rise  to
    his original grant of refugee status.  I note that at paragraph  52  of
    the decision the judge was given no clear  response  as  to  where  the
    respondent was proposing to remove the appellant.  The  judge  observes
    in paragraph 56 that the background evidence shows that the conclusions
    of the Tribunal in HM "might have  been  overtaken  by  events  on  the
    ground in Iraq".   This  appears  not  to  be  inconsistent  with   the
    respondent's position in AA (Iraq): the Tribunal at paragraph 68 record
    the respondent accepting in the  skeleton  argument  that  the  overall
    security situation in Iraq had deteriorated since HM.  I  do  not  find
    that the judge erred in  her  approach  and  she  made  what  Ms  Easty
    submitted was a prescient analysis.  It was not necessary  for  her  to
    deal with Article 8 in the light of her findings.

Notice of Decision

29.  For the reasons I  have  given  the  determination  is  not  materially
    flawed in law and the appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  dismissed.
    The decision of the First-tier Judge stands.

Anonymity Order

30.  The judge noted that the appellant was concerned he would  be  at  risk
    if  identified  on  return  to  Iraq  and  that  the  appeal   involved
    consideration  of  the  welfare  of  a  young  child  (the  appellant's
    daughter) and she decided that it was in  the  best  interests  of  the
    child to make an anonymity direction.   I  have  not  been  invited  to
    discontinue this direction.

31.   Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly   or
    indirectly identify the appellant or any member of his family.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

Funding Order

32.  No fee is paid or payable so there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 15 October 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr



