
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00073/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2014                |On 27 November 2014                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           mr gavin evens sewedor
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani Thomson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant's appeals with permission against  the  determination  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  promulgated  on  8  September  2014,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 3 December 2013 to refuse to revoke a  deportation  order  made
    against him.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on  18  December  1983.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 16 June 1999 using a Nigerian passport
    to which he was not entitled and claimed asylum.  That application  was
    refused on 2 July 2001 but he was granted exceptional leave  to  remain
    until 11 July 2005.

 3. On 26 April 2005 the appellant was convicted of rape of a girl under 13
    contrary to Section  5  of  the  Sexual  Offences  Act  2003.   He  was
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment  and  required  to  sign  the  Sex
    Offenders  Register  for  ten  years.   On  21   May   2005   he   made
    representations in response to a notice of liability to deportation and
    in that claimed a fear of return to Sierra Leone.

 4. On 18 September 2007 the appellant was issued with a letter pursuant to
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 inviting
    him to rebut the presumption  that  he  constituted  a  danger  to  the
    community given that he had been sentenced to an offence for  which  he
    was sentenced to two years in prison.  Further notices of liability  to
    deportation were issued on 27 February 2009 and 24 October 2012.

 5. Finally, on 5 December 2012 the respondent made a decision  to  make  a
    deportation order, that decision being  accompanied  by  a  certificate
    produced by the Secretary of State pursuant to Section 72 of  the  2002
    Act stating that he is a person to whom Article 33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention applies.

 6. The appellant did not appeal against that decision and  the  respondent
    proceeded on 4 January 2013 to sign a deportation  order  against  him.
    On  28  October  2013  the  Appellant's   then   representatives   made
    submissions  that  the  deportation  order  should  be  revoked.   That
    application was refused for the reasons set out in the  refusal  letter
    dated 3 December 2013 and it is against that decision which this appeal
    lies.

 7. While the main thrust of the appellant's case as to why the deportation
    order should be revoked relates to the fact that he is the father of  a
    British citizen child, with his mother he had been in a  relation,  and
    with whom he had continuing contact, he  also  brought  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds claiming that his life would be at  risk  on  return  to
    Sierra Leone.  That is clear both from the grounds of  appeal  and  the
    detailed letter in support of the grounds.

 8.  When  the  matter  came  before  Judge  Cope  the  Appellant  was  not
    represented.  He heard evidence and submissions from the Appellant  and
    submissions from the Presenting Officer.  Judge Cope found that:-

    i)   the Appellant had not rebutted the statutory  presumption  against
         him that he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime [54]
         and had not discharged the burden on him  to  rebut  the  statutory
         presumption he constituted a danger to the  community  [51]  taking
         into account his offending history; and,

    ii)  accordingly, the appeal on asylum grounds was  dismissed  pursuant
         to Section 72(10)(b) of the 2002 Act;

    iii) he was solely concerned with  an  appeal  based  on  human  rights
         grounds, that is, the right to respect for family, private life and
         Article 8 of the Human Convention of Human Rights [56];

    iv)  although he however was enjoined to take into account Section  117
         of the 2002 Act as amended [101],  the  changes  brought  into  the
         Immigration Rules by HC532, mirroring  those  provisions,  did  not
         apply  as  a  decision  to  refuse  asylum  was  made  before   the
         commencement date of 28 July 2014 [102];

       v) the exceptions set out in Section  117C  did  not  apply  to  the
          appellant and  that  the  public  interest  requires  deportation
          [122].

    On that basis the appeal was dismissed.

 9. The appellant sought leave to appeal on the grounds that:-

    i)   Judge Cope had  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  for
         protection pursuant to Article 3 which had to be considered whether
         or not the appellant had committed any crime;

    ii)  Judge Cope's assessment of  the  seriousness  of  the  Appellant's
         conviction was flawed in that it failed to take  into  account  all
         the circumstances of the offence including those  set  out  in  the
         sentencing remarks and failure to take into account his history  as
         a child soldier and subsequent diagnosis with PTSD;

    iii) Judge Cope had erred in the weight attached to the public interest
         in deportation, which  is  not  immutable  and  had  erred  in  his
         approach to Section 117 of the 2002 Act.

10. I heard submissions from both  representatives.   Mr  Mangion  accepted
    that the judge had erred in failing  to  make  any  assessment  of  the
    dangers that the appellant says he faces  on  return  to  Sierra  Leone
    which may engage Article 3, even if he falls to be  excluded  from  the
    Refugee Convention.

11. Ms Wilkins submitted that the judge erred in  reaching  the  conclusion
    that the appellant had not rebutted the presumption  arising  from  his
    conviction in that he had failed to deal with the two aspects - whether
    he had  committed  a  particularly  serious  crime  -  and  whether  he
    constituted a risk to the public - as separate issues.

12. In reply, Mr Mangion  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for upholding the certificate.

13. The grounds of appeal do  not  challenge  in  any  detail  the  judge's
    decision to uphold the certificate under Section 72.   Whilst  they  do
    challenge the judge's finding assessment  of  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence, that is in terms of the Article 8 analysis and it is stated at
    Paragraph [15];

         "Given the nature of the appeal (deportation),  the  assessment  of
         the index offence is crucial and this area is  therefore  material,
         especially because A has  been  unable  to  rebut  the  Section  17
         presumption that he has been  convicted  of  "particularly  serious
         crime," and barred from fully venting his asylum claim."

14. There is no indication here that there is an attempt to challenge  that
    certificate.

15. Further and in any event I find no merit in  the  submission  that  the
    judge erred in concluding that  the  Appellant  had  not  rebutted  the
    certificate.  Ms Wilkins made no attempt to seek to amend  the  grounds
    of  appeal  to  that  effect.  I  have,  nonetheless,  considered   her
    submissions on this issue.

16. As was noted in EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  630  at  [40]  per
    Stanley Burnton LJ, the expression "particularly serious crime"  within
    Article 15 must be applied to what is a crime under  the  domestic  law
    for members of state when the question of refoulement arises.  He  held
    [46] and [47]:


    46.  The Appellants submitted that  Article  33(2)  requires  that  the
         danger  to  the  community  must  be  causally  connected  to   the
         particularly serious crime of which the person has been  convicted.
         I would accept that normally the danger is demonstrated by proof of
         the particularly serious offence and the risk of its recurrence, or
         of the recurrence of a similar offence. I would  also  accept  that
         the wording of Article 33(2) reflects that expectation. But it does
         not expressly require a causal connection, and I do not think  that
         one is to be implied. By way of example, I do not see why a  person
         who has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  offence  of
         violence and who the State can  establish  is  a  significant  drug
         dealer should not be liable to refouled under Article 33(2). In any
         event, it seems to me that a disregard for the law, demonstrated by
         the  conviction,  would  be  sufficient  to  establish   a   causal
         connection between the  conviction  and  the  danger.  If  so,  the
         suggested added requirement of a causal connection  has  little  if
         any practical consequence.

    47.  I would add that I have no doubt that particularly serious  crimes
         are not restricted to offences against the person.  Frauds,  thefts
         and offences against property, for example, are  capable  of  being
         particularly serious crimes, as  may  drug  offences,  particularly
         those involving  class  A  drugs.  In  addition,  matters  such  as
         frequent repetition or a sophisticated system or the  participation
         of a number of  offenders  may  aggravate  the  seriousness  of  an
         offence.

17. I note also from paragraph 69:

    69.  I do not think that every crime that is punished with  a  sentence
         of 2 years imprisonment is particularly serious. One  only  has  to
         appreciate that determinate sentences may be many times longer than
         2 years  for  it  to  be  obvious  that  a  sentence  of  2  years'
         imprisonment  is  not  necessarily  indicative  of  a  particularly
         serious crime. If, therefore, section 72  requires  conviction  and
         sentence  to  2  years  imprisonment  to  result  in   irrebuttable
         presumptions that the requirement of  both  Article  33(2)  of  the
         Convention and of Article 14.4(b) of the  Directive  of  conviction
         for such a crime have been satisfied, it is incompatible  with  one
         or both. On the other hand, if the presumptions are  rebuttable,  I
         would hold that there is no incompatibility.

18. I consider that Judge Cope was entitled to conclude that the conviction
    of the rape of a child under 13 was  a  particularly  serious  offence.
    Whilst it is said that the sentence of two years imprisonment  is  low,
    nonetheless it is a sentence of two years  imprisonment.  There  is  no
    evidence before me that there were any relevant  sentencing  guidelines
    in place.

19. The seriousness of the offence is compounded by the fact  that  as  the
    judge found, [48] the Appellant  was  unable  or  unwilling  to  accept
    responsibility for his actions and for the serious offence which he was
    convicted. I consider also that the judge was  entitled  to  take  this
    into account as showing that the Appellant constitutes a danger to  the
    community of the United Kingdom.

20. Whilst,  as  Ms  Wilkins  submitted,  the  further  offences  that  the
    Appellant has committed in the  succeeding  years  are  not  of  sexual
    offences, they are nonetheless offences one of which resulted in a term
    of imprisonment.  Bearing in mind the comments of  Stanley  Burnton  LJ
    set out above, it is simply unarguable that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    conclusion that the presumption that the Appellant presents a danger to
    the community had  been made out.

21. I am satisfied that the judge erred in failing to consider  the  asylum
    claim and on that basis alone his decision did involve the making of an
    error of law.  As no relevant  findings  were  made  this  was  clearly
    capable of affecting the outcome.

22. Further, it is unclear whether any  findings  regarding  the  situation
    that the Appellant faces on return  to  Sierra  Leone  were  found  and
    these, whilst not determinative of any findings pursuant to Article  8,
    were matters that would need to  be  taken  into  consideration  for  a
    proper lawful consideration of those issues.  In  addition,  given  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1292 which was not  before  Judge  Cope,  it  is  clear  that  the  new
    provisions of the Immigration Rules in effect from 28 July 2014  should
    have been applied to this case.

23. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of Judge Cope did involve the making of an error of law and it
    is set aside.  I am satisfied that given the absence  of  any  relevant
    findings pursuant to action to Article 3 and  circumstances  which  the
    Appellant will find himself on return to Sierra Leone that it  will  be
    necessary for a  substantial  judicial  fact  finding  exercise  to  be
    undertaken.  It would in my view be artificial to preserve the findings
    in respect of Article 8 given that in particular the observations  made
    in YM (Uganda).  For that reason, I remit the matter to the First-tier.
     I make it clear that none of the findings of fact are  preserved  save
    for the finding that the Appellant has not  rebutted  the  presumptions
    that he  has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious  crime  and
    constitutes a danger to the community.

Summary of Conclusion


 1. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cope  did  involve  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  findings  of
    fact on all issues save for the finding that the Section 72 certificate
    has been upheld.


Signed                              Date:  26 November 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


