
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00727/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 13th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                ZBIGNIEW [W]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance either in person or through legal
representatives


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a Polish citizen, appealed a decision to deport  him
         in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2016. His appeal was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and, for reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  14th  June
         2018, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sills  allowed  his  appeal.  The
         Secretary of State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Kebede on the grounds it was arguable the First-tier
         Tribunal judge had 'downplayed' the seriousness of the  appellant's
         offence, the risk he posed and had erred in the weight given to his
         family in assessing the proportionality of the decision.

      2. The First-tier Tribunal judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not
         acquired permanent  residence.  There  was  no  challenge  to  that
         finding.

      3. Mr [W] was convicted on 5 September 2017 at Leicester  and  Rutland
         Magistrates Court of engaging in controlling/coercive behaviour  in
         an intimate family relationship between 1 January 2016 and 26  July
         2017. He was sentenced  to  18  weeks  imprisonment  and  made  the
         subject  of  a  restraining  order  until  4  September  2018.  The
         appellant had also come to the attention of Social Service in  2015
         following a referral from the police regarding  a  call  out  to  a
         domestic violence incident - threatening his wife with a knife. The
         report from the police refers to the wife having a 2"  cut  on  her
         hand caused by a knife thrown at her by the appellant.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge found:

             15.  I take into account that the appellant has been convicted
             of a serious offence. However, he has only a  single  criminal
             conviction. There is  also  a  spectrum  of  seriousness.  The
             appellant's 18-week sentence  is  at  the  lower  end  of  the
             spectrum. ... The fact that  the  offence  was  tried  in  the
             Magistrates Courts is in itself an indication of  seriousness.
             Whilst the description of the offence is reasonably  detailed,
             as the appellant was convicted in the Magistrates Court  there
             are no sentencing remarks that can provide useful  information
             about the offending.


             16.  ... The Magistrates Court was clearly concerned about the
             appellant's willingness to comply with any community sentence,
             hence the custodial  sentence.  While  the  appellant  pleaded
             guilty, his oral evidence was to the effect that  he  did  not
             accept his guilt. He stated that he had argued with his  wife.
             The appellant's failure to accept his  guilty  is  an  adverse
             factor. That said, I take into account that this was also  his
             first experience of custody and so he has not  demonstrated  a
             propensity to re-offend.


             17.  I place little weight on the domestic  incident  in  2015
             for the principle reason that the appellant was not prosecuted
             and convicted in relation to this. ... In  oral  evidence  the
             appellant denied inflicting any wound upon his wife. ... I  do
             not attach significant weight to the allegations made  against
             the appellant ...


             18.  ... while the  appellant  had  only  been  released  from
             detention around 13 days ago, there was no suggestion that  he
             had breached the terms of this [restraining] order. The victim
             of the crime was the appellant's wife and the  respondent  did
             not put forward evidence other than the conviction itself  and
             the incident in 2015 to suggest that she  would  still  be  at
             risk from the appellant ...


             19.  Taking the above into account I am not satisfied that the
             respondent has shown that  the  appellant's  personal  conduct
             represents a genuine present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society.  The
             appellant's offence was at the lower end  of  seriousness  for
             convictions leading to a custodial sentence. As the  appellant
             has only been convicted of a single offence, it has  not  been
             shown  that  he  has  a  propensity  to  re-offend.  The  main
             potential risk would be to his wife and  family,  however  the
             main evidence of this is  the  conviction  itself.  I  am  not
             satisfied on the evidence before me that the appellant poses a
             risk to his family in view of the seriousness of  his  offence
             and the fact that it was his first offence. I do not  consider
             that this single conviction for an offence of this  nature  is
             sufficient  to  show   that   the   appellant   represents   a
             sufficiently serious  threat  to  a  fundamental  interest  of
             society. Hence, I allow the appeal.


         The judge went on to consider the proportionality of  the  decision
         to remove him in case he was incorrect in his  finding  that  there
         were not serious grounds of public  policy  for  his  removal.  The
         judge took into account the appellant's age,  that  he  had  worked
         previously, that he was in good health and would be able to  return
         to Poland and find work. He found:

             20.  ... he does have 9 children aged between  1  and  21  and
             there is no court order preventing  him  from  having  contact
             with  these  children.  There  was  no  documentary   evidence
             concerning the children, but on the basis of  the  appellant's
             oral evidence and the information provided about the  children
             I accept that he was living with his children  before  he  was
             imprisoned. He stated that he was in phone  contact  with  his
             two oldest children, but had not yet done anything to  arrange
             seeing his children. I take into account  that  the  appellant
             has just been released from immigration detention and  so  has
             not had chance to make arrangements to  see  his  children.  I
             take into account that such arrangements  may  be  complex  in
             view of the breakdown of his relationship with his wife. While
             the appellant has not had direct  contact  with  his  children
             since his release, on the information available to  me,  I  do
             not consider that his conviction would prevent him from seeing
             his children,  though  contact  may  be  supervised  initially
             depending on the position taken by his wife. Hence I  consider
             the  appellant's  removal  would  amount  to   a   significant
             interference  with  his  relationship  with  his  children.  I
             consider it would be in the best interests of the children  to
             maintain a parental relationship with their  father  and  that
             this would not be  possible  if  he  were  to  be  removed  to
             Poland...


             21.  ... I find that the appellant's family  ties  in  the  UK
             with his children outweighs the risk the appellant  may  cause
             to the public on account of his offending.


         Error of law

      5. The appellant did not appear and was not legally  represented.  The
         notice of hearing was sent to him at his last known address and has
         not been returned to the Tribunal undelivered. I am  satisfied  the
         appellant was notified of the hearing date and has chosen,  for  an
         unknown reason not to attend or instruct a legal representative  to
         attend on his behalf.

      6. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal judge  that  the  appellant
         was convicted of a  single  offence  and  thus  not  of  sufficient
         seriousness borders on the perverse. The appellant was convicted of
         a serious offence of a continuing nature over a period of  time  in
         excess of 18 months which he denied having committed and for  which
         the court considered he had to be imprisoned. That is not a  single
         offence at the less serious end of the spectrum.  Furthermore,  the
         court imposed a restraining order, an  order  that  would  only  be
         imposed if he was thought to be a continuing risk. In addition, the
         judge describes the main victim  as  being  his  wife;  controlling
         coercive behaviour has an effect not only the victim but the family
         and society as a whole. The judge has minimised this effect of  the
         appellant's behaviour. The judge  failed  to  placed  weight  on  a
         physical attack that was corroborated by police and  also  involved
         abusive and aggressive behaviour in the police van.  These  actions
         may not have led to charge and/or conviction but that does not mean
         that minimal  weight  should  be  attached  to  the  incident  when
         considered in the context of the evidence as a whole. The appellant
         produced no evidence of rehabilitation - that he had not  committed
         any further offences since his release 10 days earlier when he  was
         subject to a restraining order is not evidence of rehabilitation.

      7. The finding by the judge that the appellant  did  not  represent  a
         sufficiently serious threat to society was founded upon a  lack  of
         proper consideration and assessment of the evidence before him.

      8. In so far as the finding on  proportionality  is  concerned  it  is
         difficult to comprehend, on the evidence that was before the judge,
         how the judge could have reached the finding that  the  appellant's
         removal  would  amount  to  a  significant  interference   in   his
         relationship with his children or that it  would  be  in  the  best
         interests of the children for them to maintain a relationship  with
         the appellant or that any relationship could not be  maintained  if
         he were removed to Poland.

      9. The appellant was in detention (in prison serving his sentence  and
         immigration detention) for just over a year. There was no  evidence
         that his children had suffered at all during his  incarceration  or
         what efforts, if any, had been made for contact to  be  maintained.
         That he is incarcerated does not prevent  arrangements  being  made
         for him to have face-to-face contact with his children. At least  2
         of his children are adults and there was no  indication  that  they
         sought contact with him.  There  was  no  evidence  that  telephone
         contact could not continue when he was  in  Poland.  There  was  no
         evidence why a relationship could  not  continue  when  he  was  in
         Poland - 7 of the children were born in Poland  and  he  had  other
         family and  owned  property  there.  The  appellant  did  not  lead
         evidence that his controlling and coercive behaviour had not had an
         adverse impact on the children or that they would wish to  see  him
         face-to-face or re-introduce contact in any other way.

     10. The appellant had said to the judge that he  wished  to  return  to
         Poland. There was no indication the appellant had any consideration
         of the effect on his children,  adverse  or  otherwise  of  such  a
         decision on his part.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal judge's  decision  that  removal  would  be
         disproportionate was founded upon  a  lack  of  assessment  of  the
         evidence and lack of evidence before him.

     12. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

         Remaking of the decision

     13. The appellant has received a sentence of imprisonment for a serious
         offence involving controlling and coercive behaviour over a  number
         of months. His behaviour was directed at his wife. He denied he had
         committed the offence and referred in his evidence  only  to  there
         being an argument. His evidence shows a lack of  understanding  and
         appreciation of the nature of his conviction and the serious impact
         such behaviour has not only on his wife but also society as a whole
         and also the psychological damage  that  could  be  caused  to  his
         children. The imposition of a restraining order, to continue for  a
         year after his conviction adds weight  to  a  conclusion  that  the
         appellant was a continuing danger to his family.

     14. The issue is not simply whether he has committed  the  offence  for
         which he was charged but the effect of that behaviour on the victim
         and society. The period over which he committed  the  offence,  the
         nature and extent of the offence, the  restraining  order  and  the
         previous violent assault are all matters which taken together  show
         a propensity towards criminal behaviour that cannot be tolerated.

     15. It is a fundamental interest of society that  individuals  are  not
         subjected to controlling and coercive behaviour. The failure of the
         appellant to acknowledge his guilt (other than as a plea to  reduce
         his sentence), address his behaviour and seek to prevent repetition
         is indicative of a continuing threat to the  fundamental  interests
         of society; such behaviour should not continue.

     16. It is not and cannot be disproportionate to  remove  the  appellant
         given the  nature  of  his  criminal  offending  and  the  lack  of
         evidenced ties with his children which could be said  to  adversely
         impact on his removal. At most he has telephone  contact  with  his
         two oldest children. he has  made  no  efforts  to  initiate  other
         contact and said in court  he  wished  to  leave  the  UK,  thereby
         showing a disregard to possible contact, such as it might be. Given
         the lack of interest shown by the appellant in his children and his
         previous behaviour, it is possible that it may not even be in their
         best interest to  have  contact  with  him.  Nevertheless,  I  have
         reached my conclusion on the basis that despite a lack of evidence,
         the best interests of the children  lies  with  continuing  contact
         with their father albeit I do not accept that such  contact  cannot
         take place in Poland.

     17. The continuation of his behaviour during the period leading  up  to
         his arrest was within the family. Although no evidence  was  before
         the First-tier Tribunal  or  before  me,  it  is  well  known  that
         observation of such behaviour  by  children  can  have  an  adverse
         effect  on  their  psychological  wellbeing.  Despite  having  been
         previously arrested a year earlier, there was no evidence that that
         arrest had led  to  a  moderation  in  his  behaviour  or  a  self-
         recognition that such  behaviour  was  not  only  unacceptable  but
         criminal.

     18. Taking all the evidence into account, there is no  doubt  but  that
         there is a continuing sufficiently serious threat to a  fundamental
         interest of society and  that  his  removal  from  the  UK  is  not
         disproportionate.

     19. I dismiss the appeal by  the  appellant  against  the  decision  to
         deport him.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by the appellant's appeal  against
    the deportation decision.


     Date 12th June 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
