
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00717/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by skype for business      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2020                          |On 24 September 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MARIAN MADALIN PETRE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Khan, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Khosla) promulgated  on
    12 March 2020.  By its decision, the Tribunal allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision,  dated,  14  November
    2017 to deport him from the United Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity order and Counsel did not seek to advance any
    grounds as to why such an order would be necessary.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Petre  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The decision to deport was made under Regulation 27 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"). The
    appellant's case was that the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the Regulations,  and/or  that  it  was
    incompatible with his rights under Article 8  of  the  Convention,  and
    thus unlawful by reason of S.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. By a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  the  13  March  2020,  the
    FtTJ(Judge Khosla) allowed the appeal, holding that  the  decision  was
    not in accordance with the Regulations as he  did  not  find  that  the
    respondent had established that the appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to public  policy  or  security
    such that his deportation was justified. The judge did not need to, and
    did not, consider the Convention grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed and permission to appeal was granted by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer).

 5. The hearing took place on 9 September  2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court  at
    Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There were  no
    issues regarding sound, and  no  substantial  technical  problems  were
    encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied both  advocates  were
    able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

 6. I am grateful to  Ms  Pettersen  and  Mr  Khan  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.




Background:

 7. The Appellant is a citizen of Romania. The key  factual  background  is
    set out in the decision of  the  FtTJ,  the  decision  letter  and  the
    witness statements filed on behalf of the  appellant.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in February 2011 to join his mother who had  entered  in
    2009.

 8. Between 2011 and 2017 he has committed criminal offences. Reference  is
    made to them in the decision letter; that he received  convictions  for
    placing advertisements relating to prostitution,  damage  to  property,
    shoplifting, two counts of drug possession and breaches of  conditional
    discharge and a breach of a community order.

 9. On 17 October 2017, the appellant was served notice that he was  liable
    for deportation and invited to make any representations as to why  this
    should not take place. Submissions were submitted  on  his  behalf,  by
    letter from his representatives, dated 9 November  2017.  Consideration
    was given to those representations, but the  respondent  refused  those
    representations in a decision  letter  of  14  November  2017.  He  was
    removed from the United Kingdom on the 24 March 2018.

10. The decision letter set out the appellant's criminal  history  are  set
    out  above.  It  was  considered  that  his  convictions  indicated  an
    established pattern of acquisitive  offending  and  that  it  indicated
    antisocial attitudes towards the public. The respondent was of the view
    that there was insufficient evidence that he had  adequately  addressed
    the reasons for his offending behaviour and abstained  from  drugs  and
    that on the available evidence it indicated  he  had  a  propensity  to
    reoffend and thus  represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to justify his deportation on  grounds  of
    public policy.

11. In terms of proportionality, the decision letter took into account  his
    age and his nationality and that it was believed that he had spent  his
    youth and formative years in Romania. He had provided no evidence  that
    had been resident in the UK for significant periods of time and had not
    acquired a right to permanently reside in the UK. He had  not  provided
    evidence of social and cultural integration. Whilst it was  noted  that
    his mother had claimed that he was his sole carer, the claim  not  been
    substantiated  with  any  documentary  evidence  although  her  medical
    history had not been disputed. However, it was considered that  in  his
    absence she would have sufficient care. In paragraph 34 - 40 the  issue
    of rehabilitation was considered and that there had been no evidence it
    undertaken any rehabilitative work to address the issues  that  led  to
    his offending.

12. It was concluded that there was a real risk that he  may  reoffend  and
    therefore it was considered  that  his  deportation  was  justified  on
    grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security,  or  public  health  in
    accordance the regulation 23 (6) (b).

13. At paragraphs 42 - 65 the decision letter addressed additional  matters
    relevant to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The applicable legal framework:

14. The deportation of EEA nationals is subject to the regime  set  out  in
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ('The  EEA
    Regulations')  which  were  made  under  section  2  of  the   European
    Communities Act 1972 by way of implementation of Directive  2004/38  on
    the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and
    reside freely within the territory of Member States. The Directive sets
    conditions that must be satisfied before a Member  State  can  restrict
    the rights of free movement and residence provided for by EU law.

15. By virtue of Regulation 23(6) of the 2016 regulations an  EEA  national
    who has entered the United Kingdom or  the  family  member  of  such  a
    national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if:

             (a) that person does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to
             reside under these Regulations; or


             (b) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified on the grounds of public  policy,  public
             security, or public health in accordance with  regulation  27;
             or


             (c) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified on grounds  of  misuse  of  rights  under
             regulation 26(3).


17.  Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows: -

         ' 27. - (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security, or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-"

                  (a) has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b) is under the age of 18, unless the  relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-"

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality.

                  (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                  conduct of the person concerned.

                  (c) the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society.

                  (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e) a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

                  (f) the decision may be  taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who
             is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must
             take account of considerations such as the age, state of
             health, family and economic situation of P, P's length of
             residence in the United Kingdom, P's social and cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of P's
             links with P's country of origin.

             ...

             (8) A court or Tribunal considering whether  the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security, and the fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).




         SCHEDULE 1

  18. CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE FUNDAMENTAL
      INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

    Considerations of public policy and public security

     The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform  scale  of  public  policy  or
    public security values: member States  enjoy  considerable  discretion,
    acting within the parameters set by  the  EU  Treaties,  applied  where
    relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own standards of  public
    policy and public security, for purposes tailored to  their  individual
    contexts, from time to time.

    Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

    2. An EEA national or the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  having
    extensive  familial  and  societal  links  with  persons  of  the  same
    nationality or language does not amount to integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom;  a  significant  degree  of  wider   cultural   and   societal
    integration must  be  present  before  a  person  may  be  regarded  as
    integrated in the United Kingdom.

    3. Where an EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national  has
    received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the  longer
    the sentence, or the more numerous the  convictions,  the  greater  the
    likelihood that the  individual's  continued  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

    4. Little weight is to  be  attached  to  the  integration  of  an  EEA
    national or the family member of an  EEA  national  within  the  United
    Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or  around  the
    same time as-"

    (a) the commission of a criminal offence;

    (b) an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of society;

    (c) the EEA national or  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  was  in
    custody.

    5. The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the family
    member of an EEA national who is able to provide  substantive  evidence
    of not demonstrating a threat (for example, through demonstrating  that
    the  EEA  national  or  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  has
    successfully  reformed  or  rehabilitated)  is  less   likely   to   be
    proportionate.

    6. It is consistent with public policy and public security requirements
    in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be  taken  in  order  to
    refuse, terminate or withdraw any right otherwise  conferred  by  these
    Regulations in the case of abuse of rights or fraud, including-"

    (a) entering, attempting to enter, or assisting another person to enter
    or to attempt to enter,  a  marriage,  civil  partnership,  or  durable
    partnership of convenience; or

    (b) fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain or assisting another
    to obtain or to attempt to  obtain,  a  right  to  reside  under  these
    Regulations.

    The fundamental interests of society

    7. For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests  of
    society in the United Kingdom include-"

    (a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration  laws,
    and maintaining the integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the  immigration
    control system (including under these Regulations) and  of  the  Common
    Travel Area;

    (b) maintaining public order;

    (c) preventing social harm;

    (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

    (e) protecting public services;

    (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member  of  an  EEA
    national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that  person
    is likely to  cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,  public  offence)  and
    maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  ability   of   the   relevant
    authorities to take such action;

    (g) tackling  offences  likely  to  cause  harm  to  society  where  an
    immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there
    is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs
    or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of
    the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

    (h) combating the effects  of  persistent  offending  (particularly  in
    relation to offences, which if taken in  isolation,  may  otherwise  be
    unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);

    (i) protecting the rights and freedoms  of  others,  particularly  from
    exploitation and trafficking;

    (j) protecting the public;

    (k) acting in the best interests of a child (including where  doing  so
    entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or  otherwise
    taking an EEA decision against a child);

    (l) countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared values."

   The appeal:

  19. In the light of the  COVID-19  pandemic   the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
      directions, inter alia, indicating that it was  provisionally  of  the
      view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face to
      face hearing and that this could take place via  Skype.  Both  parties
      have indicated that they were content for the hearing  to  proceed  by
      this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable oral
      submissions to be given by each of the parties.

  20. Before the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of State was  represented  by
      Ms Pettersen and the appellant represented by Mr Khan of  Counsel.  Ms
      Pettersen relied upon the grounds as drafted.  It is not necessary  to
      set out the submissions of each of the parties  as I will set out  the
      relevant aspects of those submissions when dealing  with  the  grounds
      advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State and my  consideration  of
      those issues.

Discussion:

  21. I am grateful for the submissions made by each  of  the  advocates.  I
      confirm that I have taken them into account and have done  so  in  the
      light of the decision of the FtTJ and the  material  that  was  before
      him.

  22. The grounds relied upon by the Secretary of State set  out  under  the
      heading "failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons for  findings
      on material matters, failing  to  take  into  account  and/or  resolve
      conflicts of fact or opinion on material matters."

  23. The first ground relates to the position of the appellant and  whether
      he was a "qualified person". Ms Pettersen relied upon the  grounds  in
      which it is submitted that the FtTJ failed to adequately  explain  how
      the appellant was dependent upon his mother and for what period.

  24. In the decision letter, the respondent had referred  to  the  lack  of
      evidence to show the appellant's date of arrival in the UK but  beyond
      this, the decision letter only made reference to the failure  to  show
      continuous residence for a period  of  five  years  to  demonstrate  a
      permanent right of residence.

  25. The FtTJ addressed this  issue  at  paragraphs  [45]  -  [48]  of  the
      decision having earlier set out the relevant legal framework.

  26. As Mr Khan submitted the FtTJ had the advantage of  hearing  the  oral
      evidence of the appellant, his mother and sister during the appeal and
      having done so reach the overall conclusion that they  had  all  given
      "truthful accounts on material matters".  He  found  them  all  to  be
      "credible witnesses" (at [45]). This included as a  "material  matter"
      the nature of the  appellant's  residence  in  the  UK.  As  the  FtTJ
      observed at [45] there was no dispute that the appellant's mother  had
      been exercising treaty rights since her arrival in the UK.  As set out
      in her evidence before the FtTJ she had entered the UK in 2009 at  and
      continued to work until February 2018 due to ill health.

  27. Whilst the respondent did not accept the appellant's date  of  arrival
      as February 2011, the FtTJ considered the appellant had given credible
      evidence as to his history and background and  therefore  he  accepted
      that the appellant entered the UK in February 2011 as set out  in  his
      evidence and corroborated by his mother. The judge also  accepted  his
      evidence as to his history which  included  the  dependency  upon  his
      mother following his arrival and entry into the United Kingdom in 2011
      and of his work history (see paragraph 19 of witness statement).

  28. In light of the judge's acceptance of their evidence, it was  open  to
      the FtTJ to reach the conclusion that  the  appellant  fell  into  the
      category as a "family member" who was dependent upon his  mother  when
      she had  supported  him  and  also  alongside  this  he  accepted  the
      appellant's evidence as to his work history  which  was  described  at
      [46], as having worked in a car wash.

  29. Ms Pettersen relied upon the written grounds where an extract  of  the
      guidance sets out a case  example  of  someone  who  claims  to  be  a
      "worker" by washing cars  for  a  relative,  and  submitted  that  the
      appellant's work was similar to this, and therefore was "marginal  and
      ancillary" and was not characterised as "a  worker".  However,  as  Mr
      Khan submits, at paragraph [46] the FtTJ set out that the  appellant's
      evidence as to his employment was not challenged by the respondent  at
      the hearing nor was it submitted that his employment was "not  genuine
      or effective". It is therefore  plain  that  the  respondent  had  not
      sought to challenge his evidence or the nature of that evidence during
      the hearing on the basis now asserted by the respondent.  Consequently
      it was open to the FtTJ to conclude on what was unchallenged  evidence
      that the appellant had enjoyed the right under EU treaties as a result
      of his dependency on his mother  in  conjunction  with  his  own  work
      history and that, whilst he could not demonstrate a permanent right of
      residence, the appeal concerned the "bottom tier"  of  protection  and
      whether the decision to deport the appellant was justified "on grounds
      of public policy, public security or public health in accordance  with
      Regulation 27".

  30. As the appellant has not exercised treaty rights for a continuous
      period of five years, the Regulations give only the lowest level of
      protection against removal. Nevertheless, the appellant cannot be
      deported unless his personal conduct represents "a genuine, present,
      and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
      interests of society, taking into account past conduct of the person
      and that the threat does not need to be imminent. This is set out at
      Regulation 27(5)(c).


  31. In this context, the grounds also challenge the FtTJ's  assessment  of
      the appellant's criminal history. The grounds  identify  a  number  of
      paragraphs  but  in  particular  paragraph  59,  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's criminal history in Romania  and  the  judge's  assessment
      that it amounted  to  "no  more  than  rebellious  behaviour".  It  is
      submitted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  FtTJ  gave   no
      consideration to the appellant's evidence of having been  the  subject
      of extradition and that it must follow that the  Romanian  authorities
      did not treat this as "rebellious behaviour".

  32. To address that submission, it is important to consider the finding at
      [59] in the context of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal.  The  FtTJ
      accepted that prior to entering the UK and when a minor, he  had  been
      involved in offences of theft. In the decision letter, the  particular
      circumstances of the offences  were  said  to  be  "unknown"  although
      elsewhere in the decision letter they  were  referred  to  as  "street
      robberies" (see paragraph 6 of the decision of the FtTJ). However, the
      FtTJ referred to the appellant's evidence that he and some friends had
      stolen a bicycle from a garden and had broken into  a  restaurant  and
      stolen alcohol. The judge recorded that  the  presenting  officer  was
      "unable to direct  me  to  any  evidence  of  street  robberies"  (see
      paragraph 6).

  33. As to the circumstances which gave rise  to  the  arrest  warrant,  it
      related to an event which occurred in Romania for which the  appellant
      had already been sentenced to a suspended sentence for what  was  said
      to be theft of a bike alongside other co-defendants. The FtTJ set  out
      the appellant's evidence at [11] and that the appellant had been  made
      the subject of an arrest warrant for an earlier offence  committed  in
      Romania and that "it was not altogether clear and the  respondent  had
      not furnished any  information  in  relation  to  this"  but  that  it
      appeared that the authorities in Romania imposed a custodial  sentence
      on the appellant  in  relation  to  an  offence  which  he  previously
      received a non-custodial sentence. The  evidence  of  the  appellant's
      mother was consistent with the appellant's evidence and that an appeal
      had led to his recall at a time when the appellant had been working in
      Spain and he was arrested. It appears that he was released by judge in
      Spain on the basis  that  had  been  a  minor  when  the  offence  was
      committed but that the decision was then reversed (see paragraph 18).

  34. Against that background, and the lack of challenge to the  appellant's
      account which the judge  accepted  and  the  lack  of  any  supporting
      evidence from the respondent as to the offences, it was  open  to  the
      FtTJ to prefer  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  to  reach  the
      conclusion that the nature of the appellant's offending, seen  in  the
      context of his age and the nature of them was properly  considered  to
      be "rebellious behaviour". This was not considered in a vacuum as  the
      judge  accepted  the  appellant's  mother's  evidence  concerning  his
      upbringing which had given rise to his "rebellious behaviour"  in  her
      witness statement. The FtTJ also  observed  the  appellant's  evidence
      concerning the nature  of  his  previous  evidence  was  "unchallenged
      evidence". The judge found the last offence in Romania took  place  in
      2002 (although he was sentenced in 2006) and that there  was  a  nine-
      year gap between his last offence in Romania and the commission of the
      offences in the UK.

  35. In my judgement, the respondent has not demonstrated that the  judge's
      characterisation of his previous offending as  "rebellious  behaviour"
      was a finding that that was not reasonably open to him on the evidence
      before the Tribunal. Whilst reference is made to the view taken by the
      Romanian authorities, as the FtTJ made plain, the respondent  provided
      no factual evidence as to the circumstances of  the  offence  nor  any
      evidence from the authorities  themselves  and  therefore  their  view
      cannot be known solely by the respondents reference  to  the  sentence
      subsequently imposed.

  36. The grounds also seek to challenge other paragraphs  of  the  decision
      (paragraphs 59, 60, 61,62) in the context of the FtTJ's assessment  of
      whether the appellant's offending represented a "genuine, present  and
      sufficiently serious threat."

  37. Ms  Pettersen  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  engage  with  the
      appellant's persistent offending when addressing his criminal  history
      and that he had found no connection wrongly between  the  offences  in
      Romania  and  those  in  the  UK  and  therefore  his  reasoning   was
      "inadequate" on this issue.

  38. Mr Khan in response submits that the FtTJ gave  careful  consideration
      to the issue of the appellant's offending and the issue  of  risk  and
      that the judge  had  analysed  the  appellant's  criminality  both  in
      Romania and the UK and did so in the context of his efforts to  change
      his behaviour. He submitted that the FtTJ had given  adequate  reasons
      which were sustainable on the evidence.

  39. I have considered those submissions in the  context  of  the  evidence
      before the FtTJ and his assessment of that evidence. The FtTJ set  out
      the relevant legal framework at paragraphs 34-42 and referred  to  the
      legal authorities that had been placed before him. He reminded himself
      of the general principles which  were  applicable  and  that  he  must
      decide the case on the individual circumstances of the  appellant.  No
      criticisms have been advanced on behalf of the respondent  as  to  his
      self -directions in law. In particular at [54],  the  FTT  J  observed
      that  he  had  "no  doubt"  that  the  appellant's  conduct  would  be
      sufficient justification for the respondent to satisfy the  burden  on
      her that public policy and public security considerations are at  play
      and that the  decision  would  be  potentially  justifiable  on  those
      grounds.

  40. The judge then addressed the respondent reliance  on  the  appellant's
      offending history. In Arranz (EEA  regulations  -  deportation  -test)
      [2017] UKUT 294 the Upper Tribunal held that the burden of  proof  lay
      on the SSHD to prove that a person represents a genuine,  present  and
      sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
      of society. That the burden of proof lies on  the  SSHD  has  recently
      been accepted by the Inner House of the Court of Session in SA v  SSHD
      [2018] CSIH 28. The person concerned must also be  a  present  threat,
      Orphanopoulos and Oliveri v Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart,  [2004]  ECR
      1999 and previous convictions are relevant:

         "Only  insofar  as  the  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  that
         conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a  present
         threat to the requirements of public policy".

  41. Contrary to the grounds the  FtTJ  did  take  into  account  that  the
      appellant had convictions for breaches of orders  made  by  the  court
      (see paragraph [56]). The judge set out his  history  of  13  offences
      resulting in 11 convictions and that there were no further convictions
      since September 2017 (at [57] and [62]). At [62] the judge  took  into
      account the period in immigration detention and found that "it  leaves
      a period of approaching two years during which the appellant  had  not
      been convicted of any crime."

  42. As to the offences in Romania, the FtTJ addressed them at [59] and for
      the reasons set out earlier in  this  decision,  the  judge  described
      those  earlier  offences  committed  whilst  a  minor  as  "rebellious
      behaviour"; a conclusion open to him on the evidence.

  43. The  judge  also  took  into  account  those  previous  offences  were
      committed whilst minor and that the last offence took  place  in  2002
      and that there had been a  nine  year  gap  between  the  offences  in
      Romania and the commencement of his offending in the UK (at [57]).

  44. Whilst the grounds challenge the FtTJ's factual finding that there was
      no connection between his offending in Romania and that in the UK, the
      FtTJ addressed this at [59] by taking into account the reasons for the
      offences committed in the UK which the judge found to be as  a  result
      of his addiction to drugs and that this had not been the cause of  his
      offending in Romania. That was a finding reasonably open to him on the
      evidence before him. The FtTJ then addressed the appellant's offending
      in the UK at [60] and again took into account that  these  were  "low-
      level offences including offences of theft and possession of  class  A
      drugs and that there were breaches of failing  to  comply  with  court
      orders but that none of the offences resulted in a custodial sentence.

  45. I accept the submission made by Mr Khan that the  FtTJ's  analysis  of
      the appellant's offending was based on the  evidence  before  him  and
      that the  factual  findings  made  an  assessment  was  one  that  was
      reasonably open to the judge to make. There is no  lack  of  reasoning
      nor as the grounds assert  was  there  any  failure  to  consider  any
      aspects of the appellant's offending history.

  46. Ms Pettersen in her oral submissions also relied upon paragraph  6  of
      the written grounds which stated as follows;  "In  assessing  risk  of
      reoffending the FtTJ's conclusion that  the  appellant's  acknowledged
      relapse was not indicative of a "permanent relapse" (para 62) fails to
      engage with the fact that the "risk" does not need  to  be  "imminent"
      and that even a "temporary relapse" may pose  unacceptable  risk  (see
      paragraph 32 HOPO submissions) ".

  47. That paragraph does not set out what  error  of  law  the  judge  made
      however I read it to mean that the judge had  not  properly  addressed
      the issue of risk of reoffending in the light of the accepted  relapse
      made in September 2019.

  48. The issue of risk  of  reoffending  was  addressed  by  the  judge  at
      paragraphs[62]-[69] of his decision. When reading the FtTJ's  analysis
      of the evidence, it is plain that he took into  account  a  number  of
      relevant factors before  reaching  his  overall  conclusion.  In  that
      assessment, in my view it was open to the judge to take  into  account
      that he had not been convicted of any offences from September 2017 and
      this was a significant period of nearly 2 years. The  judge  did  take
      into account that the appellant's offending in the UK had  been  as  a
      result of his own drug habit and therefore his  relapse  in  September
      2019 was relevant. However, the judge gave sustainable reasons  firmly
      based on the evidence that the relapse  in  September  2019  (when  he
      attempted to take his own life by taking an overdose)  had to be  seen
      in the context of what was happening at that time. At  [62]  the  FtTJ
      reached the conclusion that this  was  not  evidence  of  a  permanent
      relapse but that it was specific to the facts appertaining at that the
      time when the appellant had been told that he would not, has  he  been
      expecting been able to come to the UK to attend  his  appeal  hearing.
      The judge had accepted the appellant's evidence as to  the  effect  of
      this upon him and it was therefore open to him to reach the conclusion
      that it was not a permanent relapse.

  49. Furthermore, the judge took into account other factors in support.  He
      identified that the appellant had been abstinent  from  illegal  drugs
      since September 2017 ( at [67]), he had engaged with  a  programme  of
      prescription  methadone  to  overcome  his  addiction  and  since  the
      overdose in 2019 had been  compliant  (at  [64]),  the  appellant  had
      resisted the temptation to take drugs  despite  them  being  available
      both in Romania and the UK ( at [65]) and  that  there  had  been  "no
      challenge to the truthfulness of both the appellant's and his  mothers
      and sisters witness evidence that he had  abstained  from  drugs"  (at
      [66]).

  50. On that evidence, the FtTJ concluded that he accepted the  appellant's
      evidence and found that the appellant had abstained from illicit drugs
      for a sustained period and that this was  evidence  of  the  appellant
      having made "significant progress towards overcoming his addiction and
      rehabilitating" (at 66]). The judge  found  that  this  was  "strongly
      indicative of the appellant's desire to remain drug-free" and that the
      judge found that he would "abstain  from  drugs  for  the  foreseeable
      future."

  51. The FtTJ had the  advantage  of  hearing  the  oral  evidence  of  the
      appellant and his mother and  half-sister  alongside  the  documentary
      evidence both in the appellant's bundle and that of the respondent. It
      is plain from reading the decision as  a  whole  that  the  judge  was
      impressed by his evidence and found the appellant's evidence  to  have
      been  credible  and  truthful.  The  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
      evidence that he was "remorseful for his actions" and went on to state
      "I am satisfied that the appellant wants to improve his life  so  that
      he can be a support to his mother who suffers from  various  illnesses
      as was evident both  from  her  medical  documentation  enclosing  the
      appellant's bundle and her presentation at the appeal hearing.  It  is
      also clear that the appellant's most recent offending was a result  of
      the appellant addiction to drugs and there is no evidence to  indicate
      that if the appellant were to continue to abstain, he would engage  in
      offending behaviour.  It  is  clear  that  the  appellant's  offending
      behaviour has been centred around his substance misuse."

  52. Whilst it is argued on behalf of the respondent that the risk did  not
      need to be "imminent" and that even a temporary relapse  may  pose  an
      unacceptable risk, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  give  clear
      reasons  as  to  why  he  did  not  find  the  appellant  to  pose  an
      unacceptable risk and this was plain from his  omnibus  conclusion  at
      [69] and [70] of his decision.

  53. In his decision, the FTT J was plainly  aware  that  the  decision  to
      deport the appellant may not be taken  except  on  grounds  of  public
      policy or security and that  as  a  consequence  he  was  required  to
      identify  those  relevant  factors  and  evaluate  them  as  to  their
      seriousness. He properly analysed the offences in detail and the  FtTJ
      observed that a person's previous convictions  do  not  in  themselves
      justify the decision to deport (at [58]).

  54. In carrying out his assessment, in my judgement the FtTJ properly  had
      regard  to  the  offences  themselves  and  the  appellant's   conduct
      including his failure to comply with court orders, his abstinence from
      drugtaking which had been the catalyst for his offending and addressed
      and assessed the risks of reoffending in the light of the evidence  as
      a whole.

  55. In summary, the public policy grounds for removal are an exception  to
      the fundamental principles of the free exercise of EU  rights  and  as
      such an EU citizen should not be expelled as  a  deterrent  to  others
      without the personal conduct of the person concerned  giving  rise  to
      consider that he will commit  other  offences  that  are  against  the
      public policy of the state.

  56. It must be established  that  the  Appellant  represents  "a  genuine,
      present  or  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
      fundamental interests of society".  In this context the FtTJ  properly
      considered the future risk of reoffending and did so in the  light  of
      all the evidence before him.

  57. As set out in the decision of SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ  1245
      at paragraph [25], it  required  an  evaluation  to  be  made  of  the
      likelihood  that  a  person  concerned  would  offend  again  and  the
      consequences if he did so.  In addition, the need for the  conduct  of
      the person concerned to represent a "sufficiently serious"  threat  to
      one of the fundamental interests  of  society  required  the  decision
      maker to balance the risk of future harm  against  the  need  to  give
      effect to the right of free movement. This was the evaluation  carried
      out by the FtTJ.

  58.  A finding as to whether the conduct of  the  appellant  represents  a
      genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat  is  a  prerequisite
      for the adoption of an expulsion measure and it is only  upon  such  a
      threat being established, that the issue of proportionality  arises  (
      see grounds relating to rehabilitation). Here, the judge concluded  at
      paragraphs [69-70]that there was insufficient evidence before  him  to
      conclude that  the  appellant  presents  a  genuine  and  sufficiently
      serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.
      In view of the FtTJ's assessment, he  was  not  required  to  consider
      Article 8 of the ECHR  and  therefore  the  submissions  made  by  the
      respondent in relation to Article 8 have no relevance.

  59. I remind myself I can only interfere with the decision of a  judge  if
      it has been demonstrated that there was an error of law  and  in  this
      case, the judge had the opportunity to hear the oral evidence  of  the
      Appellant and for this to be the subject of cross-examination.

  60. As set out in the well-known case of Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] UKHL
      27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

            "...the appellate court must bear in mind the  advantage  which
            the first instance judge had in  seeing  the  parties  and  the
            other witnesses.  This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
            credibility and findings of primary fact. But it  goes  further
            than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation  of  those
            facts. ..."

     Then there is a quotation from his own decision in Biogen Inc v  Medeva
Ltd [1997]

            "The need for appellate caution in reversing the trial  judge's
            evaluation of the facts is based upon much more  solid  grounds
            than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings  of
            fact, even by the most  meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
            incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon  him
            by the primary evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always
            surrounded  by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
            relative weight, minor qualification and nuance  ...  of  which
            time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may
            play an important part in the judge's overall evaluation."

  61. As stated in the  decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an
      evaluative exercise of this kind may admit of more  than  one  answer.
      If so, provided all the  appropriate  factors  have  been  taken  into
      account, the decision cannot be impugned  unless  it  is  perverse  or
      irrational, in a sense of falling outside  the  range  of  permissible
      decisions.  It has not been advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State that the decision of the judge or  his  findings  of  fact  were
      either irrational or perverse and in light of the foregoing, the judge
      properly considered the appropriate factors and made findings of  fact
      based on the evidence before him. It may well be that this was not the
      only outcome possible on the facts in this particular appeal  but  the
      FtTJ directed himself correctly in law and that his  conclusion,  even
      if properly characterised as  one  that  might  be  thought  to  be  a
      generous one, does not disclose any legal error.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    allow the appeal stands.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated: 21 September 2020

