
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00616/2015
                                                               IA/24690/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 March 2018                      |On 17 April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 ROLAND [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs [L]
For the Respondent:    Mr R Dunlop, counsel instructed by the Government
Legal Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is the decision of the Tribunal.  We conclude that the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") made an error of law in  its  decision  dismissing
    the appeals against the decisions refusing an EEA  Residence  Card  and
    refusing a human rights  claim.   In  summary,  we  consider  that  the
    appellant was not given an effective  hearing  of  his  appeals  having
    regard to the principles that we now know  from  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in R (Kiarie and Byndloss) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 42 and accordingly we remit the case to the
    FtT for its reconsideration.  Our reasons are as follows.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania, where he was born on [ ]  1982.
    He first came to the United Kingdom on 14 April 2000 and claimed asylum
    which was rejected.  He unsuccessfully appealed.  On  6  July  2002  he
    married a British citizen.  However, on 27 November 2003 he was removed
    to Kosovo.  With entry clearance as a spouse the  appellant  re-entered
    the United Kingdom on 1 January 2004.  In 2007  he  began  his  current
    relationship with Ms [S], a Polish national who  had  arrived  here  in
    2006.

 3. On 28 March 2008 he was granted indefinite leave to remain based on his
    previous marriage to the British citizen.  That marriage was  dissolved
    on 28 April 2010.  Some two and a half years later on 10 August 2012 he
    was convicted on a count of conspiracy to supply Class A drugs.  He was
    sentenced to five years and four months' imprisonment.  On 20  November
    2012 the appellant was served with notice of liability to  deportation.
    After he applied for the Facilitated Return Scheme in  July  2013,  the
    Secretary of State issued a deportation order  on  13  September  2013.
    The appellant  changed  his  mind.   He  no  longer  wished  to  return
    voluntarily and made various  representations  against  deportation  in
    which he relied on Article 8.  He also applied  for  an  EEA  residence
    card on 1 February 2015 on the basis of his relationship with  Ms  [S].
    That application was refused by the Secretary of State by letter  dated
    11 June 2015.  Pursuant to regulation 26 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  Regulations"),  the  appellant
    lodged an appeal against the decision to the FtT on grounds  under  the
    Regulations and human rights grounds.

 4. Whilst this appeal was pending, on 13 November 2015  the  Secretary  of
    State made a deportation order  against  the  appellant  as  a  foreign
    criminal as defined by section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.   On  24
    November 2015 she also refused the appellant's human rights claim.   In
    addition, the Secretary of State certified the claim under section  94B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the  basis  that
    removal prior to the hearing of the appeal would not breach  his  human
    rights.   This  resulted  in  the  appellant  being  constrained   from
    appealing the refusal of his Human Rights claim whilst in the UK.

 5. On 15 December 2015 a  judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  exercising  its
    judicial review jurisdiction refused  an  application  for  a  stay  on
    removal.  The application  for  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
    proceedings was also refused and the claim  was  certified  as  totally
    without merit; as a result the appellant had only a right of appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal.  The  appellant  was  removed  to  Albania  on  15
    December 2015.

 6. An appeal against the decisions under  the  Regulations  and  on  Human
    Rights grounds was brought on 21 December 2015 on the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had failed to apply the  Regulations  correctly  and
    under Article 8 with reference to private and family  life  established
    in the United Kingdom.

 7. The appellant and Ms [S] married on 30 March 2016 in Albania and  later
    that year their son T was born in the United Kingdom.

 8. Earlier on 19 May 2016, the Secretary of State provided a supplementary
    letter in addition to the reasons given for the  deportation  order  in
    advance of these appeals being heard in May 2016.   As  matters  turned
    out, they were not heard until 24 January 2017.

 9. The  appellant  was  represented  at  the  hearing  by  Counsel  and  a
    Presenting Officer appeared on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   The
    judge heard evidence from Mrs  [L]  and  a  family  friend.   A  signed
    statement was provided on behalf of the appellant.

10. The judge made the following  findings  as  set  out  in  [77]  of  his
    decision:

    (i)  Mrs [L] has had permanent rights of residence since October 2011.

    (ii) The appellant is a family  member  and  regulation  21(3)  of  the
         Regulations applies.  As a  consequence  the  respondent  "may  not
         deport" the appellant unless there are serious  grounds  of  public
         policy or security.

    (iii)    It is in T's best interests that he continue to live with  his
         mother whilst developing a relationship with his father  being  the
         circumstances into which he was born.  T has  not  lived  with  his
         father.

    (iv) The appellant had  sought  to  diminish  his  involvement  in  the
         "serious and well-organised drugs ring" that operated  in  Norwich.
         The judge observed:-

             "This diminution of his role leads me  to  conclude  that  the
             appellant has not been truthful in his witness  statement  (or
             to others) and that he presents a genuine, present and serious
             threat to society by repeating his  association  with  serious
             organised  crime  in  the  Albanian  community.   Whilst   his
             marriage (and parenthood) could act as a benign influence upon
             him, I find  that  it  is  unlikely,  given  that  his  stable
             relationship with Mrs [L] over many years  failed  to  prevent
             his criminal activities previously."

    (v)  The judge observed that although the  appellant  had  no  previous
         convictions, the offences of which he had been convicted were not a
         one-off event as the activities had  been  continuing  for  several
         months under police surveillance.

    (vi) There was no reason to conclude that the appellant's prospects for
         rehabilitation were prejudiced by being deported to  Albania  where
         he resides with his parents and where "as  a  healthy,  resourceful
         and educated English speaker, he is likely to have advantage  as  a
         job-seeker over his compatriots".

    (vii)    It was proportionate to deport the appellant to Albania on the
         basis of serious grounds of public policy.

11. The judge turned to Article 8 and considered the case under Part 5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He found  that  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those in Exceptions 1 and 2  to
    paragraph 117C did  not  exist  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.  And thus the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

12. In a rule 24 response dated 5 September 2017 the  point  is  made  that
    there was nothing in the papers or the decision of the FtT which  would
    suggest that the appellant  had  made  any  request  to  give  evidence
    electronically, that he wished to appear to give evidence or even argue
    that his non-attendance  before  the  Tribunal  was  prejudicial.   The
    appellant was professionally represented and chose not  to  pursue  any
    remedy.

13. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed application to the  Upper
    Tribunal on grounds that may be summarised as follows:-

         Ground 1:  The proceedings were unfair by reference to the decision
         R (on the application of Kiarie) v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  42.   It  is
         argued that the appellant was "entirely prejudiced by  his  absence
         from  the  hearing  and  inability  to  attend  in  terms  of   his
         credibility and inability to give live evidence, the difficulty his
         professional advisers had in taking instructions, both  before  and
         during the hearing, and his inability to gain expert reports".

         Ground 2:  The First-tier Tribunal had failed to  consider  Article
         24(3) of the EU Charter of Fundamental  Rights.   No  findings  had
         been made as to  whether  this  right  would  be  breached  by  the
         appellant's deportation or whether the test of undue  harshness  is
         modified by the fundamental right.

         Ground 3:  The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  consider
         whether the deportation of the appellant would impact on his wife's
         free movement rights.

         Grounds 4 and 5:  The First-tier Tribunal erred in that  there  was
         no evidence the appellant had repeated his association with serious
         organised crime in the Albanian community and had failed to  assess
         the risk of re-offending ex nunc.  As to rehabilitation the  First-
         tier Tribunal had failed to  materially  consider  the  matters  in
         place in the United Kingdom that would assist his rehabilitation.

14. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith  explained
    that she did so principally on the first ground.    She  observed  that
    the other grounds were weaker noting that the rights of a  child  under
    Article 24(3)  were  not  absolute  and  if  deportation  is  otherwise
    justified under EU law neither that nor the partner's  rights  to  free
    movement could outweigh the result.  Permission was not however refused
    on any of the grounds.

15. There was no cross-appeal by the Secretary of  State  although  it  was
    submitted at the hearing that the FtT had applied the wrong test  under
    regulation 21; the appellant was not entitled to recognition as  having
    a permanent right of residence and  so  the  base  level  threshold  of
    assessment applied rather than "serious grounds".

The Hearing

16. The appellant's solicitors withdrew prior to the hearing due to funding
    difficulties.  Mrs [L] spoke on behalf of the appellant  and  responded
    in detail  to  Mr  Dunlop's  skeleton  argument  and  his  submissions.
    Although the focus in this case was on the first ground, we  encouraged
    him to address us on all grounds so that Mrs [L]  had  the  benefit  of
    understanding the Secretary of State's position on each aspect  of  the
    challenge.

17. Mrs [L] explained that her husband's solicitors  had  advised  that  in
    order for him to be here for the hearing he should apply for  temporary
    admission.  They were unable to afford the fee for  this  having  spent
    funds on the application for judicial review.  The  submissions  by  Mr
    Dunlop were the first time that  she  had  heard  such  an  option  was
    available and even had she been aware of this possibility  there  would
    have been a problem meeting the cost.

    Ground 1

18. Essentially Mr Dunlop maintained the position  taken  in  the  rule  24
    response and argued that the matter  at  stake  was  one  of  fairness.
    Common law fairness did not apply in respect of something that had  not
    been sought.  Mr Dunlop considered that the appellant who  was  legally
    represented had waived the right to  participate  in  the  hearing  via
    video link.  His skeleton argument identifies two options open  to  the
    appellant; the first being that he could have applied  to  the  FtT  to
    give live  evidence  or  he  could  have  brought  a  Judicial  Review.
    Understandably Mr Dunlop accepted in the light of the evidence produced
    by Mrs [L] that the latter option had been exercised.

19. Reliance was placed on two decisions. The first is R (Thompson)  v  the
    Law Society [2004] EWCA  Civ  167.   This  concerned  a  solicitor  who
    challenged the finding of a committee and  adjudication  panel  on  the
    basis that he had not been afforded  an  oral  hearing  in  respect  of
    complaints over his professional conduct.  The court was satisfied that
    if the solicitor had thought at the time of the proceedings against him
    that an oral hearing was desirable or if he had  wanted  to  give  oral
    evidence or  to  cross-examine  the  complainant  he  would  have  been
    permitted to do so.  He did not however and, as observed by  Clarke  LJ
    at [47],

         "I cannot at  the  moment  think  of  a  circumstance  in  which  a
         solicitor  who  did  not  ask  for  an  oral  hearing  before   the
         Adjudicator or appeal panel could complain that no oral hearing was
         held.  In my judgement, the claimant's failure to ask for  an  oral
         hearing ... is fatal to his argument at common law."

20. Mr Dunlop argued that  the  same  principles  of  common  law  fairness
    applied to Convention matters and he referred us to the decision of the
    European Court of Human  Rights  in  the  case  of  Schuler-Zgraggen  v
    Switzerland (Application No. 14518/89).   In  this  case  the  claimant
    challenged the decision of the Invalidity  Insurance  Board  which  had
    cancelled a pension the applicant had been previously  awarded  on  the
    grounds of incapacity for work.  Her complaint was that there had  been
    no hearing before the Federal Insurance Court.

21. The Strasbourg Court observed at [58]:-

         "58. The court  reiterates  that  the  public  character  of  court
             hearings constitutes  a  fundamental  principle  enshrined  in
             paragraph 1 of Article 6.  Admittedly, neither the  letter  or
             the spirit of this provision prevents a person from waiving of
             his  own  free  will,  either  expressly   or   tacitly,   the
             entitlement to have his case heard in  public,  but  any  such
             waiver must be made in an unequivocal manner and must not  run
             counter to any important public interest ...

             In the instant case the Federal  Insurance  Court's  Rules  of
             Procedure provided in express terms for the possibility  of  a
             hearing "on an application by one of the parties  or  of  [the
             presiding judge's] own motion." ...   As  the  proceedings  in
             that court generally take place without a public hearing,  Mrs
             Schuler-Zgraggen could be expected to apply  for  one  if  she
             attached importance to it.  She did not do  so,  however.   It
             may reasonably be considered therefore that she  unequivocally
             waived her right to a public hearing in the Federal  Insurance
             Court."

22. Mr Dunlop accepted that  the  position  might  be  different  where  an
    appellant was unrepresented which might require a tribunal  to  take  a
    more proactive approach or where there was no possibility of  obtaining
    a video link.  But such a link as shown in a Country Guidance case, was
    available between Albania and the  United  Kingdom  and  there  was  no
    obligation on a tribunal to probe why an available option had not  been
    taken.  Answering the questions set out in AJ, the appellant had  legal
    representation at all times and there was no evidence that  there  were
    reports required in addition to the OASys report that had  been  before
    the FtT.  The fact of the appellant's representation answered the third
    question and had  it  been  considered  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    necessary, his representatives should have  asked  for  a  video  link.
    This meant the fourth  question  was  not  reached  and  in  any  event
    fairness did not require the Secretary of State to offer to pay.

23. Whilst we accept that Mr  Dunlop  was  correct  as  to  the  first  two
    questions, his response to the third overlooks the fact that there  was
    a dispute as to a significant issue which is the extent  to  which  the
    appellant represented a future risk. The appellant's case was  that  he
    had reformed and had  not  committed  further  crimes.  The  judge  was
    concerned that the appellant's account of his criminal  activities  was
    at odds with the sentencing remarks and found that  the  appellant  had
    not been truthful to himself. He concluded at [77]

         "77. Drawing all the above together, I find the following:

             ...

             (4)  The Appellant was, according to  the  judge,  part  of  a
                  serious and well-organised drugs ring which,  had  it  not
                  been stopped, would  no  doubt  have  continued  to  bring
                  misery to the general public.  Their activities  had  been
                  covertly investigated over a number of months and was  not
                  a one-off  event.   The  Appellant  received  the  longest
                  sentence of the five defendants, of equal  length  to  the
                  person he names as  his  supplier.   The  Judge  expressly
                  sentenced him as a person who  had  played  a  significant
                  role in a conspiracy to deal in drugs  over  a  period  of
                  several months and that it was serious and well-organised.
                   The Appellant's own account of his activities as recorded
                  in his own  witness  statement  ("a  small  time  provider
                  supplying some drugs to seven or eight people") cannot  be
                  accurate in view of the Judge's remarks and  the  sentence
                  he imposed.  That diminished account  of  the  Appellant's
                  involvement is, however, to be found in the OASys  report;
                  and in the interviews given while in prison;  and  in  the
                  versions given by Mrs [L] and  Mr  Chesterfield.   I  find
                  that it has informed each  of  their  assessments  of  the
                  Appellant  as  being  a  low  risk  of  reoffending.   The
                  reality, in my view, is that the Appellant has  sought  to
                  diminish  his  involvement  in  this  "serious  and  well-
                  organised drugs ring."  This diminution of his role  leads
                  me to conclude that the Appellant has not been truthful in
                  his witness statement (or to others) and that he  presents
                  a genuine,  present  and  serious  threat  to  society  by
                  repeating his association with serious, organised crime in
                  the  Albanian  community.   Whilst   his   marriage   (and
                  parenthood) could act as a benign influence  upon  him,  I
                  find  that  it  is  unlikely,  given   that   his   stable
                  relationship with  Mrs  [L]  over  many  years  failed  to
                  prevent his criminal activities previously."

24. Diverging from the issues on which permission has been granted, we  are
    satisfied that Mr Dunlop was correct in his submission that  the  judge
    had applied the wrong criteria.  The judge found at [59]  that  as  Mrs
    [L] was entitled to permanent residence, the appellant "as  her  spouse
    and family member [was] also entitled, subject  to  the  provisions  on
    regulations 19 and 21".  This conclusion resulted in  the  second  tier
    level of protection against removal, i.e.  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or security being engaged.  In our  view,  whilst  there  is  no
    doubt that Mrs [L] was entitled to recognition as a permanent  resident
    from October 2011, it did not automatically follow that any  subsequent
    spouse would enjoy the same status.  Regulation 15 provides:

         "Permanent right of residence

         15. (1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
               the United Kingdom permanently-

               (a)    an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                    in accordance with these Regulations  for  a  continuous
                    period of five years;

               (b)    a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                    an EEA national  but  who  has  resided  in  the  United
                    Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance  with  these
                    Regulations for a continuous period of five years;

               (c)    a worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                    activity;

               (d)    the family member of a worker or self-employed person
                    who has ceased activity;

               (e)    a person who was the family member  of  a  worker  or
                    self-employed person where-

                    (i)    the worker or self-employed person has died;

                    (ii)   the family member resided  with  him  immediately
                        before his death; and

                    (iii)  the worker or self-employed  person  had  resided
                        continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  the
                        two years immediately before his death or the  death
                        was  the  result  of  an  accident  at  work  or  an
                        occupational disease;

               (f)    a person who-

                    (i)    has resided in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                        with these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of
                        five years; and

                    (ii)   was, at the end of that period, a  family  member
                        who has retained the right of residence.

           (2)    Once acquired, the right  of  permanent  residence  under
               this regulation shall be lost only through absence from  the
               United Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

           (3)    But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)."

25. Mr Dunlop advanced an alternative basis for undermining the  status  of
    the appellant by reference to regulation 7:

         "Family member

         7.   (1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
               Regulations the following persons shall be  treated  as  the
               family members of another person-

               (a)    his spouse or his civil partner;

               (b)    direct descendants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil
                    partner who are-

                    (i)    under 21; or

                    (ii)   dependants  of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
                        partner;

               (c)    dependent direct relatives in his ascending  line  or
                    that of his spouse or his civil partner;

               (d)    a person who is to be treated as the family member of
                    that other person under paragraph (3).

           (2)    A person shall not be treated under paragraph  (1)(b)  or
               (c) as the family member of a student residing in the United
               Kingdom after the period of three months  beginning  on  the
               date on which the student is admitted to the United  Kingdom
               unless-

               (a)    in the case of  paragraph  (b),  the  person  is  the
                    dependent child of the student or of his spouse or civil
                    partner; or

               (b)    the student  also  falls  within  one  of  the  other
                    categories of qualified persons mentioned in  regulation
                    6(1).

           (3)    Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended
               family member and has been issued with an EEA family permit,
               a registration certificate or  a  residence  card  shall  be
               treated as the family member of the  relevant  EEA  national
               for as long as he continues to  satisfy  the  conditions  in
               regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in  relation  to  that  EEA
               national and the permit, certificate or card has not  ceased
               to be valid or been revoked.

           (4)    Where  the  relevant  EEA  national  is  a  student,  the
               extended family member shall only be treated as  the  family
               member of that national under paragraph (3)  if  either  the
               EEA family permit was issued  under  regulation  12(2),  the
               registration certificate was issued under  regulation  16(5)
               or the residence card was issued under regulation 17(4)."

26. It was argued by Mr Dunlop that  as  an  extended  family  member,  the
    appellant needed the issue of  a  family  permit  before  he  could  be
    treated as a family member.  This overlooks para 7(1).   The  appellant
    became a family member  on  marriage  and  the  alternative  route  via
    extended family member status was not relevant.  We are conscious  that
    the challenge to the correctness of the judge's self-direction was  not
    a ground of appeal and Mrs [L] does not currently have the advantage of
    legal  representation.   The  law,   however,   is   clear   and   when
    reconsidering the decision, the FtT  will  need  to  be  aware  of  the
    correct test to be applied.  The less demanding standard to be  applied
    means that the risk assessment under para 21 will require  an  analysis
    for which the appellant's evidence may well  be  particularly  crucial.
    Put  another  way,  the  length  of  the  sentence  combined  with  the
    sentencing judge's comments will make it all the more difficult for the
    appellant to clear the hurdle of  the  base  level  test.   We  do  not
    express a view ourselves as to the outcome; our focus at this stage  is
    on the ground of challenge  which  is  whether  the  appellant  had  an
    effective and fair hearing.

27. Consideration of the issue of waiver requires in  the  first  place  an
    examination of what it is being relinquished.  The two  cases  referred
    to by Mr Dunlop had the common feature of a codified right  that  could
    have been exercised.  Paragraph 1(4) of the FtT Rules includes  in  its
    definitions of hearing the possibility  of  a  video  link.   Paragraph
    14(1)(e) provides a power to direct the manner of "a  hearing".   These
    provisions were examined in Kiarie v SSHD; R (Byndloss) v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 42; [2017] 1 WLR 2380 together with the decision in  SSHD  v  Nare
    [2011] UKUT 443:

         "69. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Nare  [2011]
             UKUT 443 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal (Mr  CMG  Ockelton  VP,  UTJ
             Grubb  and  IJ  Holmes),  in  the  course  of  considering  an
             allegation that a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  too
             readily allowed a witness to give evidence by telephone,  gave
             guidance  as  to  how  the  tribunal   should   approach   any
             application  for  a  direction  that  evidence  be  given   by
             electronic link. At that time the rules specifically  provided
             for such a direction to be  given;  now,  by  rules  1(4)  and
             14(1)(e) of the 2014 Rules, provision for it is encompassed in
             the definition of a "hearing",  together  with  the  power  to
             direct "the manner in which any evidence or submissions are to
             be provided [including]  orally  at  a  hearing".   The  Upper
             Tribunal prefaced its guidance by observing at  para  17  that
             departure from the usual model of oral evidence given directly
             in the courtroom was likely to reduce the quality of  evidence
             and the ability both of the parties to  test  it  and  of  the
             judge to assess it.  Its guidance, given in para 21, included:

             (a)  that the application should be made and  determined  well
                  before the substantive hearing;

             (b)  that the application should not only explain  the  reason
                  for evidence to  be  given  on  screen  and  indicate  the
                  arrangements provisionally made at the  distant  site  but
                  also include an undertaking  to  be  responsible  for  any
                  expenses incurred;

             (c)  that, were the evidence to  be  given  from  abroad,  the
                  applicant should be able to inform the tribunal  that  the
                  foreign  state  raised  no  objection  to  the  giving  of
                  evidence to a UK tribunal from within its jurisdiction;

             (d)  that the  applicant  should  satisfy  the  tribunal  that
                  events at the distant site were, so  far  as  practicable,
                  within its observation  and  control,  that  the  evidence
                  would be given there in formal surroundings and be subject
                  to control by appropriate officials and that nothing could
                  happen off camera which might cast doubt on the  integrity
                  of the evidence; and

             (e)  that a British Embassy or High Commission might  be  able
                  to provide suitable facilities."

28. As to the mechanics and effectiveness of exercising the option that was
    available to the appellant, the observations of  Lord  Wilson  at  [73]
    need to be borne in mind:

         "73. It is already clear  however  that  the  cost  of  hiring  the
             necessary equipment for use at the distant end of any evidence
             given by video link or Skype is only part of the cost which an
             appellant must bear. He must also bear the cost  of  providing
             the equipment for use at the hearing centre and  he  may  well
             have to pay for the attendance beside him of someone able  and
             willing to exercise the degree  of  control  required  by  the
             tribunal. Apart, however, from  having  to  meet  the  overall
             costs of giving evidence in that  way,  an  appellant  has  to
             confront formidable  technical  and  logistical  difficulties.
             Powerful evidence is given by the appellants'  solicitors  and
             other legal specialists in the field to the effect that:

             (a)  it can be a slow  and  tortuous  process  to  obtain  the
                  consent of the foreign state for evidence to be given from
                  within its jurisdiction;

             (b)  it can be difficult to achieve compatibility between  the
                  system adopted at the distant end and the system installed
                  at the hearing centre, with the  result  that  a  bridging
                  service sometimes needs to be engaged and funded;

             (c)  it can be difficult to alight upon a time for the link to
                  begin and end which is both acceptable to the tribunal and
                  practicable at the distant end in the light of the time
                  difference; and

             (d)  if, as is not uncommon, the link fails during the hearing
                  and cannot then and there be restored,  the  tribunal  can
                  prove reluctant to grant an adjournment to another date."

29. We are aware that cost would have been an  inhibiting  factor  for  the
    appellant and even if that could be overcome,  in  our  view,  had  the
    option of video linking been pursued, without greater assurance  as  to
    the effectiveness of any link, there are real doubts that it would have
    reliably resulted in a fair hearing of the issues.  We do not  consider
    this case can be resolved simply  by  regarding  the  decision  not  to
    request a video link as a waiver of an  opportunity  that  existed.  It
    will only be where an appellant is invited to give  evidence  by  video
    link that meets the criteria in Kiarie and Byndloss but elects  not  to
    do so that he or she can be regarded as having waived the  opportunity.
    Such an invitation will most likely arise in the situation described by
    the Tribunal in AJ v SSHD (HU/03027/2015),

         "51. The third question  is  whether,  in  all  the  circumstances,
             hearing live evidence from the appellant is necessary.  As  we
             have observed, for the effect of  Lord  Wilson's  judgment  is
             that in many if not most cases  a  fair  hearing  cannot  take
             place unless the appellant is heard in person.  The First-tier
             Tribunal will need to consider whether there are any  disputed
             findings of fact.  If there are not, then  live  evidence  may
             not be necessary.  Lord Wilson's judgment  however,  makes  it
             clear that, even if hard-edged facts are  not  in  dispute,  a
             judicial fact-finder in this area may nevertheless be properly
             swayed by seeing and hearing the appellant.  For this  reason,
             we consider that, in section 94B  cases,  the  need  for  live
             evidence is likely to be present.  A possible exception  might
             be  where  the  respondent's  stance  is  that,  even  if  the
             appellant's case is taken at its highest,  so  far  as  family
             relationships,  remorse  and  risk  of  re-offending   ,   are
             concerned, the public interest is still such as  to  make  the
             appellant's deportation a proportionate interference with  the
             Article 8 rights of  all  concerned.   It  is,  perhaps,  more
             difficult to see how the respondent could adopt such a  stance
             where the appellant is not  a  foreign  criminal,  unless  his
             immigration history is particularly problematic."

30. The difficulties that  the  appellant  faced  find  parallel  to  those
    identified in Kiarie and Byndloss at [61]:

         "61. The next question is whether, if he is to stand any worthwhile
             chance of winning his appeal, an appellant needs to give  oral
             evidence to the tribunal and to respond to whatever  is  there
             said on behalf of the  Home  Secretary  and  by  the  tribunal
             itself.  By definition, he has a bad criminal record.  One  of
             his contentions will surely have to be that he is  a  reformed
             character.  To that  contention  the  tribunal  will  bring  a
             healthy scepticism to bear.  He needs to surmount it.  I  have
             grave doubts as to whether he can  ordinarily  do  so  without
             giving oral evidence to the tribunal.  In a witness  statement
             he may or may not be able to express  to  best  advantage  his
             resolution to  forsake  his  criminal  past.   In  any  event,
             however, I cannot imagine that, on its own, the statement will
             generally cut much ice with  the  tribunal.   Apart  from  the
             assistance that it might gain from  expert  evidence  on  that
             point (see para 74 below), the tribunal will want to hear  how
             he explains himself orally and, in particular,  will  want  to
             assess whether he can survive cross-examination in relation to
             it.  Another strand of his case is likely to be the quality of
             his relationship with others living in the UK,  in  particular
             with any child, partner or  other  family  member.   The  Home
             Secretary contends that, at least in this respect, it  is  the
             evidence of the adult family members which  will  most  assist
             the tribunal.  But I am unpersuaded  that  the  tribunal  will
             usually be able properly to  conduct  the  assessment  without
             oral evidence from the appellant whose relationships are under
             scrutiny; and the evidence of the  adult  family  members  may
             either leave gaps which  he  would  need  to  fill  or  betray
             perceived errors which he would seek to correct."

    In our view the FtT failed to ask itself  what  we  now  know  that  it
    should have.  It was required to deal with a tension between the nature
    and facts of the offending and the position taken by the  appellant  in
    his witness statement.  The tribunal should have asked whether  hearing
    live from the appellant might make a difference.  In  not  asking  that
    question we consider the Tribunal materially erred.

    Ground 2

31. Article 24 was not raised as a ground of challenge  in  either  of  the
    appeals, which is understandable as the couple's  child  had  not  been
    born.  It was however raised by the appellant's Counsel in her skeleton
    argument dated 23 January 2016.  Reference is made to the child  having
    a freestanding fundamental right with reference to Abdul (Section 55  -
    Article 24(3) Charter) [2016] UKUT  106  (IAC)  with  the  accompanying
    submission that this provision impact on the unduly harsh test  in  the
    case as the child's fundamental right would arguably be breached if the
    appellant is removed.  The argument recognises that with  reference  to
    MM (Uganda) & Anor v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450 the unduly harsh test  is
    not an objective one but operates on a sliding scale.  With criminality
    being at "the low end of the scale", although  the  seriousness  of  an
    offence can impact on the unduly harsh test, the fundamental rights  of
    a child can, and should modify the same test.

32. Reliance is placed on an extract from the judgment of Laws LJ in MM  at
    [24] -[26]:-

         "24.  This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the public interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.   Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   "unduly   harsh"
             provisions  from  their  context.   It  would  mean  that  the
             question of undue hardship would  be  decided  wholly  without
             regard to the force of the public interest in  deportation  in
             the particular case.  But in that case the  term  "unduly"  is
             mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history.

         25.  The issue is not advanced with respect either by the terms  of
             the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance   in   the   Immigration
             Directorate Instructions or the learning on  the  use  of  the
             term "unduly harsh" in  the  context  of  internal  relocation
             issues arising in refugee law.  The IDIs are not a  source  of
             law and the asylum context of internal  relocation  issues  is
             far removed from that of Rules 398 to 399.  In fact  authority
             in the asylum field emphasises the importance of context  (see
             Januzi [2006] 2 AC 426 per Lord Bingham at paragraph 21).

         26.  For all these reasons in my judgement MAB was wrongly  decided
             by the Tribunal.  The expression  "unduly  harsh"  in  section
             117C(5) and Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to be  had  to
             all the circumstances including the criminal's immigration and
             criminal history."

    The skeleton analyses the position on this basis:

         "It is submitted that as the extent of  offending  impacts  on  the
         "unduly harsh" test, arguably  the  converse  will  also  be  true.
         Namely, the personal characteristics of the child may impact on the
         unduly harsh test, such as disability, age, quality of relationship
         with  the  offender,  these  are  arguably  material  and  relevant
         circumstances.  The best interests of the child will apply  to  all
         children in an  immigration  context,  however,  it  will  only  be
         European citizens whose  additional  rights  are  protected  and/or
         enhanced by the Charter.  It is averred that a potential breach  of
         Mr  [L]'s  son's  fundamental  rights  equally   are   a   relevant
         consideration, which will shift the scale to protect his interests.
          It is not just the relationship with his father which is  at  risk
         in the present case, but also his life chances due to the financial
         support his father will provide as compared to the relatively small
         sum that he can currently afford.  Additionally, due to  his  son's
         age, he would not be able to foster  and  maintain  a  relationship
         using modern means of communication.

         Alternatively, it is averred that Mr [L]'s son's fundamental  right
         and it's potential breach amounts to very compelling  circumstances
         (rule 398)."

33. We are puzzled by the reference to paragraph 398 since the  appellant's
    circumstances were to be considered with reference to the provisions in
    regulation 21(5).  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  address  the
    Charter  but  instead  approached  the  case  under  Article  8  having
    concluded that it was proportionate for the appellant to be deported to
    Albania on the basis of serious grounds  of  public  policy  under  the
    Regulations.  It would surprise us if an appellant is able  to  succeed
    on Article 8 grounds where he or she does not win under the Regulations
    as it appears to us there is no factor that Article 8  requires  to  be
    considered which is not encompassed by  the  principles  in  regulation
    21(5).

34. Mr Dunlop's skeleton argument considers that it was unnecessary for the
    First-tier Tribunal to say anything more about  Article  24(3)  on  the
    basis that there was no obligation on the FtT to reach a concluded view
    on whether Mrs [L] and the child would relocate to Albania to join  the
    appellant.  Deportation would prevent the appellant from having contact
    with the child.  The Tribunal did all that was required  by  evaluating
    the impact on the  child  in  either  eventuality  and  had  reached  a
    conclusion open to it that deportation would not be  unduly  harsh  for
    the reasons given.  Article 24(3) adds nothing  to  Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention in the light of its status as a qualified right
    with reference to Article 52 of the Charter which may be limited  where
    it is proportionate to do so.

35. Articles 24 and 52 are in the following terms:-

         "Article 24 - The rights of the child

         1.   Children shall have the right to such protection and  care  as
             is necessary for their well-being.   They  may  express  their
             views freely.  Such views shall be taken into consideration on
             matters which concern them in accordance with  their  age  and
             maturity.

         2.   In all actions relating to children, whether taken  by  public
             authorities  or  private  institutions,   the   child's   best
             interests must be a primary consideration.

         3.   Every child shall have the right  to  maintain  on  a  regular
             basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both his
             or her  parents,  unless  that  is  contrary  to  his  or  her
             interests.

         Article 52 - Scope and interpretation of rights and principles

         1.   Any limitation on the exercise  of  the  rights  and  freedoms
             recognised by this Charter must be provided  for  by  law  and
             respect the essence of those rights and freedoms.  Subject  to
             the principle of proportionality, limitations may be made only
             if they are necessary and genuinely meet objectives of general
             interest recognised by the Union or the need  to  protect  the
             rights and freedoms of others.

         2.   Rights recognised by this Charter for which provision is  made
             in the Treaties shall be exercised under  the  conditions  and
             within the limits defined by those Treaties.

         3.   In so far as this Charter contains rights which correspond  to
             rights guaranteed by the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of
             Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the meaning  and  scope
             of those rights shall be the same as those laid  down  by  the
             said Convention.  This provision shall not prevent  Union  law
             providing more extensive protection.

         4.   In so far as this Charter  recognises  fundamental  rights  as
             they result from the constitutional traditions common  to  the
             Member States, those rights shall be  interpreted  in  harmony
             with those traditions.

         5.   The provisions of this Charter which contain principles may be
             implemented  by  legislative  and  executive  acts  taken   by
             institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the  Union,  and
             by acts of Member States when they are implementing Union law,
             in the exercise of their respective  powers.   They  shall  be
             judicially cognisable only in the interpretation of such  acts
             and in the ruling on their legality.

         6.   Full account shall be taken of national laws and practices  as
             specified in this Charter.

         7.   The explanation drawn up as a way of providing guidance in the
             interpretation of this Charter shall be given  due  regard  by
             the courts of the Union and of the Member States."

36. The Upper Tribunal gave guidance in Abdul (Section 55 -  Article  24(3)
    Charter) [2016] UKUT 106 (IAC) on Article 24(3) in these terms:

         "30. I am of the opinion that Article 24(3) creates a free standing
             right.  It may,  of  course,  be  viewed  as  the  unequivocal
             articulation of a concrete "best interests" right and, on this
             analysis, is a development, or elaboration, of Article  24(2).
             Furthermore, given  the  exception  formulated  in  the  final
             clause of Article 24(3),  the  nexus  with  Article  24(2)  is
             unmistakable.  However, I consider it clear that Article 24(3)
             was designed to create a discrete right, an analysis which  is
             harmonious with general principles of EU law.   These  include
             the well known principle that every part of a  measure  of  EU
             law is presumed to have a separate and individual  effect  and
             impact.  Article 24(3) may also be viewed through the prism of
             the principle that where one has an amalgam  of  specific  and
             general provisions, the former should normally  be  considered
             in advance  of  the  latter.   This  construction  is  further
             fortified by the Commentary  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
             Rights of the European Union (published by the EU  Network  of
             Independent Experts on Fundamental Rights), at p207:

                  "... Children are no longer considered as mere  recipients
                  of services or beneficiaries of  protective  measures  but
                  rather as  rights  holders  and  participants  in  actions
                  affecting them.""

37. We draw in particular from this the point  that  Article  24(3)  is  an
    articulation of the "best  interests",  right  which  is  set  out  and
    codified in section 55 in the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009.  The duty regarding the welfare of children has been  subject  to
    continuous judicial scrutiny since the inception of section 55 and does
    not need repeating here.   It  is  sufficient  to  summarise  the  best
    interests as being a primary although not the primary consideration  in
    any case that impacts upon the welfare of children.  The focus in  this
    appeal is on Article 24(3) which sets out the right to  maintain  on  a
    regular basis a personal relationship and direct contact with  parents.
    Article 52 deals with limitations on the exercise  of  the  rights  and
    freedoms recognised by the Charter.  Such limitations may only be  made
    "if they  are  necessary  and  genuinely  meet  objectives  of  general
    interest recognised by the Union or the need to protect the rights  and
    freedoms of others".  Regulation 21(5) is  concerned  with  those  very
    matters and we are not persuaded that in substance Article  24(3)  adds
    additional criteria to those to be taken into account in  decisions  on
    public policy, public security and public health grounds.

38. The FtT addressed the child's best interests at [76] as follows:

         "76. I turn next to the Appellant's son, born on 5 August 2016,  so
             aged 5 months at the date of the hearing.  He  was  born  some
             eight months after the Appellant was removed to Albania.   The
             son has, therefore, only ever lived with his  mother  and  has
             only seen his father for, at most, six weeks in total.  In  so
             far as it has been possible in such restricted  circumstances,
             the Appellant has bonded with his son and it is trite  to  say
             that it would ideally be in the child's best interest to  live
             with both his parents if possible.  That need not  necessarily
             be in the UK although this  is  where  his  mother  wishes  to
             exercise her treaty rights.  The child was conceived and  born
             at a time when his parents were both aware  that  there  is  a
             risk that the Appellant might not be able to live with him  in
             the UK.  I find, therefore, that his  parents  took  the  view
             that, if necessary, they would all live together and bring  up
             their child outside the UK; or that he  would  live  with  his
             mother but visit his father and develop  a  relationship  with
             him by other means as he grew older.  Having found that  there
             is a serious risk of reoffending, I find that it is ultimately
             in the best interest of the  child  that  he  lives  with  his
             mother, who would be  able  to  give  him  the  stability  and
             security he needs whatever conduct the Appellant  may  display
             in the future."

39. Whilst the FtT Judge did not make specific reference to Article  24(3),
    in substance he considered the very matters captured by Article 24  and
    reached conclusions rationally open to him on the evidence.  We are not
    persuaded that the Tribunal materially erred by failing to specifically
    refer  to  Article  24(3)  in  consideration  of  the  case  under  the
    Regulations.

    Ground 3

40. This ground may be taken shortly.  The judge was clearly alive  to  the
    quality of life that Mrs [L] has established  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was no evidence before him that Mrs [L]  would  be  compelled  to
    leave the Union in order for her family  life  with  the  appellant  to
    continue.  Her right to be joined by the appellant was the focus of the
    appeal and we agree with the analysis of Mr Dunlop's skeleton in  these
    terms:-

        "The effective deportation on Mrs [L]'s  free  movement  rights  is
        built into the [Regulations].  It  is  precisely  because  of  [Mrs
        [L]'s] free movement  rights  that  the  appellant  was  given  the
        protection of Regulation 21(3) of the [Regulations] and  could  not
        be removed unless there were 'serious grounds of public  policy  or
        public security'.  The FtT found that test was met  and  hence  any
        interference  with   [Mrs   [L]'s]   free   movement   rights   was
        proportionate."

    We do not consider there was any material error by  the  judge  on  the
    basis of this ground.

    Grounds 4 and 5

41. These may be taken together.  There are two aspects to this  challenge.
    The first is that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant  having
    repeated his association with serious organised crime  in  Albania  and
    had failed to assess the risk of offending ex nunc.  The second is that
    the Tribunal has failed to materially consider the matters in place  in
    the United Kingdom that would assist his rehabilitation.

42. Mr Dunlop's skeleton asserts this ground has no merit and directs us to
    passages from the Tribunal's decision in support of his  argument  that
    the  Tribunal  had  directed  itself  correctly  on  the  approach   to
    proportionality and had taken into account evidence  of  rehabilitation
    in weighing all the evidence.  It is argued that the conclusion reached
    that the appellant did present such a threat was open to the  Tribunal.



43. This ground is now academic in the light of  our  conclusion  regarding
    the lack of ready opportunity for the appellant to give live testimony.
     It is the judge's concern that the appellant  had  not  been  truthful
    about the extent of his activities  in  the  drugs  gang  which  is  an
    important factor in assessing the threat and rehabilitation and  it  is
    that aspect which will no doubt be the subject of further scrutiny once
    the appellant has been given an opportunity to give live evidence.

Conclusion

44. In summary we are satisfied the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains a material error of law.  We set aside the decision and  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal for it to remake the decision which
    will include, inter alia,  consideration  of  an  opportunity  for  the
    appellant to give live testimony.



Signed                                  Date:  16 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson








