
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00125/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                              |On 13 May 2016                |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                     d s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person, no legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a re-hearing of the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent made on or about 9 January 2013 to  make  a  deportation
    order in terms of Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971,  following
    the conviction and sentencing of the appellant by a Judge at Portsmouth
    Crown Court on 15 March 2013 for a total  period  of  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment for a dwelling house burglary.

2.   The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Mosul.  He last entered the  UK  on
    4 February 2008 with  leave  to  enter  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    national.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain on 3  March  2010.
    Notice of liability to deportation was served on him in consequence  of
    his criminal convictions, on 11 April 2013.  A  deportation  order  was
    signed, and served on the appellant on 9 January 2014.

3.   An appeal in this matter was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holder
    on 26 November 2014.  The appeal  was  dismissed.   Permission  for  an
    onward appeal was granted.  On 5 March 2015, Mr McCloskey J allowed the
    onward appeal and directed the remittal of the matter to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing and fresh  determination.   Consequently  the
    matter came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie.   The  judge
    allowed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds only.

4.   In my decision promulgated on 25 November 2015 I held that the  judge's
    decision contained errors of law for the following reasons:

         "4.  At paragraph 29, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  found
             that the appellant has made out a claim for protection on  the
             grounds that deportation will breach the  obligations  of  the
             United Kingdom under international Convention, whether on  the
             grounds of asylum; or of breach of Articles 2, 3 or 8  of  the
             European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  or  of   breach   of
             protection  afforded  by  Article  15C  of  the  Qualification
             Directive.  He found in the circumstances of his decision that
             it was not necessary for him to address the further case  made
             out for protection of family and private life of the appellant
             and of his wife and minor children  or  others  who  would  be
             affected by his removal.

         5.   In reaching these conclusions, the judge relied on the reasons
             he had given at paragraphs 25 to 28.

         6.   The judge found at paragraph 25 that it is accepted  that  the
             appellant is a Kurd from Mosul.  He found that the  region  is
             not under the control of the Iraqi Government but is  occupied
             and controlled by ISIL.  In the  circumstances  the  appellant
             would be at risk of persecution in Mosul by ISIL in pursuit of
             their campaign of terrorist  operation,  and  as  a  perceived
             opponent of ISIL or as a Kurd, which ethnic group is in  well-
             recognised opposition to ISIL.  The judge went on to find that
             the appellant is at any event at risk, absent  any  Convention
             reason, of death or inhuman and  degrading  treatment  in  his
             home area.

         7.   I agreed with Mr Walker that the judge did not  set  out  what
             background  evidence  he  relied  on  to  conclude  that   the
             appellant would be  in  fear  of  ISIL  considering  that  the
             appellant left Iraq in 2000.

         8.   At paragraph 26 the judge found that the  appellant  would  be
             returned to Baghdad.  He found that it would not be  safe  for
             the  appellant  to  traverse  Iraq,  including  through   ISIL
             controlled areas, to reach any Kurdish governorate.  He  would
             therefore be obliged to remain in Baghdad  and  on  background
             evidence the Baghdad governorate is the most violent in  Iraq.
             Again the judge did not identify the  background  evidence  he
             relied on to reach this conclusion.  In any event he  did  not
             consider whether there were any family  members  in  Iraq  who
             could assist the appellant.

         9.   At paragraph 27 the judge gave reasons for departing from  the
             findings in HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012]  UKUT
             00409  (IAC).   In  particular  the  judge  found   that   the
             particular factors which would place the appellant at enhanced
             risk are his ethnicity, the likelihood of the appellant  being
             an enhanced target for ISIL because of  the  worsened  country
             situation, and the appellant's precarious mental health  as  a
             result of three distinct attempts at suicide, preparation  for
             an act of suicide and a course of conduct of  self-harm  while
             in circumstances of stress and mental perturbation.

         10.   At  paragraph  28  the  judge  found  that  because  of   the
             appellant's  mental  state,  combined  with  the   exceedingly
             perilous and straitened circumstances in  Iraq,  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate in  Iraq  and  such
             relocation  would   be   an   infringement   of   Article   3.
             Alternatively it would be a breach of Article 8, at  least  in
             respect of the moral and physical integrity aspects of private
             life, as being  highly  likely  to  lead  to  the  appellant's
             suicide.

         11.  I agreed with Mr Walker that the judge has not given  adequate
             reasons for departing from  HM  or  the  Home  Office  country
             information which  states  that  "the  security  situation  in
             Baghdad has changed since HM2" such as  to  make  the  judge's
             conclusions unreliable.

         12.  I agreed with the argument in the  grounds  that  the  judge's
             finding  that  the  appellant's  ethnicity  would   make   him
             vulnerable to risk,  means  that  any  person  with  the  same
             ethnicity would be at risk.  As to the appellant's  precarious
             mental state, there was no medical report before the judge  as
             to the availability of medical treatment or drugs available to
             the appellant upon his return or even whether he is  receiving
             any medical treatment in the UK, such that withdrawal  of  the
             medical treatment would lead to a suicidal risk before  he  is
             deported or after he is deported.

         13.  The Home Office Country Information Report clearly states that
             the security situation in Baghdad  has  changed  significantly
             since HM2.  It was not apparent from  the  determination  that
             the judge considered the Home Office  Country  Information  in
             his decision to depart from HM2, or indeed that  his  findings
             were based on information contained in  the  respondent's  COI
             Report."

5.   This was the third occasion that the appellant had appeared  before  me
    and on all occasions without a legal representative. He has  been  held
    in immigration detention since he completed his criminal sentence.   At
    a CMR hearing on 22 February 2016 when the case  was  adjourned  to  be
    relisted, Mr Walker, HOPO, handed the court and the appellant a copy of
    enquiries the Home  Office  had  made  on  15  April  2015  as  to  his
    healthcare and the response by  Dr  Michaela  Routhu,  a  Registrar  in
    Forensic Psychiatry at Winchester  HMP  dated  13  January  2016.   The
    appellant is currently held at Winchester HMP.

6.   At today's hearing the appellant was given a full  copy  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in AA (Article 15(c)) (Rev 2) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)
    (30 October 2015).

7.   The appellant gave evidence through  an  Iraqi  interpreter  using  the
    Arabic language.  The appellant confirmed that he is a Kurd from Mosul.
     He said he had no contact with any family member in Iraq and therefore
    did not know who was there at the present time.  Both parents should be
    alive and living in the family home Mosul.  He last  had  contact  with
    his mother a year ago.  He has five brothers and two  sisters  who  all
    live in Mosul.  One of his siblings is older than him.   The  rest  are
    younger.  As far as he knows his siblings are in employment.

8.   The appellant said he did not know what job he would be able to  do  in
    Iraq  on  his  return.   In  the  UK  he  used  to  work  in  different
    restaurants.  As far as I gathered the  last  restaurant  was  a  kebab
    shop.  He lived with his wife and children.  He has been in the UK  for
    fourteen years or more.

9.   He said his health was almost  good.   He  has  not  attempted  suicide
    recently and has no suicidal thoughts.  He  is  presently  not  on  any
    medication.

10.  In cross-examination the appellant confirmed that he returned  to  Iraq
    in 2006 and remained there until 2008.  When he returned to the  UK  in
    2008 it was on a valid Iraqi passport.  That passport is  still  valid.
    He lived with relatives in Kurdistan.  He had two uncles who  lived  in
    Dahok with whom he lived for two years.  A third uncle  lived  an  hour
    away from Dahok.  He confirmed that  Dahok  is  in  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    region.  As far as he was aware his uncles still lived in Dahok.

11.  The appellant said that he has an  Iraqi  civil  status  document.   He
    does not have it with him in the UK.  It  is  in  the  family  home  in
    Mosul.

12.  The appellant said that he last had contact with  his  wife  about  six
    months ago and last spoke to his children about  six  months  ago.   He
    last saw them a year ago.

13.  The appellant said that if he returned to Baghdad it would not be  easy
    for him to make contact with his family in Iraq  because  he  does  not
    have their correct number.  He managed to speak to his  mother  a  year
    ago through the internet by Skype.  It would mot be easy to connect  to
    the website when he is in Baghdad.  He confirmed  that  when  he  lived
    with his uncles in Dahok for two years, he did not  have  any  problems
    with the Iraqi authorities.

Findings

14.  I considered this  appeal  in  the  context  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in AA and in the context of the oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant today.  I find that on the whole, the appellant gave credible
    answers to the questions he was asked, although he tried to  play  down
    his ability to contact them were he to be removed to Baghdad.  He  also
    admitted that he used various aliases to make  asylum  applications  in
    the past.

15.  It is not disputed that  the  appellant  is  a  Kurd  from  Mosul.   Mr
    Bramble relying on paragraphs 101 to 106 of  AA  submitted  that  Mosul
    falls into the governorate of Ninewah and it is a contested area.   The
    Upper Tribunal at paragraph 102 found that the  security  situation  in
    the governorate including Ninewah remains volatile.  The Upper Tribunal
    at paragraph 106 held that given the volatility of the situation in the
    contested areas, the number of displaced persons therefrom, the tactics
    of warfare used by ISIL and the circumstances in the  areas  controlled
    by  ISIL,  they  have  no  hesitation  in  endorsing  the  respondent's
    concession  and  concluded  that  a  civilian  with  no  distinguishing
    characteristics will, simply by  virtue  of  his/her  presence  in  the
    contested area be at risk of suffering harm of the type  identified  in
    Article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.   In  light  of  this
    evidence  Mr Bramble accepted that the appellant cannot return  to  his
    home area of Mosul.

16.  Mr Bramble relied on paragraphs 112 and 113 of AA  where  the  Tribunal
    specifically looked at the Iraqi Kurdish region and Dahok.   The  Upper
    Tribunal noted Dr Fateh's opinion that the IKR "is  virtually  violence
    free, and only exceptional one offs disrupt this".  The Upper  Tribunal
    considered the Home Office April 2015 CIG which also made reference  to
    the November 2014 attacks but  identifies  that  there  have  been  ten
    deaths as a consequence.  The report concluded that the IKR  is  stable
    and has very low levels of violence.  The Upper Tribunal  concluded  at
    paragraph 113 that the evidence before it did not establish that  there
    was an Article 15(c) risk to an  ordinary  civilian  in  the  IKR,  and
    neither does a person's  ethnicity,  religion  or  sex,  whether  taken
    individually or cumulatively, and has the level of risk so as to engage
    Article 15(c).

17.  The appellant's evidence was that he lived in Dahok  trouble  free  for
    two years.  In the light of this evidence and the conclusions drawn  by
    the Upper Tribunal at paragraphs 112 and 113, I find that the appellant
    is not likely to suffer any risk of harm, or serious harm  were  he  to
    relocate to Dahok.

18.   In  considering  relocation  to  Baghdad  city,  which  is  where  the
    appellant would be returned to in any  event,   I  rely  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal's finding at paragraph 152 of AA.   In  light  of  Dr  Fateh's
    evidence, the Upper Tribunal concluded  that  a  CSID  is  required  to
    access income/financial  assistance,  employment,  education,  housing,
    pension and medical committee documents.  There will be  those  who  do
    not have a CSID but who nevertheless have access  to  adequate  support
    mechanism in Baghdad, those persons with family or friends  in  Baghdad
    who are willing and able to provide such assistance to them.   In  this
    appellant's case he has a CSID in his home in Mosul.  I see  no  reason
    why he cannot obtain this document or apply for a replacement to assist
    him to settle in Baghdad.

19.  At paragraph 135 of AA, the Upper  Tribunal  said  that  they  had  not
    heard or seen anything that would lead them to  conclude  that  persons
    without  connections  or  Kurds,  in  Baghdad  are  an  "enhanced  risk
    category".

20.  On this evidence I find that the appellant  can  relocate  to  Baghdad.
    He has a valid passport and returned to the  UK  on  that  passport  in
    2008.  He has family in Iraq and has a CSID.  He has  been  in  contact
    with his mother.  I was not persuaded by his claim that he would not be
    able to contact her again if he was removed to Baghdad.

21.  I do not find in the light of AA that  the  appellant  falls  into  any
    risk category under Article 3 or Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  He confirmed that he did not have any medical issues at the
    moment.   Indeed,  Dr  Routhu  confirmed  in  her   response   to   the
    respondent's healthcare enquiries on 13 January 2016 that the appellant
    was not on any medication.  She noted that although the  appellant  had
    some reported history of depression and suicidal thoughts/attempts, her
    understanding that his risks to  self  have  been  related  to  stress-
    related worries about deportation.  She said that the appellant did not
    mention any symptoms of PTSD or panic attacks.  There was  no  evidence
    of major mental illness when she assessed him.  As  already  noted  the
    appellant himself said he was "almost" in good health and did not  have
    any suicidal thoughts and had not attempted suicide in the recent past.



22.  On all the evidence before me I find that the appellant  would  not  be
    at risk on return to Iraq.

23.  I find that there are no Article 8  issues  in  this  case  and  indeed
    Article 8  was  not  raised  by  the  appellant.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant's evidence is that he has not seen his wife and children  for
    a year and last had contact with them about six  months  ago.   In  the
    absence  of  evidence  from  his  wife  as  to   the   current   family
    circumstances, I  find  that  there  is  no  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his wife and children.  It would not be unduly  harsh  if
    he was separated from his wife and children by virtue of his removal to
    Iraq.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date:  6 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


