
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00204/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 November 2015                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGES DEANS AND MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           MR ALEKSANDRS KOLOSOVS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Katani, Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal against  an  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Watters  dismissing  an  appeal  against  a  decision  by  the
    respondent to deport the appellant from the UK in terms  of  Regulation
    19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 2) The appellant was born on 7 August 1984 and is a  national  of  Latvia.
    On 4 October 2014 he was convicted of  assaulting  an  officer  in  the
    execution of his or her duty and assault to injury.  The appellant  was
    sentenced to imprisonment for  one  year  and  8  months  and  given  a
    supervision order for 10 months.  The weapons used in the offence  were
    confiscated, namely multiple replica shell casings, a BB  revolver  and
    ammunition.

 3) In his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant claimed to
    have been in  the  UK  since  2004.   Since  2006  he  has  been  in  a
    relationship with his partner  Mr  Cliff  Anderson.   The  judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant and from Mr Anderson.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had been residing in the UK since 2004 but
    accepted that he had lived in the UK from 2006.  As the judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had been in the UK for a continuous period
    of at least 10 years he was  not  entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
    protection in terms of regulation 21(4).  The judge was satisfied  that
    the appellant was entitled  to  an  enhanced  level  of  protection  as
    somebody who had had continuous residence for more than  5  years,  and
    therefore his removal could be justified only  on  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security, in terms of regulation 21(3).

 4) The judge noted that in October 2013 the appellant had  been  convicted
    of behaving in a threatening  or  abusive  manner  likely  to  cause  a
    reasonable person to suffer fear or alarm.   In  respect  of  this  the
    appellant was sentenced to a Community Payback Order of 6 months unpaid
    work.  Weapons used in this offence were  confiscated  namely  a  black
    airsoft shotgun, an airsoft shotgun, ammunition, CO2 canisters and a BB
    speed loader with ammunition.  When the appellant was convicted for the
    second  offence,  in  October  2014,  the  judge  recognised  that  the
    appellant had only one previous conviction but pointed  out  that  this
    previous conviction itself involved the brandishing of a BB gun.   This
    was described by the sentencing judge as a serious matter  and  he  was
    troubled by the appellant's  attitude  to  it.   In  his  evidence  the
    appellant had described  the  BB  gun  as  a  "cool  adult  toy".   The
    sentencing judge said this was not a  toy  of  any  description  but  a
    powerful and dangerous  weapon.   When  used  irresponsibly  it  was  a
    potentially lethal  weapon.   The  appellant  appeared  to  have  taken
    careful aim with it and shot his victim  in  the  head,  not  once  but
    twice.  The assault was described as calculated, cowardly and  vicious.
    The pellets had to be surgically removed from the victim's scalp.

 5) The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  also  troubled  by  the
    appellant's attitude.  At the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the appellant maintained that he was not  guilty  of  any  crime.   The
    appellant did not recognise the seriousness of his offences, the effect
    on the victim, or the risk of very serious injury.  The  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal noted that the previous offence in  2013  had  also
    involved the use of  a  BB  gun,  which  had  been  brandished  by  the
    appellant.  On the evidence the judge was satisfied that the  appellant
    had a propensity to re-offend.  There was no evidence of the  appellant
    doing anything in prison by way of rehabilitation.  The evidence showed
    no likelihood of rehabilitation in this country.

 6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the nature  of
    the appellant's offending conduct, which on both occasions involved  BB
    guns.  It was clear that the public was vulnerable to  the  effects  of
    the  appellant's  re-offending.   The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's conduct represented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to justify deportation.

 7) The judge went on to consider the appellant's  age,  state  of  health,
    family and economic situation, his length of residence in the  UK,  his
    social and cultural integration into the UK and the extend of his links
    with his country of origin.  The judge found  that  the  appellant  had
    spent most of his life in Latvia.  He was healthy and had been  in  the
    UK only since 2006.  He still had considerable links with  his  country
    of origin.  He had returned to Latvia  on  several  occasions  and  his
    parents and sisters still lived there.

 8) Having regard to proportionality, the judge found that the balance fell
    in favour of deportation.  The judge took account  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner, who not only gave evidence at the appeal
    hearing but had visited the appellant in prison.   The  respondent  had
    not accepted that the appellant and his partner were  in  a  subsisting
    relationship.  Nevertheless the judge accepted the  partner's  evidence
    to this effect and found that they had been  in  a  relationship  since
    2006.  Although the appellant's partner was currently working,  he  was
    looking to retire early.  The judge found that there were few obstacles
    to the appellant and his partner carrying on  their  life  together  in
    Latvia.  In addition there was nothing to suggest the  appellant  would
    not be able to find work in Latvia.

 9) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  The judge found that the consequences  of
    deportation would potentially engage Article 8 but this  would  have  a
    legitimate aim.  The appellant had been in the UK since  2006  and  has
    had employment and established a life here.  On  the  other  hand,  the
    seriousness of his offences had to be weighed against this.  There  was
    little evidence that the appellant had contributed to the community  in
    the UK.  The seriousness  of  the  appellant's  crimes  outweighed  any
    family or private life that he had in the UK.

10) The application for permission to appeal was drafted on the basis  that
    the judge did not properly assess the evidence about when the appellant
    had arrived in the UK and did not put to the appellant a discrepancy in
    his CV about any  employment  prior  to  2006.   In  addition,  it  was
    contended that the judge had not properly considered the effect of  the
    appellant's removal upon his partner.  Permission was  granted  on  all
    grounds, but chiefly on whether the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had properly assessed the evidence of when the appellant first  arrived
    in the UK.

11) A rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the respondent contending that
    the judge had provided a "plethora of reasons for concluding  that  the
    appellant has lived in the UK since 2006 and not 2004 or 2005."

Submissions

12) At the commencement of the hearing before us,  Mr  Katani  informed  us
    that new evidence had come to light over the previous  weekend  and  he
    sought to lodge this.  This new evidence was from HMRC and  related  to
    the length of time which the appellant had been in  the  UK.   The  new
    evidence provided definitive information that the appellant had been in
    the UK for over 10 years.

13) It was pointed out to Mr Katani that the first issue for  the  Tribunal
    to decide was whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had made  an
    error of law such that his  decision  should  be  set  aside.   If  new
    evidence were to be introduced, an application should  have  been  made
    under Rule 15A(2).  Finally, even  if  the  new  evidence  were  to  be
    admitted and did establish that the appellant had been in the UK  since
    2004, the appellant would not be entitled to enhanced protection  based
    on 10 years' residence unless he could show that this residence fell to
    be taken into account in accordance with the decision of  the  European
    Court of Justice in MG, Case C-400/12, 16 January 2014, as subsequently
    considered in the Upper Tribunal at [2014] UKUT 392.

14) Mr Katani persisted that  his  client  was  entitled  to  the  enhanced
    protected provided by 10  years'  residence,  in  terms  of  regulation
    21(4).  This should have been recognised by the Home Office.  The Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal had applied too high a  standard  of  proof.
    This was a question of "connecting the dots".  The judge  had  referred
    to a discrepancy between the  appellant's  CV  and  a  letter  dated  1
    October 2004 addressed to the appellant stating  that  his  application
    under  the  "Accession  State  Worker  Registration  Scheme"  had  been
    approved by  the  Home  Office.   This  letter  was  addressed  to  the
    appellant c/o Crosslee PLC  in  Halifax.   In  his  oral  evidence  the
    appellant stated that he had started work at the  White  Knight  tumble
    dryer factory in Halifax in August  2004  and  worked  there  for  6-12
    months.  The judge found it very difficult to understand why there  was
    no documentary evidence of this claimed employment.  If  the  appellant
    had not retained evidence of this employment, then it should  not  have
    been difficult for him to contact the company and request a  letter  to
    assist his case.  Furthermore, the claimed employment was not listed in
    the appellant's CV.

15) Before us Mr Katani submitted that the  appellant  had  explained  this
    omission in his witness statement.

16) Turning to Article 8, Mr Katani submitted that the Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal had not considered the impact of the appellant's  removal
    upon his partner.  Such consideration was required in terms  of  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39.  The couple had been  in  a  relationship  for  9
    years.  The impact on the appellant's partner would be devastating  and
    this was not even considered.  The judge had paid only lip  service  to
    this relationship, at paragraph 14 of the decision.

17) For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien said she relied on the rule 24  notice.
    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had come  to  a  decision  on  the
    evidence before him.  Where a person sought to establish  a  period  of
    residence then contemporaneous documentary evidence was required and it
    was not sufficient to "connect the dots", as suggested on behalf of the
    appellant.

18) The judge had before him a registration document from 2004 issued under
    the Accession  State  Worker  Registration  Scheme  but  there  was  no
    evidence from HMRC relating to this period, although such evidence  was
    produced for later years.  The respondent had  not  accepted  that  the
    letter under the Accession State Worker Registration Scheme was  enough
    to show continuous residence.  The appellant's CV had not addressed the
    period prior to 2006.  The findings made by the judge at paragraph 7 of
    the decision were open to him and were sustainable.

19) Mrs O'Brien continued that the judge had expressed  concern  about  the
    appellant's attitude to his offending.  This was not a  straightforward
    matter of an unchallenged witness.  The judge was expected  to  make  a
    decision on the evidence in dispute.  The decision made  by  the  judge
    was open to him.  The judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to the enhanced protection based on 10 years' residence.

20) In relation to Article 8,  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  the  decision
    should be informed by the relevant Immigration Rules in respect of non-
    EEA nationals.  The position of the respondent was that even if it  was
    accepted that the appellant was in a  relationship  with  his  partner,
    removal was not disproportionate given the nature  of  the  appellant's
    offending and the possibility of continuing family life in Latvia.   It
    was difficult to see how the interference with the appellant's  private
    or family life would be disproportionate.

21) Finally, Mrs O'Brien opposed the admission of any new evidence at  this
    stage in the proceedings.

22) In response Mr Katani submitted that the appellant had not  been  found
    anything other than credible and what  he  said  about  his  length  of
    residence should be given weight.  In respect of more recent  residence
    it was much easier to connect the dots than it was in  respect  of  the
    earlier period.  It was  unreasonable  to  expect  the  same  level  of
    documentary evidence from 10 years ago.  It was  normal  in  a  CV  for
    people to refer to their recent jobs rather than  jobs  from  a  longer
    time ago.

23) In relation to Article 8, Mr Katani reiterated that this had  not  been
    properly considered and the assessment of proportionality had not taken
    into account all the evidence.

Discussion

24) The case Mr Katani sought to advance before us was based on the premise
    that if the appellant was able to show that if he had resided in the UK
    for a continuous period of at least 10 years prior to the  decision  to
    remove him then he would be entitled  to  the  enhanced  protection  in
    regulation 21(4) and a decision to remove him could not be taken except
    on imperative grounds of public security.  The assessment by the  judge
    was made under regulation 21(3) in terms of which a decision to  remove
    a person who has a permanent right of residence them may not  be  taken
    except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

25) Even if we were to assume, however, that the appellant was  in  the  UK
    continuously from 2004 and exercising Treaty rights, it does not follow
    that he would be entitled to the enhanced protection  arising  from  10
    years' continuous residence under regulation 21(4).  In MG the Court of
    Justice  recognised  that  the  criterion  for  gaining  this  enhanced
    protection was whether the Union citizen had lived in the member  state
    for 10 years preceding the expulsion decision.  The 10 year period  was
    calculated by counting back from the date of decision.  In  determining
    whether the 10 years' residence was satisfied, all relevant factors had
    to be taken into account in each individual case, such  as  periods  of
    absence from the host member state.

26) The Court then went on to  consider  whether  periods  of  imprisonment
    could be taken into account  in  calculating  the  10  year  period  or
    whether a period of imprisonment would be capable of  interrupting  the
    continuity of the period of residence.   The  Court  pointed  out  that
    protection against expulsion was based on the degree of integration  of
    the person concerned in the host member state.  Accordingly the greater
    degree of integration of the Union citizen in the  host  member  state,
    the greater degree of protection against expulsion.  Where  a  national
    court had imposed a custodial sentence this was an indication that  the
    person concerned had not respected the values of  the  society  of  the
    host member state, as reflected in  its  criminal  law,  and  that,  in
    consequence, taking into consideration periods of imprisonment for  the
    purpose of the acquisition of a right of permanent residence  would  be
    contrary to  the  aim  of  the  European  Directive  in  question.   In
    principle, a period of imprisonment would interrupt the continuity of a
    period of  residence  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  enhanced
    protection based  on  10  years'  residence.   However,  it  was  still
    necessary to consider the extent to which the non-continuous nature  of
    the period of residence during the 10  years  preceding  the  expulsion
    decision prevented the person from enjoying  enhanced  protection.   An
    overall assessment had to be made of the person's situation at the time
    when the  question  of  expulsion  arose.   In  principle,  periods  of
    imprisonment, together with other factors going to make up the entirety
    of relevant considerations in each individual case, might be taken into
    account in determining whether the  integrating  links  with  the  host
    member state had been  broken  and  for  determining  whether  enhanced
    protection would be granted.  It was  possible  to  have  regard  to  a
    period of 10 years' residence prior to the imprisonment as part of  the
    overall assessment required  in  determining  whether  the  integrating
    links had been broken.

27) The judgment of the Court  of  Justice  was  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal when the case of MG came back before the Tribunal, reported as
    [2014] UKUT 00392.  The Upper Tribunal stated that the judgment of  the
    Court of Justice "should be understood as  meaning  that  a  period  of
    imprisonment during those 10  years  does  not  necessarily  prevent  a
    person from qualifying  for  enhanced  protection  if  that  person  is
    sufficiently integrated.  However, according to the  same  judgment,  a
    period  of  imprisonment  must  have  a  negative  impact  insofar   as
    establishing integration is concerned."

28) We mention these matters at this stage in order to show  that  even  if
    the appellant had succeeded in showing 10 years'  continuous  residence
    in the UK, it did not necessarily follow from this that he  would  have
    been entitled to the enhanced protection  from  expulsion.   Similarly,
    given the nature of his offences, it does not necessarily  follow  that
    if the appellant was entitled to the enhanced protection of  regulation
    21(4) it would not have been found that there were  imperative  grounds
    of public security to justify his removal.  We would emphasise  that  a
    finding that the appellant has lived in the UK for a continuous  period
    of 10 years does not  lead  automatically  to  a  finding  that  he  is
    entitled to the highest level  of  enhanced  protection  in  regulation
    21(4).  Indeed, even with such enhanced protection his conduct was such
    that his removal might still have been held to be justified.

29) The first task for the appellant in his appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    however, was to show an error of law by the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Reference has already been made to the judge's treatment  at
    paragraph 7 of the evidence before him as to how long the appellant had
    been living in the UK.  The judge made specific reference to  the  Home
    Office letter of 1  October  2004  informing  the  appellant  that  his
    application  had  been  approved  under  the  "Accession  State  Worker
    Registration Scheme".  The  judge  noted  a  discrepancy  between  this
    letter and the CV provided by the  appellant,  in  which  his  earliest
    period of employment in the UK was stated as being from  February  2005
    until July 2005.  After July 2005 the appellant was not employed  again
    until February 2006.  The judge noted that the appellant  had  produced
    no documentary evidence relating to any employment in 2004.  The  judge
    questioned why the employment in 2004 was not listed on the appellant's
    CV.  The judge found that the Home Office letter of 1 October 2004 was,
    by itself, insufficient to show that the appellant had lived in the  UK
    since 2004.

30) We consider that this was a conclusion which the judge was entitled  to
    reach upon the evidence before him and for the reasons which  he  gave.
    We do not find any error or law in the judge's finding on this  matter.



31) In the application for permission to appeal it is argued that the  lack
    of evidence of the appellant's residence in the  UK  between  2004  and
    2006 did not necessarily mean that the appellant was  not  in  the  UK.
    This may be so, but bearing in  mind  the  burden  of  proof  upon  the
    appellant the absence of evidence will not lead to a finding  that  the
    appellant was in the UK and does not affect the judge's conclusion.

32) In the application for permission to appeal it was contended on  behalf
    of the appellant that the discrepancy between his CV and the letter  of
    1 October 2004 should have been put to the appellant for explanation at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  At this hearing the  judge
    not only had the documentary evidence  before  him  but  he  heard  the
    appellant's oral evidence.  In his evidence  the  appellant  maintained
    that he had been living in the UK since 2004.  The judge did not accept
    the appellant's evidence on this point.  The judge was entitled to have
    regard to the paucity of  the  documentary  evidence  relating  to  the
    period of alleged residence before 2006, including the lack of evidence
    from HMRC for this period, as well as the apparent discrepancy  between
    the CV and the Home Office letter of 1 October 2004.  When  making  his
    findings it was not incumbent upon the  judge  to  have  regard  to  an
    apparent discrepancy in the documentary evidence only where it had been
    specifically put to the appellant, even assuming that  this  particular
    matter was not.

33) It was argued for the appellant that the judge had applied too  high  a
    standard of proof.  There is nothing in the judge's decision,  however,
    to support this proposition.  The judge was entitled to have regard  to
    omissions in the documentary evidence and to  his  concerns  about  the
    appellant's attitude to the offences of which he was convicted.

34) For the sake of completeness we should add that we  are  not  persuaded
    that the absence before the First-tier Tribunal of  the  evidence  from
    HMRC on which the appellant now seeks to rely amounts to  an  error  of
    law.  This point was not argued before  us,  but  in  the  case  of  MM
    (unfairness; E  &  R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considered the circumstances in which an  error  of  fact,  such  as  a
    mistake as the availability of particular evidence, might amount to  an
    error of law.  We do not consider, however, that in  the  circumstances
    of this appeal any mistake as to the availability of evidence was  such
    as to amount to unfairness sufficient to vitiate the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and indeed no argument to  this  effect  was  made
    before us.

35) The other area in which it has been suggested that the judge  erred  in
    law was in relation to his treatment of  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his partner.   The  judge  accepted  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's partner but found that there  were  few  obstacles  to  the
    appellant and his partner carrying on their life together in Latvia.

36) It was argued for  the  appellant  that  the  judge  had  not  properly
    considered the impact of the appellant's removal on his partner.  It is
    difficult to see, however, what factors  relating  to  this  the  judge
    failed to take into account, according to the evidence presented.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant and his partner are in  a  subsisting
    relationship.  The appellant's partner gave evidence that he  hoped  to
    take early retirement.  In his submission before us Mr Katani  referred
    to possible language  or  cultural  difficulties  for  the  appellant's
    partner in relocating to Latvia and  made  a  comment  also  about  the
    appellant's partner's age.   The  judge  did  not  say  there  were  no
    obstacles to the appellant and his partner continuing  family  life  in
    Latvia but, "few obstacles".  This  was  a  conclusion  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach for the reasons which he  gave.   Both  in  assessing
    proportionality under regulation 21(6) and under Article  8  the  judge
    had proper regard to the appellant's private and family life and to the
    effect on the appellant's partner  of  the  appellant's  removal.   The
    judge decided in relation to regulation 21 that the appellant  posed  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  interests  of
    public policy and public security such as to justify  his  deportation.
    Under Article 8, the interference with the appellant and his  partner's
    private or family life was outweighed by the public interest.

37) In conclusion, we are not satisfied that the Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law such that  his  decision  should  be  set
    aside.  We have not looked at the additional evidence which  Mr  Katani
    sought to lodge.  It may be that in light of this  additional  evidence
    the judge would have accepted that the appellant arrived in the  UK  in
    2004.  Nevertheless, the judge was required to make a decision  on  the
    basis of the evidence before him.  On the evidence that was before  him
    at the date of the hearing he was entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions
    which he did.

38) Furthermore, even  if  the  appellant  were  able  to  show  10  years'
    continuous residence in the UK, for the reasons set out above  it  does
    not follow that he would necessarily be entitled to the enhanced  level
    of protection in regulation 21(4) for those with 10  years'  continuous
    residence.  There are a number of hurdles that the appellant would have
    to overcome in showing entitlement to such a protection.   Although  we
    are not required to make a decision in respect of this, it seems to  us
    that where the appellant  has  been  convicted  not  once  but  on  two
    occasions  of  offences  involving  BB  firearms,  this  would  be   an
    indication that he has not respected the values of the society  of  the
    host member state, as reflected in  its  criminal  law,  and  that  any
    integrating links forged with the host member state had been broken.

Conclusions

39) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

40) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

41) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity.   We  have
    not been asked to make such an order and we see no reason of  substance
    for so doing.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
