
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00162/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 January 2017                        | On 3 May 2017                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Weston
For the Respondent:    Ms Brockelsby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AS, is a  female  citizen  of  France.     She  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 4 December  2015  to
    deport her from the United  Kingdom.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Moore), in a decision promulgated on 31  October  2016,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 17 January 2017, the representatives for both
    agreed that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should not stand. I
    refer to the grant of permission (Judge Ford) at [3-4] and  agree  that
    the decision is unclear  as  regards  the  length  of  the  appellant's
    residence in the United Kingdom. Because the judge has failed  to  make
    unequivocal findings on this fundamental issue, his application of  the
    relevant  tests  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations  2006  is  unsafe.  In  addition,  again   concerning   the
    appellant's length of residence, it is not  clear  why  the  judge  has
    failed to accept evidence of the appellant  which  was  not  challenged
    before or at the First-tier Tribunal hearing by the Secretary of  State
    or the Tribunal.  The  next  Tribunal  will  need  to  make  clear  and
    unequivocal findings of fact, in particular as regards the  appellant's
    length of residence, and to apply the relevant law to those findings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 31  October
2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   The  appeal
shall be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  Tribunal  to  remake
the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 2 April 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


