
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00093/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons            |
|                                         |Promulgated:                    |
|                                         |On 6 January 2021               |
|On 11 December 2020                      |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                George Yeboah
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 20 March 2020 to deport him to Ghana, of which he is a citizen.  The
    appellant came to the United Kingdom as a young adult, aged 18 and  has
    permanent residence pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016, acquired as the EEA dependant family member  of
    his father.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Ghana on 7 January 1990 and is now  30  years
    old.  He grew up in Ghana, completed  his  education  there,  and  left
    Ghana in September 2008, with his father and twin sister,  arriving  in
    the United Kingdom on 22 September 2009.   While  in  Ghana  he  was  a
    student and did not take up employment.

 3. On 18 February 2010, the appellant applied for a residence card as  his
    father's EEA dependant, which was issued on 14 August 2010, valid until
    14 August 2015. On 16 August 2015, he applied for  permanent  residence
    as his father's extended family member, which was issued on 17 February
    2016.

 4. On 16 October 2014, the appellant's daughter was born.  Her mother  has
    had very little contact with the  child  from  birth,  and  disappeared
    altogether in 2017.  The appellant and his twin sister  have  fulfilled
    the parental roles: the appellant had sole custody of his daughter, who
    is six years old now.

 5. By family agreement,  his  sister  gave  up  work  to  look  after  the
    appellant's daughter and her own children.   In  practice,  it  is  his
    sister who has brought up the appellant's daughter, undertaking the day
    to day care of the child, while the appellant worked to  support  them.
    When arrested, the appellant was living in Telford but his daughter was
    living with his sister, her husband, and their  children  in  Stoke-on-
    Trent. The sister says in her witness  statement  that  'we  have  been
    happy to be able to bring [the appellant's daughter] into our family'.

 6. Since the appellant's arrest, there has  been  a  special  guardianship
    order made in favour of the appellant's sister and her husband, and  it
    is they, not the appellant, who have  custody  of  his  daughter.   The
    child lives with them and her cousins and it is expected that she  will
    remain with them for the rest of her childhood.  The appellant has  had
    no direct contact with his daughter her while in prison and will not be
    permitted to live in his  sister's  house,  or  any  house  with  young
    children in it, when he is released.

 7. On 11 March 2019, the appellant was convicted at Shrewsbury Crown Court
    of sexual activity with  a  female  child  under  16  years,  including
    vaginal penetration.  The child in question was 13  years  old  and  is
    described in  the  January  2020  OASys  report  as  a  family  friend,
    attending the same church, the Church of Grace, in Telford.   The  rape
    occurred when the child asked the appellant to see her safely home.  It
    was his only offence, but was a serious one and a breach of trust.

 8. On 1 April 2019, a  judge  at  Shrewsbury  Crown  Court  sentenced  the
    appellant to 38 months' imprisonment.  He is required to  sign  on  the
    Sex Offenders Register for life and is  prohibited  from  working  with
    children, also for life.  The sentencing judge said this:

         "...At the time of this offence you were 27.  Why  you  decided  to
         engage in sexual activity with a 13-year-old child  only  you  will
         know. One of the aspects of this type of offending, that  sometimes
         gets missed out, is that even if there is a  genuine  relationship,
         as opposed to simply sexual desire, one rarely  goes  from  a  kiss
         straight into sexual intercourse which is what you did; it was with
         a 13-year-old child and somebody you knew was 13.

         To your credit, you accept all of that;  you  understand  that  you
         were the adult, and therefore you really  should  have  known  that
         what you were doing was wrong.  This was very wrong; a  13-year-old
         child.  The offence is plainly a category 1 offence.  It is plainly
         culpability A.  There is, as I  have  already  mentioned,  the  age
         disparity; there is clearly an element of breach of trust, you were
         somebody that she knew and trusted, as is  evidenced  by  the  fact
         that she asked you if you would help her get home.   I  accept,  of
         course, that as a result of this your daughter  has  suffered,  you
         have suffered because of the change in your ability to  look  after
         her imposed by the Children Services. ..."

 9. In response to a liability to deport letter dated 18  April  2019,  the
    appellant relied on his EEA permanent residence, his  sole  custody  of
    his daughter, and stated that his life would be in serious danger if he
    returned to Ghana.  However, on 15 August 2019 the appellant had signed
    a disclaimer expressing a wish to return to  Accra,  Ghana,  and  on  2
    September 2019, he applied for the Facilitated Return  Scheme.   On  30
    September  2019,  the  respondent  told  the  appellant  that  he   was
    ineligible for  the  FRS.   The  appellant  subsequently  withdrew  his
    disclaimer.

10. The appellant has now  reached  the  licence  phase  of  the  custodial
    sentence, and bail in principle was granted on 30 October 2020, subject
    to suitable Schedule 10 accommodation being found.  There  was  another
    bail hearing in November 2020.   The  appellant  moved  to  immigration
    detention on 1 December 2020 and remains in detention.   He  hopes  for
    supervised access to his daughter when he returns to the community.

Deportation order

11. In a letter of 10 March 2020,  the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for
    making  a  deportation  order.   She  considered  that  the   appellant
    represented a significant threat to the  safety  and  security  of  the
    public and that any further offence would be similar, or more  serious.
    Deportation was justified on public policy grounds, with  reference  to
    Regulation 23(6)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2016.

12.  The  respondent  considered  the   appellant's   Regulation   27(5)(a)
    dangerousness and whether it  was  proportionate  to  remove  him.  The
    appellant had lived in Ghana until he was 18 and was  young  enough  to
    adapt to the  changes  on  return.   He  could  approach  the  Ghanaian
    authorities should he experience  hardship  on  return.  There  was  no
    evidence of his having undertaken  any  rehabilitative  work  while  in
    prison.  His family in the United Kingdom had been  unable  to  prevent
    the original offence and, as he was not allowed to reside with them, it
    was  not  likely  that  they  could  provide   support   to   aid   any
    rehabilitation in the United Kingdom.

13. The appellant's international protection claim was  not  accepted.   He
    had a mother in Ghana.  His fear of his victim's family if he  were  to
    be returned to Ghana, said to be dangerous people, was contradicted  by
    the appellant's willingness in August  2019  to  return  to  Ghana  and
    rejoin his mother  there.   On  12  December  2019,  he  had  told  the
    immigration staff that his  only  reason  for  staying  in  the  United
    Kingdom was to be near his daughter and his sister's family.

The OASys reports

14. The respondent's bundle includes an OASys report prepared on 31 January
    2020, while the appellant's bundle includes an updated version dated 30
    June 2020.

15. The reports both note that appellant completed his education in  Ghana,
    before coming to the United Kingdom with his sister and  their  father,
    all of them hoping to find work here.  Following his sister's  marriage
    in 2010,  the  appellant,  her  husband,  and  his  sister  moved  into
    accommodation  in  Stoke-on-Trent,  while  their  father  remained   in
    Telford.   His father has since  relocated  to  the  Netherlands.   His
    mother, who is in Ghana, is in poor health.  She has not had much to do
    with the appellant or  his  sister,  as  their  father  was  implacably
    opposed to contact between his children and their mother.

16. While in the United Kingdom, the appellant has worked in factories  and
    in shops.  He did not manage to save, and had no  financial  resources,
    nor did he wish to ask his  family  for  money  while  in  prison.   He
    survived in prison financially on what he earned from  working  in  the
    waste management function there.

17. The appellant told the probation officer that he was not  good  at  any
    sports and liked to 'hang around at home'.  The probation  officer  was
    not clear how much  alcohol  the  appellant  had  consumed  before  the
    offence, nor how predatory he was.   He had never  misused  drugs,  but
    his alcohol use was a  worry.   Further  work  needed  to  be  done  to
    understand how much he consumes.  He was calm and  polite  but  he  had
    difficulty recognising  problems  and  his  awareness  of  consequences
    needed further work.

18. The appellant was reluctant to discuss his offending behaviour,  saying
    only that he was drunk and that  the  rape  'just  happened'.   He  was
    prepared to admit his responsibility, but not to  discuss  it  further.
    The appellant said to the probation officer that he would be 'SO angry'
    if the same thing happened to his daughter.  He refused to  acknowledge
    that such offences do not 'just happen'.  Further work  was  considered
    to be needed, when the appellant was eventually released.

19. The OASys report considered that the appellant presented a high risk of
    serious harm to females under the age of 16 and that if  the  appellant
    lived in a house in which there are young girls around, 'his risk  will
    escalate'. Both the January 2020 and June 2020 OASys  reports  identify
    him as a continuing high risk to children, although a low risk  in  the
    community generally.  A high risk is defined thus:

         "High risk of serious harm - there are identifiable  indicators  of
         risk of serious harm.  The potential event could happen at any time
         and the impact would be serious.  ...

         Where an individual is assessed as being at medium,  high  or  very
         high risk of serious harm, this MUST be following  through  with  a
         risk management plan. ..."

20. The 30 June 2020 OASys report says that  the  appellant's  daughter  is
    likely to spend the rest of her childhood with her aunt and her  uncle,
    who are now her guardians.   There were  no  current  Child  Protection
    /Looked After Child meetings but there  had  been  in  the  past.   The
    Probation Service would not agree to  the  appellant  living  with  his
    sister when released, or in a house with young people (even his nephews
    and nieces) as this would raise the risk of serious sexual harm, linked
    to the appellant's offending behaviour.  They would stipulate  that  he
    could not do so, and that he could have supervised  contact  only  with
    his young daughter.

First-tier Tribunal decision

21. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal, setting out  the
    nature of the offence and  that  it  was  a  first,  but  very  serious
    offence.   The appellant had not offended while on bail pending  trial,
    but had  maintained  his  innocence,  not  pleading  guilty  until  the
    hearing.  The judge noted at [13],  when  assessing  the  future  risk,
    that:

         "13. ... Those that have assessed him closely clearly do regard the
         appellant as being a high risk to children, that he requires  MAPPA
         supervision in addition to that of the Probation Service, he is not
         permitted direct contact with his daughter, is not allowed to  work
         with children and is to  register  with  the  police.   With  those
         matters in mind, I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  presents  a
         sufficiently serious and present threat such that there are serious
         grounds of public policy and security that justify the  appellant's
         deportation."

22. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom as an adult and was not  a
    'home grown criminal'.  International protection was  not  relied  upon
    and there was a functioning police force in Ghana, should the appellant
    have  difficulty  with  his  victim's  family  on  return.   There  was
    insufficient evidence to establish that any such risk could not be  met
    by internal relocation, as Ghana has a population of over  31  million:
    it is a large country.

23. In relation to the appellant's  daughter,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant, with his sister, had always been  the  main  carer  for  the
    child, and that she was the subject of a care order, and lived with the
    appellant's sister and her family.  The appellant did not  have  direct
    contact and was not even permitted to speak to the child on the  phone.
    Such indirect contact could be maintained from Ghana.   The  respondent
    accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  go  and  live
    with her father in Ghana.

24. The Care Order arrangement for the child to live  with  her  aunt,  her
    uncle, and their two little boys  aged  6  years,  and  10  months  old
    respectively, would continue whether or not the appellant was removed.

25.  From  [22]-[25]  the  First-tier  Judge  summarised  his  reasons  for
    concluding that the deportation order was 'not  inconsistent  with  her
    [s55] best interests' and not disproportionate. Direct contact was not,
    he considered, an option for some considerable time and  'it  would  be
    possible to maintain indirect contact  with  effort  on  his  part  and
    assistance and support from  his  sister  and  her  partner'  when  the
    appellant was in Ghana.

26. The judge concluded:

         "Taking all of the above into account, I find that the  appellant's
         deportation is justified as the evidence shows that he  presents  a
         sufficiently serious threat within the United Kingdom to  meet  the
         threshold for the  deportation  of  an  individual  with  permanent
         residence.  It is a proportionate response in the circumstances and
         is not contrary to his daughter's best interests.  I find that  the
         appellant is not  in  need  of  international  protection  and  can
         relocate within Ghana, in those circumstances there is no  need  to
         make an assessment under section 72 of the 2002 Act."

27. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

28. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Resident  Judge  Campbell,  who
    considered that the First-tier Judge had arguably erred in  failing  to
    make an adequate Regulation 27(5) dangerousness  finding,  and  in  the
    application of HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (Rev 1) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176  with  respect  to  the  section  55  best
    interests of his daughter.

Rule 24 Reply

29. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply, arguing  that  the  decision  was
    adequately reasoned, given the assessment that the appellant remained a
    high risk to children and was not even permitted  direct  contact  with
    his daughter.

30. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

31. For the appellant, Mr Burrett acknowledged  that  the  evidence  showed
    that even if the  appellant  were  granted  supervised  access  to  his
    daughter, he was likely to see her at most 6 times a year.  There would
    be lifelong restrictions on his being with children on his own, but  it
    was a single offence which had occurred  in  February  2017,  and  been
    reported to the police in March 2017.  He was arrested on 3 March  2017
    and bailed not to live at his sister's family home, which  had  endured
    until the trial in 2019.  He had committed no further  offences  during
    that time.

32. Not all children would be  at  risk  from  the  appellant,  Mr  Burrett
    submitted, since the OASys report said the risk was to known  children.
    The appellant had not been convicted of the offence of rape, but of the
    lesser offence of sexual activity with a minor, with  penetration.   Mr
    Burrett said the appellant accepted that his actions had been seriously
    wrong.

33. Mr Burrett contended, without evidence, that statistics showed that sex
    offenders when released committed 50%  fewer  offences  than  those  of
    other offenders.  That had been argued  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
    The judge in making his decision had no regard to the management  which
    would take place on release.

34. As regards the section 55 issue, Mr Burrett asserted that the appellant
    currently had contact three times a week with his daughter, albeit  not
    direct contact. The child did not see her mother and  was  living  with
    her aunt.  He relied on HA (Iraq),  and  argued  that  the  obligations
    placed on the 'decision maker' at [154] of that decision  included  the
    judge.   Mr Burrett asked me to find a material error of law and  allow
    the appeal.

35. For the respondent, Mr Lindsay relied on his Rule 24 reply. The grounds
    of appeal did not seriously challenge the finding that there was a lack
    of  evidence  that  the  daughter  was  not  suffering  unduly  in  the
    appellant's absence.  The judge's decision was careful and fair, and he
    was in command of the facts,  including  the  inaccurate  reference  to
    'rape' in the OASys report. The judge had made  a  properly  considered
    forward looking assessment which was  amply  justified  on  the  facts,
    including proper consideration of proportionality, the breach of  trust
    involved in the offence, and the unduly harsh exception.  The  findings
    were sound and the First-tier Tribunal's decision should be upheld.

Analysis

36. I remind myself of the narrow circumstances in which  as  an  appellate
    Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal may interfere with findings of  fact  made
    by the First-tier Judge: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.   The  challenge  in  this
    appeal is to the adequacy of the findings of fact about the appellant's
    future dangerousness, and the best interests of his daughter.

37. Dealing first with the dangerousness question, Regulation 27(3) of  the
    2015  Regulations  requires  the  respondent  to  demonstrate  'serious
    grounds of public policy and public security' and the decision must  be
    proportionate, based exclusively on the appellant's personal conduct.

38. Section 27(5)(c) requires that such conduct 'must represent a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct  of
    the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent'.  In  this
    case, the OASys report, the care order, and the proposed  circumstances
    of release indicated that the appellant  was  considered  to  represent
    such a threat on an ongoing basis, and for life.

39. Despite Mr Burrett's eloquent submissions about the percentage  of  sex
    offenders who reoffend, and the risk being to known children, a risk of
    forced sexual penetration of a child under 16, which is  considered  to
    exist for life, is more than sufficient to support the appellant's  EEA
    deportation.    The  First-tier  Judge  did  not  err  in  finding  the
    appellant's removal to be proportionate, on the facts  of  this  appeal
    and he gave proper, intelligible and adequate reasons for  so  finding.



40. I consider next the best interests of the child, applying the  guidance
    in HA (Iraq), which was not available to the First-tier Judge  when  he
    decided this appeal.   At  [153]-[155],  Lord  Justice  Peter  Jackson,
    concurring  with  the  leading  judgment  by  Lord  Justice  Underhill,
    summarised the section 55 test:

         "153.          The  practical  effect  of  Section  55   has   been
         summarised in Zoumbas. I draw particular  attention  to  the  final
         parts of Lord Hodge's summary, reproduced for convenience:

             "(5) It is important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

             (6)  To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a
             child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

             (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
             is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

         154. To these I would respectfully add that  the  Section  55  duty
         falls on the decision-maker. A child  will  not  usually  be  in  a
         position to urge his or her point of view  and  the  decision-maker
         cannot treat the child as if he or she had some burden of proof.

         155. The assessment that has to be carried  out  is  therefore  one
         that is adequately informed and specific to the individual child as
         a person distinct  from  the  offending  parent.  It  requires  the
         decision-maker, as part of  the  overall  assessment,  to  look  at
         matters from the child's point of view - in the case  of  Exception
         2, the question explicitly concerns undue harshness to the child."

41. At [157]-[159], Peter Jackson LJ emphasised the  individual  assessment
    which must  be  made,  and  the  proper  approach  to  emotional  harm,
    concluding that:

         "159. ... Provided the decision-maker faces up to  the  reality  of
         the child's situation  and  gives  it  primary  consideration,  the
         public interest in deportation may prevail, but it will not  do  to
         minimise the emotional impact on the child of the severing of  ties
         by reference to the doubtful prospect of maintaining  relationships
         over many years by indirect means only, or  by  reciting  the  fact
         that this is what deportation does."

42. In this case, that was precisely what the First-tier  Judge  did.   The
    evidence, properly  understood,  is  that  since  the  appellant  found
    himself as sole carer for his baby daughter, a family  arrangement  was
    swiftly reached whereby his twin sister gave up work to  care  for  her
    and for her own little boy,  who  was  roughly  the  same  age  as  the
    appellant's daughter.  Another child  has  since  come  along  in  that
    household.  For all practical purposes, the appellant's sister  is  the
    only mother his daughter has ever known, and she has lived as a part of
    the sister's family throughout.  The appellant has not always lived  in
    the family, particularly since his arrest and bail in 2017.  He has not
    been home at all since he was convicted in 2019.

43. On the evidence, the judge was fully  entitled  to  consider  that  the
    evidence was that the appellant's removal to Ghana would  make  little,
    if any difference, to his daughter's situation or her  emotional  life.
    She is pleased to get letters from him, but she is in reality a  member
    of his sister's family and the care order which is in place, along with
    an emergency guardianship order, contemplates that  she  will  complete
    her childhood as a member of that family.    The First-tier Judge  made
    no error of law or fact in so finding.

DECISION

44. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      16
December 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


