
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00495/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AGNE KHAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C H Bexson, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of  Lithuania,  a  member  of  the  European
    Economic Area and was born on 30 January 1985.

3.   On 5 March 2015 she was served with a notice that  she  was  liable  to
    deportation in accordance with the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Thereafter a deportation order was made on  22  July
    2015.

4.   She appealed the above decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 May 2016 the appeal was allowed.

5.   The respondent sought permission to appeal against the  above  decision
    to this Tribunal and permission was granted on 20 May 2016 by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

The Relevant Law

6.   Under Regulation 19(3), subject to certain  limited  exceptions,  which
    do not apply here, it was accepted  that  the  appellant  may  only  be
    removed if:

         '(b) The Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
             is justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health in accordance with Regulation 21.'

7.   In the making  of  the  decision  in  terms  of  Regulation  19(3)  the
    decision-maker must have due regard to the factors listed in Regulation
    21(5) and (6) and these provision are in the following terms:

         "21(5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
                policy or public security it shall in addition to  complying
                with the preceding paragraphs of this Regulation be taken in
                accordance with the following principles:

                (a)    The  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality.

                (b)     The  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned.

                (c)    The personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society.

                (d)    Matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision.

                (e)    A person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision."

         "21(6)   Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
                policy or public security in relation to  a  person  who  is
                resident in the United Kingdom the decision-maker must  take
                account of considerations such as the age, state of  health,
                family and economic situation of the  person,  the  person's
                length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  person's
                social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom  and
                the extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his  country  of
                origin."

Submissions on Behalf of the Secretary of State

8.   Mr Jarvis at the  outset  of  his  submissions  advised  that  he  only
    intended to argue one of the grounds  of  appeal  which  was  in  these
    terms:

         "It is further submitted that the FTTJ asserts in his conclusion at
         paragraph 22 that  the  appellant  has  not  committed  a  criminal
         offence either before or after the index offence.  He has failed to
         consider the fact that the appellant deliberately sought  to  evade
         capture for a number of years by returning to her native Lithuania.
          Even at  the  point  she  allegedly  re-entered  the  UK  in  2012
         undetected, she continued to demonstrate a lack of respect for  the
         laws of the United Kingdom and was only caught having left  the  UK
         returning to Lithuania as she attempted  to  enter  the  UK  again.
         This demonstrates both a lack  of  compliance  and  additionally  a
         failure to accept responsibility for her offending."

9.   In putting forward this ground of appeal, Mr Jarvis conceded  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was a  careful  one;  that  in
    reaching its  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  had  regard  to
    numerous sources of evidence and factors; and that if the  decision  at
    paragraph 25 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination  was  well-made
    the appeal must fail.

Reply on Behalf of the Appellant

10.  Counsel's reply was a short one.  The First-tier Tribunal was aware  of
    the facts relied upon by the respondent in the ground of appeal founded
    upon.  At paragraphs 14 and  15  of  the  determination  these  various
    circumstances were set out.  The First-tier Tribunal would  accordingly
    have had these factors in  mind  when  considering  the  core  question
    before it.  There was accordingly no material error of law.

Discussion

11.  The First-tier Tribunal in coming to its decision begins  by  directing
    itself to the correct question, namely: did the personal conduct of the
    appellant represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  Thereafter,  in
    what we agree, is a careful consideration of that issue the  First-tier
    Tribunal has regard to a large number of relevant factors.   Among  the
    factors which are considered by it is the  judge's  sentencing  remarks
    with respect to the index offence (see: paragraph 20).   The  judge  in
    his sentencing remarks at page 6 makes full reference  to  the  various
    points  relied  on  by  the  respondent.   Accordingly  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by having regard to the judge's  sentencing  remarks  has  had
    regard to these points.  In addition  as  was  pointed  out  to  us  by
    Counsel for the appellant the First-tier Tribunal  refers  specifically
    to  these  points  at  paragraphs  14  and  15  in  a  section  of  the
    determination headed "Issues for me to determine".

12.  Against the above background  we  are  persuaded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has  had  proper  regard  to  the  points  relied  on  by  the
    respondent in reaching its decision on the core issue.  There  is  thus
    no material error of law.

13.  Even, had we been persuaded, that the First-tier Tribunal had  not  had
    full regard to the points relied upon by the respondent in  the  ground
    of appeal we would nevertheless have held that there  was  no  material
    error of law.  When regard is had to  the  whole  circumstances  relied
    upon by the First-tier Tribunal in reaching its decision  on  the  core
    issue we are persuaded that the points relied upon  by  the  respondent
    were of no materiality.  We believe that a failure  to  consider  fully
    the factors relied upon by the respondent would not have undermined the
    conclusion  reached  at  paragraph  25  in   light   of   the   careful
    consideration of a large number of factors carried out  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Even without full consideration of the  factors  relied
    upon by the respondent the decision reached by the First-tier  Tribunal
    was one which it was entitled to arrive at.  For these further  reasons
    we hold that there was no material error of law.

Decision

14.  For the foregoing reasons we refuse the appeal.

15.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

