
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |On 23 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     m t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION mADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Wilson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because of the Appellant's mental state.  We  are  concerned
    that publicity will create a risk to his health.

 2. This is an appeal by a national of the DRC against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent on 4 April 2014 refusing to revoke a deportation order.  The
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against the respondent's decision
    on 6 November 2013 to refuse to revoke a deportation order  made  on  6
    March 2012 under Section 51 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. The Upper Tribunal at a hearing on 2 October 2017 found  error  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and set it aside and gave directions for
    a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The decision to set aside was the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey who was particularly concerned about the impact of the  decision
    of the European Court of  Human  Rights  in  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  13
    December 2016, ECtHR (application No 41738/10) and  Judge  Storey  gave
    directions intended to  amplify  or  consider  the  relevance  of  that
    decision.  The decision of this Tribunal  in  EA  and  Ors  (Article  3
    medical cases - Paposhvili not applicable) [2017] UKUT  445  (IAC)  was
    not reported until 15 November 2017 which was about a  fortnight  after
    Judge Storey's decision was promulgated. Understandably Judge  Storey's
    directions had no regard to the decision in EA and Ors which  sets  out
    this Tribunal's position and which we intend to follow. The decision in
    EA and Ors does not bind us. We will continue to follow J v SSHD [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629. Mr Mackenzie asserted that we should not  follow  EA  and
    Ors but did not develop his arguments.

 5. The case was transferred to us but we include Judge  Storey's  decision
    and reasons which was promulgated on 26 October 2017.

 6. For the purposes of introducing the themes in this decision, and at the
    risk of over simplification, the appellant is subject to a  deportation
    order because he was sent to prison for four years in 2010 for offences
    including making threats  to  kill,  possessing  a  stun  gun,  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm and criminal damage.

 7. He was convicted of making threats  to  kill  after  a  trial  and  the
    threats were directed to the mother of his children.

 8. Further he was recalled to prison and later sentenced  to  four  weeks'
    imprisonment in October 2015 for using threatening  and  abusive  words
    and behaviour and also for possessing a controlled drug.  He has  other
    criminal convictions.

 9. He says that he should not be the subject of  a  deportation  order  in
    part because of the effective of removal on him and his children and in
    part because his mental health means it will be wrong to remove him.

10. This  appeal  has  already  been  dismissed  twice  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Unless  expressly  stated  otherwise  when  we  refer  to  a
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  we  mean  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal promulgated on 30 May 2017 that is the subject of  the  appeal
    to us.

11. The First-tier Tribunal had unchallenged evidence from a social worker,
    a Mr P Horrocks.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  includes
    considerable reference to this report.  The judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant does have a "genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    children", a daughter N who is aged 9 years and a son A who is  aged  5
    years.   His  relationship  with  the  daughter  is  closer  than   his
    relationship with the son.  The judge was entirely satisfied that their
    best interests lay in their remaining with their mother in  the  United
    Kingdom (something which no-one has doubted) and in continuing to  have
    face-to-face contact with their father the appellant  as  is  presently
    happening.  However the judge found that this is not a case  where  the
    best interests of the children can be achieved given the  clear  public
    interest in deporting the appellant as a foreign criminal.

12. The judge found that the effects on the  children  of  the  appellant's
    removal would not be unduly harsh.  The judge had particular regard  to
    medical reports from Professor Katona  and  from  Professor  Kodi.   At
    paragraph 32 the First-tier Tribunal said:

         "In the circumstances it seemed to me that there are mental  health
         facilities and treatment available in  the  DRC  and  there  is  no
         particular reason why the appellant could not have recourse to  it.
         I do not find on the evidence it is likely that the appellant  will
         be treated, as claimed, as if he were a "sorcerer" or  "bewitched".
         I accept that there are limitations upon the resources in  the  DRC
         and the limitations are to a degree presumably directed at what the
         government assesses the necessary funding  should  be.   Those  are
         judgments made by the government of the DRC and the fact that it is
         significantly different from that in the UK does not put  a  burden
         upon the UK authorities to provide medical treatment at a  standard
         which the appellant will be likely to obtain or has  been  able  to
         obtain in the UK."

13. It is against  this  background  that  Mr  Mackenzie  argued  that  the
    treatment the appellant would face in the DRC  from  local  healers  or
    traditional healers would be so inappropriate and harsh  that  exposing
    him to the risk of that would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
    and, alternatively the appellant's  mental  health  is  such  that  the
    effect of deportation combined  with  the  likely  available  treatment
    would be contrary to those same obligations and in any event  it  would
    be a disproportionate interference with the private and family life  of
    the appellant or, more pertinently, his children to remove him.

14. We have no difficulty in accepting  that  the  possible  ill  treatment
    identified in the evidence could be  sufficiently  serious  to  violate
    Article 3 but if there is any doubt about it all (we do not  have  any)
    it is supported fully by the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NO
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 876 at paragraphs 44 and  45,  the
    important parts of which we set out below:

         "44. ... The appellant does not simply claim  that  the  healthcare
         available to him in the UK is not available in Afghanistan.  Rather
         he submits that his condition, which generates the  need  for  that
         care,  of  itself  gives  rise  to  a  risk  of  ill-treatment   in
         Afghanistan.  He is not complaining about the consequences  of  the
         lack of treatment in Afghanistan  but  about  the  consequences  to
         which his condition gives rise in Afghanistan, that is to  say  the
         risk of inhuman or degrading treatment.

         45.  Whether it is right to regard these consequences as the Deputy
         Judge seems to have done as "wholly occasioned by his mental health
         condition"  I  rather  doubt.   I  would  have  thought  that   the
         consequences are occasioned by a combination of his  mental  health
         condition  and  the  societal  attitudes   thereto   prevalent   in
         Afghanistan.  But I do not think it  matters.   It  is  a  complete
         misreading of the regulatory and statutory materials and indeed the
         Secretary of State's own policy to think that the risk  of  inhuman
         or  degrading  treatment  does  not  generate  an  entitlement   to
         humanitarian protection if caused by a medical condition.   On  the
         contrary, it is the risk of inhuman or degrading treatment which is
         capable of lifting those cases out of the category of mere "medical
         cases" into the category  attracting,  exceptionally,  humanitarian
         protection."

15. The First-tier Tribunal's findings on  the  sort  of  difficulties  the
    appellant might experience in the event of his return are adequate  and
    although we agree with the skeleton argument that it is established  in
    these proceedings that the appellant does  suffer  from  post-traumatic
    stress disorder it does not follow from that that he  would  experience
    difficulties that would invoke the protection of Article 3.

16.  There  are  two  export  reports  from  Dr  Kodi.   The  one  that  is
    particularly relevant for present purposes is dated 7 May 2017  and  is
    in the supplementary bundle.  Dr Kodi describes himself  as  a  British
    citizen of Congolese origin.  His relevant qualifications  include  his
    being a former Associate Fellow of Chatham House and his having  worked
    as an Academic of the University  of  Nairobi  and  the  University  of
    Lubumbashi in the Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.   Dr  Kodi's  report
    includes an appropriate expert direction and we regard his observations
    as sincere, honest and helpful.

17. He concludes at paragraph 16 that the appellant:

         "... would likely  face  deep  seated  stigma,  discrimination  and
         vilification in the DRC on account of his mental health  condition.
         He is likely to be treated more harshly if  his  condition  was  to
         deteriorate on return  in  the  DRC.   He  would  even  risk  being
         killed."

18. This is chilling and we reflected on it.

19. He was asked particularly to explain what would be likely to happen  in
    the DRC. The report explains that there is no equivalent in the DRC  to
    the United Kingdom process of "sectioning" the mentally ill.   Dr  Kodi
    says that it  is  "customary  for  people  with  severe  mental  health
    problems to be declared witches or possessed by evil spirits".  He then
    quotes a Congolese psychologist  saying  that  in  effect,  people  who
    suffer from mental disorder risk are accused of sorcery  or  witchcraft
    rather than seen as someone in need of medical treatment.  He says that
    such people "Are, therefore, subjected to inhuman treatment."

20. However when that opinion is particularised  he  says  they  "Could  be
    chained, beaten and undergo other violent treatment to cast  the  devil
    out of them."  We are  entirely  satisfied  that  being  beaten  and/or
    chained is  the  kind  of  behaviour  that  violates  Article  3.   The
    difficulty for the appellant is Dr Kodi's use of the phrase "could be".
     The report explains how people with "Mental health  problems  continue
    to be ostracised by their  families  because  of  the  stigma  that  is
    attached to mental problems.  They are left to fend for themselves  and
    end up wandering and sleeping in the streets where they are "beaten and
    chased by the public."  We do  not  doubt  that  these  things  happen.
    Indeed we know that there is an example of a person from the DRC  being
    killed in  the  United  Kingdom  because  he  was  perceived  as  being
    bewitched.  However we are not able to extrapolate from these  examples
    evidence to support a conclusion that there is  a  real  risk  of  such
    serious ill-treatment facing this appellant.  The  report  contains  no
    quantitative analysis to help us discern if these  examples  of  highly
    unacceptable behaviour are so commonplace that they are evidence  of  a
    real risk facing this appellant.  While we accept  that  the  appellant
    has no-one to help him we think that there is a likelihood that he will
    be wandering and sleeping in the streets  and  we  accept  there  is  a
    likelihood of some ill-treatment. We understand that, regrettably, this
    kind of ill-treatment tends to  happen  to  people  who  sleep  on  the
    streets in the United Kingdom.  Again, this nastiness is  not  evidence
    of a real risk of the appellant being exposed to treatment sufficiently
    severe to come within the scope of Article 3.

21. In short, we find that Dr Kodi's report raises a concern but  does  not
    prove the case.

22. We have noted as well the report from Al Jazeera which, as is perfectly
    permissible, includes some  rather  shocking  and  disturbing  pictures
    although  we  are  spared  their  full   unpleasantness   because   the
    photocopying is not of the highest quality.  That does not matter.   We
    have got the point.  This confirms that such mental  health  facilities
    as are available tend to come from spiritual healers rather than people
    with professional qualifications.  We regard such treatment  as  likely
    to be useless rather than reasonably likely to contravene Article 3.

23. A person is not entitled  to  international  protection  against  being
    "prayed  over"  or  subjected  to  unorthodox  treatment  unless   that
    treatment is itself sufficiently severe to come  within  the  scope  of
    Article 3 and again there is no evidence  before  us  that  establishes
    that that is a real risk rather than a theoretical possibility for this
    appellant.

24. It follows therefore that we are not persuaded that  there  is  a  real
    risk of Article 3 treatment in the event of return and we  reject  that
    argument.

25. The leading case on the correct approach for people who  are  suffering
    from ill-health and particularly mental ill-health  remains  J  v  SSHD
    [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629  which  we  find  Mr  Mackenzie  has  summarised
    accurately and helpfully at  paragraph  39  of  the  skeleton  argument
    provided for his use in the First-tier Tribunal.  This case  makes  the
    point that there is a particularly high threshold to cross in  "foreign
    cases" because the difficulty is not the act of the United Kingdom  but
    the poor health facilities  in  the  country  of  which  the  appellant
    happens to be a national.  He is just not entitled  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom because the health treatment available there is  better.
    We agree that the available healthcare is inadequate.  Drugs are  going
    to be very difficult to find.  Finding anybody to  give  the  appellant
    care is going to be a matter of chance and may not happen at all.   His
    prospects are profoundly unattractive and we should not  try  to  salve
    our consciences  by  deciding  otherwise.   It  remains  our  view  the
    difficulties are not the result of some  wrongful  act  by  the  United
    Kingdom that contravenes the appellant's  human  rights.   His  plight,
    grim as it is, is not so serious that it meets the very high  threshold
    that is explained in case law.

26. Neither do we accept that this is an  appeal  that  should  be  allowed
    under Article 8 under the Rules or statute or at all.  We again clearly
    accept the principle underlying Mr Mackenzie's argument.  Circumstances
    which are not sufficient to attract the  protection  of  Article  3  on
    their own can be part of an "Article 8 mix" and can  theoretically  tip
    the balance.  However the appellant's criminal misbehaviour has put him
    in the category of people that Parliament has decided  are  people  who
    should be deported in the public interest.  It  is  not  sufficient  to
    come within the scope of Exception 1 and Exception 2 under Section 117C
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Before an  appeal
    can be allowed under Article  8  there  have  to  be  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described".

27. For what it is worth we are satisfied that the appellant  comes  within
    the scope of Exception 1.  Clearly he has been lawfully resident in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life.  He has been in the United Kingdom
    since he was aged 11 and he was  born  in  1989.   Deciding  if  he  is
    "socially and culturally integrated in  the  United  Kingdom"  is  more
    problematic.  We do not fall into the  trap  of  saying  he  cannot  be
    culturally integrated because he is a criminal.   We  agree  that  that
    primitive instruction has been stopped firmly by the Court of Appeal in
    SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  The sad truth is  that  this  man's
    mental illness leaves us to wonder if he can  really  be  described  as
    integrated anywhere but he certainly is not someone who  is  culturally
    integrated into another country outside the United Kingdom and in  that
    sense we are satisfied that he is socially  and  culturally  integrated
    into  the  United  Kingdom.   We  also  accept  there  would  be   very
    significant obstacles to his integration into the country to  which  it
    is proposed that he be deported.   This  is  a  result  of  his  mental
    illness and the difficulties he would find there.

28. We do not agree that he comes within the scope of Exception 2.  Clearly
    he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  qualifying
    children particularly his daughter.  We do not agree that the effect of
    deportation on the children will be unduly  harsh.   Deportation  is  a
    nasty process which breaks up family relationships but  Parliament  has
    decided that it is necessary.  It  is  particularly  necessary  with  a
    person who has been sent to prison for  four  years  and  although  the
    behaviour that led to that sentence is the main course  of  concern  in
    this case it is not the extent of his criminality.  He is not living in
    a nuclear family and his contact with the children is limited.   We  do
    not accept that the harshness and harsh is an appropriate word in their
    relationship with their father being interrupted in this way  is  undue
    in the context of deportation proceedings.

29. However we find nothing which would justify  finding  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2."

30. We have also had  regard  to  the  Rules  and  particularly  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" test.  We are not sure that it adds  anything
    to the statute but if it does in theory it does not in this case.   The
    disturbing  circumstances  are  the  Appellant's  ill-health  and   the
    consequences of his having to manage them in the DRC.  We have  already
    explained why we do not find that sufficient  reason  to  rule  in  his
    favour on the Article 8 point.

31. Putting these things together we dismiss the appeal.






|Signed                                 |                                    |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal Judge |Dated: 31 January 2018              |




                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2017                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [M T]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of the DRC has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Davey sent on 6  July  2017
    dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 4 April 2014 refusing to revoke a deportation order.

2.   The principal target of the grounds  is  what  Judge  Davey  stated  at
    paragraph 35:

         "Reliance was placed on Paposhvili v Belgium [2016]  Grand  Chamber
         of the European Court.  It seems to me that that  case  principally
         starts from the point of a failure by Belgium to  properly  address
         its ECHR obligations.  The comments made by the Grand  Chamber,  on
         UK caselaw (sic) are essentially obiter to that issue: The ratio of
         the case was the failings by Belgium.  The Grand Chambers  decision
         is case fact specific and is not a  precedent.   I  note  that  the
         United Kingdom was not a party to that litigation nor was it making
         representations on the issues arising.   I  note  the  remarks  the
         Grand Chamber made about the cases of N and D but I apply  UK  case
         law as to the  application  of  Article  3  ECHR  in  the  domestic
         circumstances of the UK.  N and D remain the  relevant  authorities
         to consider the Article 3 issues.  For  these  reasons,  either  in
         respect of Article 3 ECHR or as  a  consideration  in  relation  to
         compliance with Article 8 and proportionality, in neither situation
         it seems to me has the Appellant discharged the burden  of  showing
         that there is a breach of those respective Articles."

    The reasons the judge gave for disregarding Paposhvili are said  to  be
    flawed in more than one respect.

3.   The grounds also take issue  with  what  is  said  to  be  the  judge's
    failure to explain why there  was  no  risk  of  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment to the appellant from destitution and/or harmful  traditional
    treatment.  Connected with this contention,  it  was  argued  that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for not accepting the contents of
    the expert report by Dr Kodi, consultant on African affairs and  former
    Associate Fellow of the RIIA (Chatham House).

4.    The  third  ground  contended  that  the  judge's  findings   on   the
    availability of healthcare in the DRC were not reasonably open to him.

5.   I heard submissions  from  Mr  MacKenzie  and  Mr  Deller,  the  latter
    stating that he found it difficult to disagree with the thrust  of  the
    former's submissions given that both the Court of Appeal and the  Upper
    Tribunal  have  identified  a  range  of   issues   requiring   further
    examination regarding the impact of the Paposhvili judgment on previous
    domestic case law.

6.   I have concluded that the judge  fell  into  legal  error  for  several
    interrelated reasons.  First, he was clearly incorrect to  dismiss  the
    significance of Paposhvili for the reasons he  gave  in  paragraph  35.
    The judgment was from  the  Grand  Chamber  and  its  main  conclusions
    clearly went further than a finding regarding  a  specific  failure  by
    Belgium to observe its Article 3 obligations in the  applicant's  case.
    It was not solely fact-specific.  The fact that the UK was not a  party
    to the proceedings and  did  not  make  representations  on  the  issue
    arising did not alter the fact that as a Grand Chamber judgment it  was
    intended to clarify the Court's position on Article  3  'health  cases'
    relating to expulsion.  The effect of the judge's incorrect analysis of
    the significance of the judgment was that he failed  to  take  it  into
    account, contrary to s. 2 of the Human Rights  Act  1993.  The  judge's
    misdirection as regard the relevance of Paposhvili was compounded by  a
    failure to give reasons for  disagreeing  with  the  expert  report  of
    Professor Kodi.  To summarise the purport of this report was "show[ing]
    the limitations on medicines and treatment available  in  the  DRC"  is
    quite simply a mischaracterisation, as that report is  highly  critical
    of the ability of the  DRC  to  afford  even  basic  medical  care  and
    includes a specific assessment of the risks to mentally ill people from
    societal neglect, destitution and/or  traditional  treatment.   It  was
    also wrong of the judge to consider the issue of the numbers of  health
    professionals as irrelevant:  See Y & Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362
    at [41] and [46].  The  judge's  dismissal  at  paragraph  34  of  such
    concerns as not relevant to the Article  3  obligation  was  erroneous.
    Whilst it may have been open to the judge to assess that the  appellant
    would not on return face serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his
    health resulting in intense suffering or  a  significant  reduction  in
    life expectancy, it was not open to him to do so without engaging  with
    the expert report and medical COI (or "Med  COI"  as  it  is  sometimes
    termed) to the contrary.

7.   Nor does  it  seem  to  me  that  the  judge  properly  considered  the
    relevance of the appellant's account of having no family  ties  in  the
    DRC, having come to the UK at the age of 11 in  September  2000.   That
    was potentially a relevant consideration  when  assessing  whether  the
    appellant would be able to survive in the DRC given his  mental  health
    problems.

8.   The judge did consider the issue of destitution, but it  is  not  clear
    that he understood  the  need  for  a  distinct  consideration  of  the
    appellant's likely living circumstances in terms  of  the  consequences
    for his mental health condition: see NO (Afghanistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    876.

9.   As regards the appellant's Article 8 circumstances, the judge's  flawed
    assessment of the expert report also clearly affected his  analysis  of
    whether on return the appellant would face very  significant  obstacles
    to integration.  Linked to this the judge also failed to make any clear
    appraisal  of  the  social  worker  evidence  of  Peter  Horrocks  (who
    considered that the children would suffer great distress and trauma and
    harm to their emotional development upon the removal of the appellant).



10.  In light of the above I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  for
    material error of law.  There is no dispute with regard to the  judge's
    primary findings of fact and hence these shall stand.  The task of  re-
    making the decision by applying clear and correct legal  principles  to
    those findings is complicated by the pending litigation on  Paposhvili.
    In these circumstances I will instruct that the file be  placed  before
    the Principal Judge for review in 6 weeks time as to whether it  should
    be stayed to await  the  outcome  of  these  pending  cases.   With  Mr
    Mackenzie's consent, Mr Deller undertook to provide the Upper  Tribunal
    with details of the pending cases in the near future. At  the  time  of
    concluding this decision this has not happened.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 26 October 2017
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

