
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number:    DA004932016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision and Reasons promulgated    |
|on 2 August 2017                       |On 7 August 2017                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KISHAN PATEL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Moksud instructed by International Immigration
                    Advisory Service (Levenshulme).


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik, promulgated on 20  February  2017,
        in which the Judge allowed Mr Patel's appeal under the  Immigration
        (EEA) Regulations 2006 against the order for his  deportation  from
        the United Kingdom.




Background


     2. Mr Patel is a Spanish national born on  23  January  1992  and  who
        arrived in the United Kingdom in 1996.
     3. On 15 February 2016 Mr Patel was  convicted  for  failing  to  stop
        after an accident and causing serious injury by dangerous  driving,
        as a result of which he was served with  notice  of  liability  for
        deportation.
     4. The Judge notes Mr Patel's  criminal  history  at  [12-13]  of  the
        decision under challenge.
     5. The Judge noted the Secretary of State accepted that Mr  Patel  had
        acquired a right of permanent residence in the United  Kingdom  but
        did not accept that he had been continuously resident in the UK for
        10 years in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.
     6. The Judge carefully considered the evidence and found the witnesses
        to be credible [37] leading to it  being  concluded  in  that  same
        paragraph that "Having done so I find, on  balance,  the  appellant
        has been continuously resident in the UK  in  excess  of  10  years
        [sic] prior to the deportation order having been made".
     7. The Judge writes at [42]:


             "42.     I accept  the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  a
                  serious offence [sic] and this is my starting  point;  yet
                  his personal conduct does not, on the evidence before  me,
                  suggest he represents a genuine, present and  sufficiently
                  serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
                  of society; nor do I find the threshold of the  imperative
                  grounds  of  public  security  has  been  met  to  justify
                  deportation. Consequently I allow the appeal."


     8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal arguing that the
        Judge had applied the wrong test when assessing  whether  Mr  Patel
        was entitled  to  the  higher  level  of  protection,  namely  that
        'imperative grounds' were required to deport Mr  Patel.  Permission
        to appeal was granted by  a  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal on 22 May 2017.



Error of law


     9. The  Judge  clearly  calculated  the  qualifying  period  that  the
        appellant had remained in the United Kingdom from the date of entry
        as, arguably, did the Designated Judge in appearing to  find  there
        was no merit in the respondent's argument that such an approach  is
        infected by arguable legal error.
    10. Case law relevant to determining whether the Judge erred in such an
        approach includes SSHD v MG Case no c-400/12 CJEU (second  chamber)
        it which it was held that unlike the requisite period for acquiring
        a right  of  permanent  residence,  which  began  when  the  person
        concerned commenced lawful residence in the host Member State,  the
        10 year period of residence necessary for the grant of the enhanced
        protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a) must be  calculated  by
        counting back from the date of the decision ordering that  person's
        expulsion. All relevant factors should be taken into  account  when
        considering the calculation of the  10-year  period  including  the
        duration of each period of absence from the host Member State,  the
        cumulative duration and the frequency  of  absences.  A  period  of
        imprisonment was in principle  capable  both  of  interrupting  the
        continuity of the period of residence needed and of  affecting  the
        decision regarding the grant of enhanced protection provided  there
        under, even where the person concerned  had  resided  in  the  host
        member state for 10 years prior to  imprisonment  albeit  that  the
        fact that the person had been in the member state 10 years prior to
        imprisonment was a factor to be taken into account.
    11. In MG (prison-Article  28(3)(a)  of  Citizens  Directive)  Portugal
        [2014] UKUT  00392  it  was  held  that  (i)  Article  28(3)(a)  of
        Directive 2004/38/EC contained the requirement that for  those  who
        had resided in the host member state for the previous 10 years,  an
        expulsion decision made against them must be based upon  imperative
        grounds of public  security;  (ii)  there  was  a  tension  in  the
        judgment of the Court of Justice of  the  European  Communities  in
        Case C-400/12 Secretary of State v MG in respect of the meaning  of
        the "enhanced protection" provision; and (iii) the judgment  should
        be understood as meaning that a period of imprisonment during those
        10 years did not necessarily prevent a person from  qualifying  for
        enhanced protection if that  person  was  sufficiently  integrated.
        However, according to the same judgment, a period  of  imprisonment
        must have a negative impact in so far as  establishing  integration
        was concerned.
    12. In Warsame [2016] EWCA Civ 16 it was  held  that  in  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department v MG (Portugal)  (Case  C-400/12)  it
        was established that the ten-year period of residence  required  to
        benefit from the enhanced protection of imperative grounds must  in
        principle be continuous and be calculated by counting back from the
        date of the deportation decision.  The  Court  of  Justice  of  the
        European Union  ("CJEU")  found  that,  in  principle,  periods  of
        imprisonment interrupted the continuity of periods of residence for
        the purposes of granting the  enhanced  protection.   However,  the
        CJEU also held that claimants  could  still  qualify  for  enhanced
        protection if they could show that  they  had  resided  in  the  UK
        during the ten years prior to imprisonment, but that depended on an
        overall assessment of whether integrating links  previously  forged
        with the host Member State had been broken. On the  facts,  because
        of an earlier period of imprisonment which also  broke  continuity,
        this appellant was not one of those in the narrow "maybe"  category
        of cases contemplated in MG (Portugal) where a person  has  resided
        in the host state during the ten years prior to  imprisonment,  for
        which a more detailed individual assessment of links  to  the  host
        and home state would be required.
    13. The authorities clearly show the Judge adopted a  flawed  approach,
        as rather than starting from  the  date  of  entry  to  the  United
        Kingdom the Judge was required to count back from the date  of  the
        deportation decision. In this appeal the date of  decision  was  27
        September 2016.
    14. Even though the Judge arguably erred in  failing  to  approach  the
        matter in the manner set out above, it has not been made  out  that
        any error was material to the decision to allow the appeal.
    15. The decision in Warsame clearly  illustrates  the  need  to  assess
        whether a person subject to a deportation  decision  under  the  EU
        Regulations had resided in the UK during  the  10  years  prior  to
        imprisonment based upon an assessment of whether  integrated  links
        previously forged within the United Kingdom had been broken. It was
        accepted by Mr McVeety that the Judge had undertaken the  necessary
        investigation to ascertain whether Mr Patel had established he  was
        integrated within the United Kingdom and whether those links forged
        had been broken. It was accepted Mr Patel has resided in the United
        Kingdom since the age of 3 and is in effect, with the exception  of
        his passport, identical to a British citizen  member  of  his  peer
        group.
    16. The assessment by the Judge that  Mr  Patel  was  entitled  to  the
        higher rate of protection  has  therefore  not  been  shown  to  be
        infected by arguable material legal error.
    17. The Secretary of State also raise the  issue  of  whether,  on  the
        basis of serious grounds of public policy or  public  security,  Mr
        Patel's history of offending combined with the seriousness  of  the
        index offence reflected in the 32-month prison  sentence  may  have
        led to a different decision.
    18. It is accepted that the personal conduct of the  individual  is  an
        important aspect to be considered as measures taken on  grounds  of
        public policy or public security are to be based exclusively on the
        conduct of the person concerned, although Article 3(2) of Directive
        64/221 specified that previous criminal  convictions  were  not  in
        themselves to constitute grounds for taking such measures  although
        could be taken into account, but only insofar as the  circumstances
        which had given rise to the conviction were  evidence  of  personal
        conduct constituting a present threat to the requirement of  public
        policy.
    19. This is not a matter involving the commission of  an  exceptionally
        heinous offence, although it  is  accepted  Mr  Patel  committed  a
        serious driving offence.
  20. Mr Patel is entitled to the higher level of protection.   Guidance  on
      how an appeal against a decision to deport should be  considered  when
      such a level of protection is available can be found in LG  (Italy)  v
      SSHD EWCA Civ 190.   In this case the Court of Appeal  confirmed  that
      an EEA national who had been here for 10 years can only be deported on
      imperative grounds  of  public  security,  which  bear  a  qualitative
      difference to the less stringent grounds applicable to deportation  of
      those with  shorter  residence.  'Imperative'  connoted  a  very  high
      threshold and the ground requires an actual  and  compelling  risk  to
      public security,  though  public  security  need  not  be  equated  to
      national security.  The Court said that "risk to  the  safety  of  the
      public or a section of the public" seemed reasonably  consistent  with
      the ordinary meaning of the test.  The Court of Appeal seemed to be of
      the opinion that  the  severity  of  the  offence  committed  was  not
      necessarily one to make removal "imperative".
  21. In VP (Italy) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 806 the Court of Appeal  endorsed
      LG (Italy)  and  said  that  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
      required not simply a serious matter of public policy  but  an  actual
      risk to public security so compelling that it justified an exceptional
      course of removing someone who had become integrated  by  many  years'
      residence in the host state.  The severity of the offence could  be  a
      starting point for consideration but there had to be something more to
      justify a conclusion that that removal was imperative to the interests
      of public security.   In that case, an Italian who had been here since
      1986 and had served 9 years for attempting to murder of  his  ex-wife,
      including twice trying to cut  her  throat  and  inflicting  32  knife
      wounds, could not be removed when there was a low risk of  reoffending
      albeit a medium risk of serious harm to others.
    22. The Judge properly considered  the  above  cases  at  [41]  of  the
        decision under challenge and the conclusion that the  threshold  of
        imperative  grounds  of  public  security  had  not  been  met  is,
        arguably, the only decision available to the Judge on the facts  of
        this case. The Secretary of States  grounds  refer  to  the  second
        level of protection, serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
        security, and ignore the fact Mr Patel is entitled  to  the  higher
        level of protection.
    23. This  is  not  a  'domestic'  deportation  but  one  that  must  be
        considered in light of the provisions of relevant EU law.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 August 2017












