
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00573/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 July 2015                      |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     CH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel instructed by Bhattarai & Co
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt  of  court  proceedings.  We  make  this  order
       because the case  concerns  the  best  interests  of  the  claimant's
       daughter and she is entitled to privacy.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 10  April  2015  allowing  the
       respondent's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to make
       a deportation order against him pursuant to section 32(5) of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. In this decision we refer to the respondent as "the
       claimant".

    3. The claimant is a national of Jamaica. He was born on 31 October 1992
       and is now 22 years old. He arrived in the UK in December 2001,  aged
       nine, when he joined his mother who was already residing in  the  UK.
       He was granted indefinite leave to remain  on  10  April  2006  as  a
       dependent of his mother.

    4. On 11 November 2009 his daughter, now 5 years old, was born. She is a
       British citizen. The claimant is  not  in  a  relationship  with  his
       daughter's mother, who is a British citizen.

    5. On 10 August 2011 the claimant was convicted of burglary (which  took
       place in January 2009) and theft (which took place in March 2011) and
       sentenced to eighteen months detention for the theft and  six  months
       detention for the burglary to be  served  consecutively  in  a  Young
       Offenders Institute.

    6. On 17 March 2014 a deportation order was made against  the  claimant.
       The  Notice  of  Decision  explained  that  this  was  an   automatic
       deportation under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  and  that
       the claimant did not fall within any of the  exceptions  set  out  in
       section 33 of that act.

    7. The claimant contended that deporting  him  would  be  in  breach  of
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  ("ECHR").  The
       Secretary of State disagreed. The  Notice  of  Decision  states  that
       although it was recognised that deportation would interfere with  the
       claimant's rights under Article 8, and that it may not be in the best
       interests of his daughter, it was nonetheless justified in  light  of
       the severity of the criminal offence. The claimant's  position  under
       paragraphs 399(a) and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  (as  then  in
       force) were considered  and  it  was  found  that  he  could  satisfy
       neither. In reaching its conclusion with respect to paragraph 399(a),
       the Secretary of State noted that although the claimant had a genuine
       and subsisting relationship with his daughter, her  mother  (who  has
       parental responsibility) was able to care for her in the UK  and  the
       claimant  could  maintain  contact  from  Jamaica.   With  regard  to
       Paragraph 399A, the Secretary of  State  noted  that  the  claimant's
       brother lived in  Jamaica  and  could  give  him  some  support.  The
       Secretary of State  also  commented  that  because  of  his  academic
       achievements and employment history the claimant  would  be  able  to
       secure employment in Jamaica; and that because he had grown up in his
       family he had maintained his cultural links with Jamaica. Furthermore
       it was not considered there were any exceptional circumstances  which
       would outweigh the public interest.

    8. The claimant appealed and the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Elson MBE on 12 September 2014. In a decision promulgated on 25
       September 2014 Judge Elson  allowed  the  appeal,  finding  that  the
       appellant met the requirements of both paragraph 399(a) and  399A  of
       the Rules and that in any event  deportation  would  be  contrary  to
       Article 8 of the ECHR.

    9. The Secretary of State appealed Judge Elson's decision and the appeal
       was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Mailer. In a decision promulgated  on  22  December  2014  they
       found that Judge Elson had erred in law by failing  to  consider  the
       public  interest  question  by  reference  to  Section  117  of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act")  and
       that the old Immigration Rules had been applied.  They  remitted  the
       case for re-hearing before a different First-tier Tribunal judge.

   10. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell on 18 March
       2015. The judge heard evidence from the  claimant,  his  mother,  his
       step-brother and his step-father. It is apparent that the judge had a
       degree of  sympathy  towards  the  claimant.  At  paragraph  76,  for
       example, he recorded that he found the claimant to be intelligent and
       sensible and was satisfied he had accepted responsibility for his own
       future and the role he should play in relation to his daughter.

   11. The judge found that deporting the claimant would  breach  his  human
       rights with reference to Article 8 ECHR. He was  satisfied  that  the
       claimant met the requirements of both paragraph 399(a) and  paragraph
       399A of the Immigration Rules and that Exceptions 1 and 2 of  section
       117C of the 2002 Act applied.

   12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid on
       the basis that the judge  made  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  his
       assessment  of  'unduly  harsh'  under  paragraph   399(a)   of   the
       Immigration Rules and 'very significant  obstacles'  under  paragraph
       399A of the Rules.

Consideration

   13. At the Hearing we heard submissions in relation to paragraphs  399(a)
       and 399A of the Immigration Rules and we will now  consider  each  in
       turn.

Paragraph 399(a)

   14. Paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

           '399.  This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                        ...'

   15. In considering Paragraph 399(a) it  is  necessary  to  have  in  mind
       Exception 2 of section 117C of the 2002 Act, which applies where,  as
       in this case, the foreign criminal has been sentenced  to  less  than
       four years imprisonment:

           'Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.'

   16. The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant had a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with his daughter and that she was a
       qualifying child. The only issue for the judge to decide,  therefore,
       was whether the effect of the claimant's deportation on his  daughter
       would be "unduly harsh". Under paragraphs 399(a)(i)(a) and (b) of the
       Rules there are two parts to the "unduly  harsh"  test:  it  must  be
       unduly harsh for the claimant's daughter to move to Jamaica with  him
       and unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without him.

   17. The judge's decision does not, on its face, address  undue  harshness
       at all. At paragraph 79 the judge stated that he  was  satisfied  the
       claimant's daughter had a subsisting relationship with  the  claimant
       and that accordingly paragraph 399(a)(i) applied. At paragraph 85  he
       concluded that Exception 2 of section 117C  was  satisfied.  However,
       there is nothing in the decision to show that he in  fact  considered
       the question of how deportation would affect the claimant's  daughter
       and whether the effect would be unduly harsh on her.

   18. Mr Singer acknowledged  the  deficiency  in  how  this  part  of  the
       decision had been drafted but argued that there was no error  of  law
       as the facts support the finding that the undue  harshness  test  has
       been met even if the judge has not clearly articulated  his  reasons.
       With respect to paragraph 399(a)(i)(a), his argument was that  it  is
       self evident it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's daughter  to
       move with him to Jamaica. There is some force to this submission.  We
       note in this regard that the Secretary of State's Notice of  Decision
       states that it would be in the claimant's daughter's  best  interests
       to remain in the UK with her mother, who  is  her  main  carer.  With
       regard to paragraph 399(a)(i)(b), Mr Singer pointed  to  the  judge's
       findings about the relationship between the claimant and his daughter
       and commented on the impediments to  this  being  maintained  if  the
       claimant were to be deported.

   19. Mr Tarlow did not disagree with any of the judge's  factual  findings
       but argued  they  were  insufficient  to  draw  the  conclusion  that
       deportation would be "unduly harsh" for the claimant's  daughter.  Mr
       Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal  which  submit  both  that  no
       circumstances have been raised that would suggest it would be  unduly
       harsh for the claimant's daughter to move to  Jamaica  with  him  and
       that it would not be unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without
       him as contact could be maintained.

   20. Mr Tarlow emphasised that the judge had  failed  to  give  sufficient
       weight to the public interest in deportation.  Mr  Singer's  response
       was that it is clear from the judge's decision that he  had  accorded
       due weight and deference to the public interest. He  noted  that  the
       judge had recognised that the Immigration Rules  (together  with  the
       provisions of Part 5A of the 2002 Act) constitute a complete code for
       considering Article 8 of the ECHR in deportation appeals and that the
       judge had referred to Court of Appeal case law -  cited  in  his  own
       skeleton argument - stressing the weight to be given  to  the  public
       interest in deporting criminals.

   21. The judge has completely  failed  to  engage  with  the  question  of
       whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  claimant's  daughter  to
       remain without her father in the UK. This is  not  a  straightforward
       question. Weighing on one side is that it is undoubtedly harsh  on  a
       young girl to be separated from her father, where, as is  surely  the
       case here, it is in her best interests to  maintain  regular  contact
       with him and for him to be a part of her life as she grows up. She is
       already five years old and the loss of contact with  her  father  may
       well be of great distress  to  her.  Moreover,  given  the  uncertain
       relationship between the claimant and his daughter's mother  it  also
       may prove difficult to maintain relations by telephone and visits  as
       this will no doubt depend on the mother's cooperation,  which  cannot
       be guaranteed. This further weighs against deportation. On the  other
       hand, this is not a case where a family unit will be broken up -  the
       claimant only sees his daughter once a week or once every few  weeks.
       The daughter lives with and is cared for by her mother. Moreover,  it
       is necessary to reflect on the seriousness of the claimant's criminal
       offence bearing in mind the requirement under Section 117C(2) of  the
       2002 Act to take into account that the more serious the  offence  the
       greater the public interest in deportation.

   22. The judge has failed to  carry  out  the  proportionality  assessment
       required by the Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act  and  as  described
       above. Indeed, he appears to have reached  the  conclusion  that  the
       requirements of paragraph 399(a) were  met  without  even  addressing
       whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  claimant's  daughter  to
       remain in the UK without him. We do not accept Mr Singer's submission
       that we can infer from the factual findings  that  the  unduly  harsh
       test was met such that it was not necessary for  the  judge  to  make
       explicit his analysis  and  reasons.  Although  the  judge  correctly
       identified the relevant  legal  test  he  failed  to  carry  out  the
       assessment it required. This was an error of law.

Paragraph 399A

   23. Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

           '399A. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                  applies if -

                  (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                      most of his life; and

                  (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                      and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                      integration into the country to which it is  proposed
                      he is deported.'

   24. In considering Paragraph  399A  it  is  necessary  to  have  in  mind
       Exception 1 of section 117C of the 2002 Act, which applies where,  as
       in this case, the foreign criminal has been sentenced  to  less  than
       four years imprisonment:

           'Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.'

   25. The first question is whether the claimant has been lawfully  in  the
       UK for most of his life. This requirement is clearly met.

   26. The  second  question  the  judge  was  required  to  consider  under
       paragraph 399A was whether the claimant was socially  and  culturally
       integrated into the UK. The Secretary of State,  in  its  grounds  of
       appeal, submitted that the claimant, because of his  criminality  and
       disregard for societal norms, was not integrated into  the  UK.  This
       argument, which was not developed by Mr Tarlow at the hearing, is not
       a strong one. The judge's findings about  the  claimant's  education,
       training and employment, as well as his command of  English  and  the
       length of time he had been in the UK, made it undoubtedly open him to
       conclude that the claimant was socially and culturally integrated  in
       the UK.

   27. The third, and more difficult, question is whether the judge erred in
       finding that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
       claimant's integration into Jamaica. This was dealt with by the judge
       at paragraph 80, where he found that if the claimant were deported to
       Jamaica he would be left to fend for himself and  would  find  living
       very difficult. He took into consideration that the claimant had come
       to the UK as a child, had not been back to Jamaica since, and  lacked
       knowledge and experience  of  Jamaica.  In  those  circumstances,  he
       concluded that there were very significant obstacles  to  integration
       such that the requirement of paragraph 399A(c) was satisfied.

   28. Mr Tarlow, relying on the grounds of appeal, submitted that there was
       nothing before the judge to suggest the claimant could not  establish
       and enjoy,  albeit with some difficulty, a private life  in  Jamaica,
       and that in reaching his conclusion the judge had relied  on  matters
       that went no way to demonstrating the very significant obstacle  test
       was satisfied.

   29. Mr Singer's response was  that  the  judge  had  provided  sufficient
       reasoning for his conclusion that there would  be  "very  significant
       obstacles" to integration into Jamaica. He referred  to  the  judge's
       findings at paragraph 80 on the length of time the claimant had  been
       in the UK and the lack of support he would receive in Jamaica.

   30. It is clear, from the judge's findings of fact, which  were  accepted
       by the Secretary of State, that the  claimant  would  face  obstacles
       integrating into Jamaica. It is less clear,  however,  whether  these
       obstacles meet the  threshold  of  being  "very  significant"  as  is
       required by the Rules.

   31. We remind ourselves that the issue before us  is  whether  the  judge
       made an error of law and not whether we, or a differently constituted
       Tribunal, might have reached a different conclusion based on the same
       facts. The judge has reached a particular view of the facts but  that
       does not make his finding an error  of  law.  The  question  we  must
       decide is whether  his  finding  that  there  were  very  significant
       obstacles was one that was open  to  him  on  the  evidence  for  the
       reasons given.

   32. The judge had the benefit of hearing the claimant and other witnesses
       give evidence.  He heard the claimant describe his  relationship  (or
       lack thereof) with family members in  Jamaica.  At  paragraph  30  he
       recorded the claimant as saying he did not know  about  other  family
       members and that he would  not  know  how  he  would  integrate  into
       Jamaica.  At paragraph 34 the judge recorded the claimant's  comments
       about finding work in Jamaica and the difficulties he anticipated  he
       would face. The judge also heard the claimant's mother who  commented
       on the difficulty the claimant might face in Jamaica. He recorded her
       as saying her son in Jamaica is like a stranger to the  claimant  and
       would not be able to help him or make available a place  for  him  to
       stay. At paragraph 80 the judge summarised his factual findings  that
       lead him to the conclusion  that  there  would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to integration: that  the  claimant  lacked  knowledge  and
       experience in Jamaica; that he would have to fend for  himself;  that
       he had been in the UK since he was nine and  had  not  been  back  to
       Jamaica since.

   33. The judge has given reasons for his findings  which  demonstrate  the
       correct legal test, having regard to the Rules and 2002 Act, has been
       applied. His factual findings show that in making his decision he has
       had regard to, and considered, the relevant evidence before  him.  In
       these circumstances, although the judge's finding that  the  claimant
       would face significant obstacles integrating into  Jamaica  might  be
       considered somewhat generous to the claimant, we are  satisfied  that
       it was a finding that was properly open to him based on the  evidence
       and therefore that he has not made an error of law.

Conclusion

   34. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its assessment of whether the
       claimant met the requirements of paragraph 399a of the Rules.

   35. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  error  of  law  in  its
       consideration of whether the requirements under paragraph  399A  were
       satisfied.

   36. In order to establish that his deportation would be contrary  to  the
       UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR the  claimant  was  only
       required to satisfy either paragraph 399a or paragraph 399A.

   37. As no error has been identified with respect to paragraph  399A,  the
       error with respect to paragraph 399a was not material to the  outcome
       of the claimant's appeal.  Accordingly, the  decision  of  First-tier
       Judge Buckwell shall stand and I dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
       appeal.

   38. An anonymity order is made.

Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Dated: 12 August 2015

DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

