

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00754/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th October 2013                          |On 22nd October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           VERNON EUGENE MITCHELL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway of Halliday Reeves Law Firm, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M Morgan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 14th August  1971,
      appeals against a decision of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Lloyd sitting with  Mr  Sandall,  a  non-legal  member  of  the
      Tribunal) who, by a  determination  promulgated  on  18th  July  2013,
      dismissed his appeal against a decision  of  the  respondent  that  he
      should be deported. That decision was made by the respondent  pursuant
      to the "automatic deportation" provisions of  section  32  of  the  UK
      Borders Act  2007.  That  was  because,  as  the  appellant  had  been
      convicted of making false representations to make gain for himself  or
      cause loss/expose others to risk, failing to answer to bail and  other
      lesser offences for which he was sentenced to a  total  of  27  months
      imprisonment, he was  a  foreign  criminal  in  respect  of  whom  the
      respondent was required to make deportation  order,  such  deportation
      being deemed to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  of  the
      provision of section 32(4) of the 2007 Act.


     2. The challenges to that determination  raised  in  the  grounds  for
        seeking permission to appeal  are  in  essence  challenges  to  the
        findings by the panel in so far as the Article 8 human rights claim
        is concerned. Permission was  granted  on  those  grounds  and,  in
        addition, on the basis that it was arguable that the provisions  of
        paragraph 399A had not been properly canvassed before the panel and
        that the calculations provided by the appellant showing that he did
        not meet the 20 year residence requirement because of  imprisonment
        were inaccurate.

     3. Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules clearly states that periods
        of imprisonment are to be disregarded when  calculating  length  of
        residence. Mr  Mitchell  does  not  have  the  requisite  20  years
        residence when his terms of imprisonment are taken into account. He
        does not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A, as  was  properly
        conceded by Mr Selway before us and indeed considered  specifically
        in paragraph 64 of the First-tier Tribunal panel's determination.

     4. Mr Selway sought to rely only upon his grounds  seeking  permission
        to appeal and did not seek to elaborate them.

     5. In terms of Article 8 there was no challenge to  the  recording  of
        evidence by the First-tier Tribunal; rather the  challenge  was  to
        the weight placed upon that evidence and the findings  reached.  In
        essence the grounds sought to challenge the findings on  the  basis
        that:

              a. The panel found no material inconsistency in the  facts  as
                 put forward yet reached different conclusions to those  put
                 forward by the appellant;
              b. The panel accepted the Probation service assessment of risk
                 rather than expressly setting out its own views as to risk;
              c. There had been no balancing exercise by the panel which had
                 only considered the appeal under the Immigration Rules;
              d. The panel failed to take account of factors positive to the
                 appellant;
              e. The panel failed to take account of the impact  of  removal
                 on family members
              f. The panel failed to give consideration to the  difficulties
                 the appellant would face on return  to  Zimbabwe  after  21
                 years away;
              g. No real finding on whether the appellant's light complexion
                 would result in him having difficulties in Zimbabwe.




     6.  Although  it  is  correct  that  the  panel  found   no   material
        inconsistency in the evidence before it, that does not  necessarily
        result in a finding that the removal of the appellant  pursuant  to
        the deportation order falls within one of the exceptions. The panel
        considered  the  evidence  and   in   a   detailed   and   coherent
        determination set out its reasons for its own  conclusions  on  the
        weight to be given to that evidence in reaching its findings. In so
        doing the  panel  gave  legally  sufficient  reasons  for  reaching
        conclusions that were plainly open on the evidence.


     7. In so far as  the  probation  report  is  concerned,  although  the
        grounds challenge the acceptance by  the  panel  of  its  findings,
        there  is  no  assertion  that  the  panel  reached  an   incorrect
        conclusion or what other evidence there was before the panel  which
        should or could have led to a different conclusion.

     8.  The  panel  referred  specifically  to  the  appellant's  lack  of
        political profile and the lack of evidence that he would suffer ill
        treatment because of his mixed race (paragraph 53); that  his  long
        absence from Zimbabwe was a significant factor as was his family in
        the UK, his lack of family in Zimbabwe and his own view that he was
        rehabilitated (paragraphs 65, 70, 71, 72  and  73).  It  is  simply
        incorrect to assert that  the  panel  failed  to  take  account  of
        factors positive to the appellant, to the impact on his  family  or
        his absence from Zimbabwe.

     9. The panel specifically considered the appellant's appeal under  the
        Immigration Rules and also 'on a free standing basis' in line  with
        caselaw as it then was. In  paragraph  74  the  panel  specifically
        balanced   the   "personal   factors   against   the   history   of
        offending......Having taken into  account  all  the  evidence  [the
        panel] find the Home Office decision was  proportionate  and  there
        was no breach of Article 8." There can be no criticism of the panel
        for undertaking this 'two stage  approach'  because  that  was  the
        approach as required at that time.  Although the Court of Appeal in
        MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192 has now made clear that the Rules in fact  provide  a
        complete code and so it is not  necessary  to  look  outside  them,
        nothing turns in this case upon the route taken  by  the  panel  in
        reaching their conclusion.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and we do not set the decision
    aside; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  panel  to  dismiss  the
    appeal stands.


    The appeal is dismissed.











    Anonymity:


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    There was no application to lift that order and it therefore  continues
    (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008).









                                    Date 17th October 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
