
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 29 July 2015                       |                On 12 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Mr Norbert Facuna
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr Tom
Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Titus Ojo, Counsel instructed by Graceland
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Slovakia.  His date of birth is 11  July
    1991.  We shall refer to him as the appellant  as  he  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   This matter appears before the Upper Tribunal  today  as  a  result  of
    permission to appeal being granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  on
    9 September  2014.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  regarded  it  as
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal, comprising Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Miles and Dr J O de Barros (non-legal member),  may  have
    erred in law in the Determination and Reasons promulgated  on  12  June
    2014.  In light  of  the  conclusion  that  we  have  reached  and  the
    submissions that we have received we will deal with the matter  briefly
    and consciously refrain from entering into some of the aspects  of  the
    case in detail.

3.   The central point urged on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    course of the helpful and concise submissions from Mr Wilding  is  that
    the panel materially erred in finding that the appellant  was  entitled
    to enhanced protection without  making  the  assessment  or  evaluation
    required in the light of the decisions in MG [2014] EUECJ C- 400/12 and
    Onuekwere [2014] EUECJ C- 378/12  so  as  to  determine  the  level  of
    protection. In particular a  qualitative  assessment  was  required  in
    relation to the matter of the integration or degree of  integration  of
    Mr Facuna, in the context  of  ascertaining  the  consequences  of  his
    having served a period of imprisonment for criminal offences.

4.   The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal indicates at paragraph 8  that
    their consideration in this area was affected by  what  they  termed  a
    statement from the representative of the Secretary of State.   On  that
    occasion Mr Vaghela said that if the evidence of Mr Facuna was accepted
    then Mr Facuna was entitled to protection under Regulation 21(4) of the
    2006 Regulations, which would therefore require a finding of imperative
    grounds of public security to justify his removal.  That statement,  as
    recorded by the First-tier Tribunal, has at times  been  described,  in
    particular by the representative today for Mr Facuna, as a concession.

5.   If it is a concession then the Secretary of State today  says  that  it
    involves a misapprehension of the  legal  position  and  therefore  the
    matter must still be addressed and the  fact  of  a  concession  is  no
    answer to that.

6.   We are not persuaded that the passage referred  to  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is necessarily properly or  safely  treated  as  a  concession
    strictly so-called, but even if it was to  be  so  treated  we  do  not
    regard that, in the circumstances of the present case, as  constituting
    a sufficient barrier to the matter being treated in accordance with the
    legal framework that applies.

7.   There have been additional arguments advanced on behalf of Mr Facuna.

8.   The Secretary of State maintained that  in  accordance  with  authority
    one must look back from the date of the  relevant  decision.   In  this
    case that is 11 January 2014.  When one is  calculating  in  the  first
    instance the answer to the question whether there  are  ten  years  one
    must have regard to the circumstances in which periods of  imprisonment
    may interrupt the continuity of residence, but  what is called  for  in
    this connection is an evaluation of integration.  (It  is  further  not
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the  appellant  was  exercising
    Treaty rights since 1 May 2004 when Slovakia joined the EU, or that the
    appellant had a right of permanent residence.)

9.   Mr Ojo maintained, on behalf of Mr Facuna, that (a) the quality  of  Mr
    Facuna's presence in the jurisdiction changed  in  2004  and  (b)  that
    regard should be had to the period  between  1998  and  2004  which  he
    argues at  least  has  some  additional  bearing  on  the  question  of
    integration.

10.  In our view, the panel materially erred because  they  found  that  the
    appellant was entitled to enhanced protection under regulation  21  (4)
    of the 2006 without  giving  adequate  reasons  and  without  directing
    themselves fully in relation to the calculation of the relevant  period
    and the  consequence  of  the  imprisonment.   The  starting  point  at
    paragraph 8 of the decision is likely to have contributed to this,  and
    we do not criticise the panel.

11.  However, for this reason we set aside the decision to allow the  appeal
    under the 2006 Regulations.

12.  The representations from the Secretary of State accept  that  if  their
    argument is correct the matter will have to be considered  further  and
    having asked both representatives before us today whether  the  further
    consideration is best undertaken before the First-tier Tribunal  or  by
    the Upper Tribunal the balance of submission points towards the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  That is  an  approach  that  we  respectfully  support.
    There is a fact finding assessment to be undertaken in relation to  the
    level of protection potentially available to the  appellant  which  may
    involve an evaluative exercise to assess integration.  This is an  area
    in which the factual content is such that it is  desirable  that,  once
    findings have been made, if those findings need to be  reviewed  by  an
    Appellate Tribunal, then the Appellate Tribunal  should  be  the  Upper
    Tribunal and not, as would be the case if the findings were made by the
    Upper Tribunal, a review by the Court of Appeal.  And so we will  allow
    the appeal and remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  We add that the panel found that the appellant's evidence  in  relation
    to his education here was credible; however, the finding alone may  not
    be sufficient to establish permanent residence and  this  is  an  issue
    that the First-tier Tribunal will also need to consider.

14.  It is important that it is understood by all that the  exercise  before
    the First-tier Tribunal will include the question of the  relevance  or
    otherwise of the matter of permanent residence and if relevant  whether
    there is permanent residence, and the question  whether  the  appellant
    has resided  here  for  ten  years  or  whether  the  imprisonment  has
    interrupted the ten years.

15.  Given that those areas are going to need to be considered by the First-
    tier Tribunal and in order that they can be  properly,  and  this  time
    completely, traversed by both sides we propose to direct an exchange of
    skeleton arguments  forward  from  this  point.   These  can  be  brief
    skeleton arguments but sufficient to inform each side  as  well  as  to
    inform the First-tier Tribunal.   Subject  to  any  refinement  we  are
    invited to require, we think the Secretary of State's  skeleton  should
    come first in 21 days from today and is to be followed  by  a  skeleton
    argument from Mr Facuna's legal representatives  21  days  after  that.
    Both parties must be in a position to grapple with the issues  that  we
    have identified at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

We direct the parties to file and serve  skeleton  arguments  in  accordance
with paragraph 15 of this decision.  This was  communicated  orally  to  the
parties at the hearing.






Signed                                                              Date:  4
August 2015


Mr Justice Knowles


