
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00738/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|                                 |On 12 August 2019                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 PAULINA [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a Polish national who was born on  7  September  1995.
    She appeals against a decision which was issued by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Roots ("the judge")  on  2  March  2020,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to deport her  to  Poland  on  public
    policy or public security grounds.

 2. The appellant states that she came to the UK in 2012.  She studied here
    but I do not understand it to be said that she worked.  She lived  with
    her parents in the West Country.  Her father worked for a  tyre-fitting
    company.

 3. Unfortunately, the appellant began to use drugs during her time in  the
    UK.  Her use was recreational at first but, as is so  often  the  case,
    she developed a habit which  turned  into  an  addiction.   Criminality
    followed on from addiction and she began to accumulate convictions  for
    acquisitive offences which she had committed in order  to  raise  money
    for drugs.

 4. The  appellant's  two  children  were  made  the  subjects  of  Special
    Guardianship Orders by the Family Court and continue to live  with  her
    parents in Bristol.  The appellant's life  spiralled  out  of  control,
    culminating in the respondent's decision to deport her from the  United
    Kingdom on the ground that  she  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental  interests  of  the  UK.
    That decision was made on 1 October 2018.

 5. The respondent also issued a certificate under  regulation  33  of  the
    Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016,  preventing  the  appellant  from
    remaining in the United Kingdom whilst any appeal against her  decision
    was pending.  The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision
    on 16 November 2018.  The time for bringing the appeal was extended  by
    a Tribunal Caseworker  on  20  November  2018.   As  a  result  of  the
    certificate, however, the respondent was able to remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom on 23 November 2018.

 6. The appeal was first listed  in  Newport  on  14  December  2018.   Her
    current representatives (Osprey Solicitors) wrote on 11 December  2018,
    however, to state that they had only recently been instructed and  that
    they would benefit from additional  time.   The  appeal  was  adjourned
    until 21 February 2019.  That listing was also adjourned, although  the
    reasons for the adjournment are not clear to  me  from  the  Tribunal's
    file.  What is clear is that the appellant was, by that stage,  seeking
    to re-enter the United Kingdom so that she  could  be  present  at  her
    appeal hearing (regulation 41 refers).

 7. The appeal was duly re-listed on 5 March 2019, now at Taylor House but,
    in due course, that hearing was changed to  a  Case  Management  Review
    Hearing ("CMRH").  At the CMRH (before Judge Aujla) it  was  agreed  on
    all sides that the appeal should proceed substantively in three months'
    time but that there should be an additional CMRH before  that  listing.
    Directions were set and the further CMRH was set for 23 July 2019, with
    the substantive hearing  to  take  place  on  5  September  2019.   The
    respondent was directed, by Judge Neville  at  the  CMRH  in  July,  to
    explain what she had done to facilitate the appellant's admission under
    regulation 41.

 8. The respondent wrote on 9 August 2019, stating that  she  had  answered
    the appellant's request for re-admission in February but that  she  had
    heard nothing since.  As a result, the respondent invited the  Tribunal
    to proceed in the appellant's absence on  5  September.   A  Designated
    Judge was persuaded that this was the correct  course  and  he  ordered
    that the hearing would remain in the list.  The appellant's  solicitors
    wrote on 22 August 2019, however, and sought an adjournment so that DNA
    reports could be completed, confirming  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her children.  That persuaded the  FtT  to  adjourn  once
    again and the appeal was relisted before  for  a  further  CMRH  before
    Designated Judge Peart on 21 November 2019.  The appeal was relisted to
    be heard substantively on 11 February 2020.

 9. The appellant booked tickets to travel to the UK on 10 February and  to
    return to Poland on 12 February but she lost her Polish ID card and was
    unable to send it to the respondent so that arrangements could be  made
    for her return.  The respondent advised the appellant's  solicitors  to
    apply for an adjournment and to re-apply for readmission to the UK when
    a new date was notified.  The appellant's solicitors duly  applied  for
    an adjournment but it was refused on the papers,  with  the  Designated
    Judge noting that the appellant had had considerable  opportunities  to
    make the necessary arrangements.

10. So it was that the appeal came before Judge Roots on 11 February  2020.
    The appellant was represented by counsel (Mr Khan), the respondent by a
    Presenting Officer (Ms Ayodele).  Mr Khan sought an adjournment so that
    the appellant could return to the UK to be present at the hearing.   He
    explained that the appellant had lost her ID card  and  was  trying  to
    obtain a  new  one.   Judge  Roots  refused  the  application  for  the
    following reasons:

         "[18] Mr Khan renewed the adjournment request which had been made a
         few days prior to the hearing and refused  on  10  February.   This
         stated that the appeal could take place in her absence.  He  sought
         an adjournment to enable the appellant to attend.  His  submissions
         are set out in the Record of Proceedings.  The  presenting  officer
         opposed the adjournment  request.   I  refused  the  request.   The
         history is set out above.  There have been multiple adjournments on
         this case.  There is no evidence from the appellant in  support  of
         the submissions which Mr Khan made.  There is no evidence from  any
         authorities in Poland that she is trying to get any  new  ID  card.
         She apparently reported as long ago as 2 January that this had been
         lost but there is no concrete  evidence  of  any  steps  taken.   I
         refused the adjournment request."

11. The hearing therefore proceeded in the appellant's absence.  The  judge
    concluded, in brief summary, that the appellant continued to  represent
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  UK  because
    she had not taken any proven steps to address her addictions.   And  he
    concluded  that  her  exclusion  from  the   United   Kingdom   was   a
    proportionate step under the Regulations and Article 8 ECHR on  account
    of that threat.

12. Permission to appeal was sought on the single ground that it  had  been
    unfair for the judge to proceed with the  hearing  in  the  appellant's
    absence.  Permission was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchison on the  basis
    that that complaint was arguable.

13. On 24 June 2020, the papers were placed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kamara,  who  formed  the  provisional   view   that   progress   might
    legitimately  be  made  in  the  appeal  notwithstanding  the   ongoing
    difficulties as a result of the  Covid-19  pandemic.   Her  provisional
    view was that the Upper  Tribunal  could  fairly  and  justly  consider
    without a hearing the questions of whether the FtT  had  erred  in  law
    and, if so, whether its decision should  be  set  aside.   She  invited
    written submissions on the merits of the appeal and she made  it  clear
    that any submissions about the  application  of  rule  34(1)  (decision
    without a hearing) would also be considered by the Upper Tribunal.

14. Written submissions were duly filed by the parties.  Neither sought  an
    oral hearing.  I bear the absence of any such request in mind, as  rule
    34(2) requires me to do.  I also consider whether  the  appeal  can  be
    determined fairly and justly without an oral hearing.   In  considering
    that question, I bear firmly in mind what was said by the Supreme Court
    in Osborn v Parole Board [2014] 1 AC 1115.  There is a single  question
    at  issue  in  this  appeal.   Both  parties  have  made  full  written
    submissions upon it.  There are no disputed questions of fact, and  the
    credibility  of  a  party  or  witness  is  not  in  issue.    In   the
    circumstances,  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  the  appeal  can   be
    determined fairly and justly on the papers.

15. For the appellant, Mr Khan submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the over-riding objective of dealing  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly, and had failed to consider what had  been  said  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Nwaigwe [2014] 418 (IAC).  The  guiding  consideration  for
    the FtT had been fairness but it had failed to consider that issue,  or
    even to mention it.  The appellant had sought a  short  adjournment  so
    that she could obtain a new ID card and attend  the  hearing.   It  was
    clear that the appellant's  absence  from  the  hearing  had  played  a
    material part in the judge's decision to dismiss  the  appeal  because,
    for example, he had noted that he  would  attach  less  weight  to  her
    statement as a result of her absence.

16. For the  respondent,  Mr  Lindsay  accepted  that  there  had  been  no
    reference to  the  over-riding  objective  or  to  fairness.   He  also
    accepted that the appellant's absence from the  hearing  had  played  a
    material part in  the  judge's  reasons  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   He
    nevertheless submitted that the  decision  to  refuse  was  not  unfair
    because there had been numerous  adjournments  before  the  hearing  in
    front of the judge and there had been no evidence whatsoever to support
    the claim that the appellant had lost her ID  card  and  that  she  had
    applied for another one.

Analysis

17. In Nwaigwe, the then President of  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  guidance
    which was summarised in the judicial headnote in this way:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

18. With respect to the judge, I feel bound to conclude that  his  decision
    to refuse an adjournment was erroneous in several respects, even before
    considering whether that decision was ultimately fair.  As submitted by
    Mr Khan, the judge failed to apply the correct test (fairness)  and  he
    failed to mention or to consider the over-riding objective  of  dealing
    with cases fairly and justly.  Fairness and the over-riding  objectives
    were material matters which the judge failed to take into account.  The
    errors into which he demonstrably fell may be described in any  or  all
    of these three ways.

19. Robust case management is to be encouraged and a judge on appeal should
    be slow to interfere with  case  management  decisions  made  by  hard-
    pressed judges at first instance.  These principles are trite.   It  is
    nevertheless imperative that any  application  for  an  adjournment  is
    considered and decided on the proper footing.  I am  unable  to  detect
    anything in the judge's decision, with respect, which indicates that he
    did so.  Whilst he was justifiably frustrated by the inordinate  amount
    of time which had passed since the appeal was first lodged in  the  FtT
    in 2018, he was nevertheless  bound  to  consider  the  application  to
    adjourn the hearing to enable the appellant to attend with  a  view  to
    deciding whether or not it would be fair to  proceed  in  her  absence.
    His failure to do so is necessarily an error of law.

20. Mr Lindsay accepts that the judge's consideration  of  the  application
    was not as it should have been.  Ultimately, however, he  submits  that
    the judge's error does not justify the setting aside  of  his  decision
    because, on any proper view, the decision not to adjourn was  the  only
    one which a judge could have reached on the facts of  this  case.   The
    appellant had lost her ID card some time before the hearing and she had
    failed to produce any evidence that she had applied for a new one.   Mr
    Lindsay submits that any judge, properly directing himself  to  Nwaigwe
    and to the over-riding objective, would have refused to adjourn.

21. Whilst I have considerable sympathy for the respondent's submissions, I
    am ultimately unable to accept what is said by Mr Lindsay.  The absence
    of evidence that the appellant had lost her ID card, or  that  she  had
    applied for a new one, was necessarily a relevant consideration for the
    judge to bear in mind.  The fact that there was no evidence  of  either
    assertion militated in favour - and strongly in favour  -  of  refusing
    the adjournment request.  So too did the absence of any indication from
    Mr Khan of the amount of time that it might take to acquire a new card.
     But these were not determinative considerations, even if it meant that
    the judge would be unable to identify a date in  the  future  when  the
    appeal could be expected to proceed substantively.

22. What the judge was required to consider was  whether  it  was  fair  to
    proceed in the appellant's absence, and it was also relevant for him to
    consider - as part of that analysis - (i) the fact that  the  appellant
    has an EU Law right (subject to public security considerations)  to  be
    present for her hearing; and (ii) the prejudice which  might  arise  if
    she was not present.  Given the significance which he attached  to  her
    absence from the hearing, it is likely that  he  would  have  concluded
    that prejudice was likely to arise if he proceeded in her absence.

23. I am not able to conclude, in the circumstances,  that  the  only  fair
    course was to proceed with the hearing  on  11  February  2020  in  the
    absence of the appellant.  The judge could have put the matter back  in
    the list for counsel to make further enquiries of the appellant  and/or
    his instructing solicitors as to the  timescales  involved.   He  could
    have adjourned the hearing to a further CMRH in a week's time  so  that
    further information could be provided.  Although there was  an  absence
    of evidence in support of the application, and even though  the  appeal
    had run an unsatisfactory course before it reached the judge, the point
    had not been reached where the only fair course was to proceed  without
    the appellant.  With some reluctance, therefore, I hold that the  judge
    erred in refusing to adjourn and that his decision must be  set  aside.
    Given that the effect of the error was to deny  the  appellant  a  fair
    hearing, the only permissible course is for the appeal to  be  remitted
    to the FtT to be heard by a judge other than Judge Roots.

24. Months have now passed since the events  I  have  described  above.   I
    firmly expect that the appellant now has the replacement ID card  which
    she required and that she should be able  to  travel  to  the  UK.   Of
    course, different considerations now abound, and I am not sure  whether
    travel between Poland and the UK is possible at present.   I  therefore
    direct that the appellant's solicitors must, no later than  10  working
    days after this decision is issued:

    Notify the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House of whether:

      i) The appellant still wishes to attend the hearing of her appeal;

     ii) An application is to be made to the respondent  to  facilitate  her
         admission for that purpose;

    iii) The appellant has all of the documents which are required for  that
         application and to travel to the UK;

     iv) There are any Covid-19 related  difficulties,  whether  related  to
         travel arrangements or otherwise, which might bring about a request
         for a delayed listing



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT was erroneous in law and is set aside.   The  appeal
is remitted to the FtT, to be heard afresh  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Roots.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                              12 August 2020
