
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00286/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 30 November 2015                      |               On 18 January 2016    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AAM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Ms Rahman, instructed by IAS, Birmingham


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy promulgated on 15 May 2015, in  which
    she allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State (whom I refer to as the respondent as she was below)  made  on
    29 October 2013 to make a deportation order made against him.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Somalia who  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    with his mother and siblings in 2000 to join his father who was already
    here. It is the claimant's case that his father had been recognised  as
    a refugee and that he too, after  arrival,  had  been  granted  refugee
    status.  The claimant's case is that  he  is  at  risk  of  persecution
    and/or  ill-treatment  contrary  to  article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention if deported to Somalia.

 3. The claimant has been convicted of several offences as detailed in  the
    respondent's letter of 29 October 2013, including on 22 July  2005  six
    counts of robbery and attempted robbery for which he received 39 months
    imprisonment and on 14 December 2009, assault occasioning actual bodily
    harm and theft for which he was sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment.  It
    is on account of these convictions that the respondent sought to deport
    the claimant

 4. For the reasons  set  out  in  the  letter  of  29  October  2013,  the
    respondent did not accept that the claimant was at risk  on  return  to
    Somalia and concluded [9] that he had not  in  the  past  been  granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain as a refugee and his father's  asylum  claim
    had been rejected.

 5. After the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal has  been  lodged,  it  was
    adjourned at the request of the respondent. It then came  before  Judge
    Herlihy. As is recorded at [21]:

    21.      The appeal...listed for hearing... on 3 October 2014  ...  was
         adjourned by Judge Webb at the request of the Respondents to  allow
         the Respondents to consider if the Appellant had  been  invited  to
         rebut the presumption that section 72 of the 2002  Act  applied  to
         his case as it appeared that the  appellant  was  a  recognised  UN
         Convention refugee having entered the United Kingdom on a UN travel
         document and the Family Union traditions and article 33 (2) of  the
         Refugee Convention (Exclusion from Protection)  was  relevant.  The
         Appellant's representative stated  that  he  had  at  that  hearing
         produced a copy of the travel document issued to the  Appellant  to
         enter the United Kingdom and a  copy  of  his  father's  convention
         document copies of which appear in the Appellant's appeal bundle.

         ...

    23.  At the commencement of the hearing the Respondent's representative
         stated that he did not have the Respondent's bundle and he  had  no
         record of what transpired at the earlier hearing.  He  requested  a
         brief adjournment to make enquiries which I granted. On  return  to
         court the Respondent's Representative said that he had been  unable
         to contact office in Liverpool being the criminal  case  with  team
         but accepted that if the Appellant was a refugee is  the  issue  of
         revocation of  his  refugee  status  had  not  been  considered  in
         accordance with  Home  Office  policy.  He  could  not  access  the
         Appellant's father's file to establish whether he had been  granted
         refugee status but conceded (after speaking to a senior caseworker)
         in all likelihood that the Appellant's father had  been  recognised
         as a refugee and that the Appellant had been granted refugee status
         as a family member.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found: -

      i) that it was very likely that the claimant is a refugee[25]; that it
         was very likely that his father had  been  granted  refugee  status
         say, and, that the facts are summarised in  paragraph  [6]  of  the
         Respondent's decision letter was incorrect;

     ii) that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  law
         as she had not conceded that the claimant is a refugee and thus had
         given   no   consideration   as    to    the    policy    on    the
         revocation/cancellation of the claimant's refugee status;

 7. The First-tier Tribunal thus allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  it
    was not in accordance with the law.

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the judge failed to make findings  on  relevant  matters,  that  is
         whether at the date of the hearing the  claimant  was  at  risk  on
         return to Somalia; or, whether he was to be excluded on account  of
         his criminal offending [2];

     ii) the fact that the decision letter may have contained errors did not
         obviate the requirement for the Claimant to demonstrate that he met
         one of the exceptions within sections 32  (2)  or  (4)  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007;

    iii) the finding that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law
         was inadequately reasoned;

 9. On 10 June 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge granted permission on  all
    grounds. stating:-

          The  grounds,  while  asserting  the  fact  with  the  Appellant's
          membership of a majority clan makes the Appellant's  asylum  claim
          untenable, raises an arguable ground in the context of an  absence
          of reasoning in respect of the judge's finding that the  Appellant
          has established, on the basis of his arrival  in  the  context  of
          family reunion on his father's asylum status and is arguable as  a
          risk assessment needs to be located in the present.

    Submissions

10. Mr Norton sought to rely on additional documents which he accepted were
    not before the First-tier Tribunal. These appear to show that there has
    been errors in the identity of the claimant and that  he  may  not,  in
    fact, have been entitled to enter the United Kingdom under  the  family
    reunion provisions; and, that his father had not been recognised  as  a
    refugee.  Mr Norton accepted that the respondent would need to issue  a
    supplementary refusal letter.

11. Ms Rahman submitted that  in  light  of  what  had  been  said  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    judge had been entitled to conclude that the  claimant  had  previously
    been recognised as a refugee. She submitted that it  flowed  from  that
    that  the  respondent  should  then  have  considered  her  policy   on
    revocation of asylum, not least given the safeguards  therein  and  the
    involvement of UNHCR. She submitted that  the  considerations  in  that
    policy were different from the consideration of whether the claimant is
    a refugee. She did, however, accept (as did Mr  Norton)  that  were  an
    error of law to be found, the matter would need to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier for a fresh decision on all issues.




    Findings

12. I consider that, on the basis of the submissions made to the  judge  by
    the presenting officer, she was entitled to conclude that the  claimant
    had been recognised as a refugee.  Mr Norton did not seek  to  persuade
    me that the  evidence  said  to  show  the  contrary  was  of  such  an
    incontrovertible nature such that it could be  taken  into  account  at
    this stage; in any event,  it  is  contested  by  the  claimant  and  a
    significant fact-finding exercise (including allegations of  deception)
    would need to  be  undertaken  with  regard  to  the  propositions  now
    presented.

13. As the judge was entitled to proceed on the basis that the claimant  is
    a refugee, then it follows that, as Ms Rahman submitted, the respondent
    erred in failing to follow her own revocation policy as set out in  the
    documents produced to the Tribunal. Mr Norton did not demur  from  that
    proposition. Further, and in  any  event,  the  respondent  would  have
    needed to consider whether (albeit that the claimant was  not  entitled
    to refugee status) the risks giving rise to  the  fear  of  persecution
    remain and engage articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

14. In the circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  one
    to which it was entitled to come. Adequate reasons were given  why  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law, and thus  remained  before
    the respondent to make a fresh, lawful decision.    Whether that  would
    now give rise to an in-country right of appeal is  not  a  matter  that
    concerns me.




Summary of conclusions


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I maintain the anonymity order put in place by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date:  3 December 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





