
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00418/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2014                |On 17 December 2014               |
|extempore                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                              Mr Royola Kawoya
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Amino, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State (whom I refer to as the respondent  as  she  was
    below) appeals with permission against a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G A Black promulgated on 22 September 2014  wherein  she
    allowed the appeal of  Mr  Royola  Kawoya,  whom  I  refer  to  as  the
    claimant, against the decision of the Secretary of  State  made  on  20
    February 2014 that he is a person to whom Section 32 of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007 applies and therefore is to be deported.

 2. The claimant's immigration history  is  set  out  in  detail  in  Judge
    Black's decision. He arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998 and had been
    granted entry clearance under family reunion provisions.  He was  later
    granted indefinite leave to remain in 2001.  He has been  convicted  on
    ten separate occasions since then and materially on 23  September  2009
    was convicted at Cardiff Crown Court of possession  of  class  A  crack
    cocaine - a controlled drug - with intent to supply and  was  sentenced
    to two years' imprisonment.  He has since been convicted in South  East
    London Magistrates' Court in August 2013.

 3. The claimant's case is that he has established a family life here  with
    his partner who is British citizen and with his child  who  is  also  a
    British citizen, and that, given also his lack of ties to  Uganda,  the
    country of which he is a citizen, his deportation would be in breach of
    article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 4. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the claimant fell  within
    the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules as then constituted as
    set out in paragraphs 398, 399 (a), 399 (b) and 399A of the Immigration
    Rules.

 5. When the matter came before Judge Black on  26  August  2014,  Sections
    117A to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  had
    come into force on 28 July 2014 as had amendments  to  the  Immigration
    Rules  concerning  deportation.   Neither   representative   made   any
    submissions on these matters to Judge Black but she quite properly took
    the new Sections 117A-D into account.  She did not, however, take  into
    account the new provisions of the Immigration Rules in  force  from  28
    July 2014 as the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  YM  (Uganda)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1292
    demonstrates should have been taken into account. That  decision  does,
    however postdate the determination in this case.

 6. Judge Black considered specifically Section 117C of  the  2002  Act  in
    reaching her decision.  She found that the claimant had a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his child and partner; that the effect  on
    the claimant's child and partner of his  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh; and, on that , that he met the requirements of  Exception  2  as
    set out in Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.  She concluded that  having
    met that exception, that by virtue  of  Section  117C  (3)  the  public
    interest did not require  the  claimant's  deportation  given  that  an
    exception applied, and allowed the appeal on that basis on human rights
    grounds.

 7. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin.  The grounds can be characterised as three-
    fold:

     i) that the Judge had failed to provide adequate reasons  for  finding
        that there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the
        claimant, his partner and their child;

    ii) that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  concluding
        that on the facts of this case that the effect of deportation would
        be unduly harsh;

   iii)  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  give  proper  weight   to   the
        consideration of the public interest.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

 9. I consider that Judge Black did, contrary to what  is  averred  by  the
    Secretary of State, give adequate reasons for finding that there was  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the claimant, his child and
    his partner. While I note Mr Melvin's submissions that this was  not  a
    conclusion open to her, given the lack of evidence of cohabitation over
    a sustained period that is not a factor set out in section 117  of  the
    Act.

10. I do not, however, consider that the judge gave  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the effect of the claimant's deportation on the partner
    or child would be unduly harsh.  It is not clear how the judge assessed
    the test of  undue  harshness;  it  cannot  be  discerned  whether  she
    considered that "unduly harsh" is simply a level of hardship  that  has
    to be reached  or  whether  she  considered  that  "unduly"  imports  a
    balancing exercise, the degree of an individual's offending, propensity
    to offend, and the public interest in deportation falling to be weighed
    against the effect of deportation on a child and/or partner.

11. The reasons given in paragraph 22 are not on either of these two  bases
    adequate; if the test  includes  a  balancing  exercise,  there  is  no
    indication of the public interest or other factors  militating  against
    the claimant being taken into account.  In the alternative, if it is  a
    level of harshness to be reached, the judge does not indicate  what  it
    is, and the reasons given why it is reached do not go  beyond  what  is
    the normal and usual effect of deportation (and is provided for in  the
    Immigration Rules)  which  envisages  that  family  relationships  with
    children may be severed. The judge does  not  adequately  explain  what
    specific hardships would  flow  from  deportation.   I  note  also,  in
    passing, that she did not engage with  paragraphs  398  -  400  of  the
    Immigration Rules as currently constituted in reaching her conclusion.

12. For these reasons I am satisfied that the determination of Judge  Black
    did involve the making of an error of law in that her approach  to  the
    question  of  undue  harshness  is  insufficiently   and   inadequately
    reasoned.  I do, however, for the  reasons  I  have  given  uphold  her
    finding on the genuine and subsisting relationship point.   It  follows
    from this that Judge Black's finding that the requirements of exception
    2 are met cannot stand.

13. It is therefore necessary to remake  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to whether, on the facts as found:

      a) The claimant met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as
         amended with effect from 28 July 2014, specifically paragraphs  398
         to 400, and with specific  regard  to  what  is  meant  by  "unduly
         harsh"; and,

      b) Whether, having had regard to sections 117A-D it would be a  breach
         of article 8 to deport the claimant to Uganda.



Signed        Date 3 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

