
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00820/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 September 2013                          |On 01 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                   Mr s m

                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by Peer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bosnia Herzegovina. He was born on 5 July
    1979.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision dated 9 January 2013  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Astle and Mr  A  F  Sherward  which  dismissed  the
    appeal against the respondent's  decision  dated  10  October  2012  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order made against the appellant.

Background

 3. The appellant came to the UK on 6 November 1998 using a false Slovenian
    passport. His wife entered at the  same  time.  They  made  independent
    asylum claims but both were refused by the respondent.

 4. On 11 July 2005, the application of the appellant's wife for indefinite
    leave to remain  for  herself  and  the  couple's  five  children.  The
    application was refused on 23 August 2006 due  to  the  wife's  unspent
    conviction for theft.

 5. On 18 May 2010 the couple's oldest  child  became  a  British  citizen,
    having been born here on 10 July 1999. On 19 January 2011,  the  second
    child became a British citizen, having been born  here  on  1  December
    2000. On 24 April 2012, the  third  child  became  a  British  citizen,
    having been born here on 25 December 2001.

 6. On 9 February 2012, the appellant's wife and  two  daughters,  born  25
    March  2013  and  15  May  2004  respectively,  were  granted  3  years
    discretionary leave to remain (DLR), valid until 8 February 2015.

 7. On 31 July 2012, the couple had their sixth child, a son.

 8. Meanwhile, on 21 May 2004  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  8  years
    imprisonment for wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm and
    3 years imprisonment for threatening to kill, the latter sentence to be
    served concurrently. The circumstances of these offences were that  the
    appellant attacked his victim, a post office  counter  worker,  with  a
    Swiss army knife, cut his throat causing a wound of over 10 centimetres
    which was deep at  the  centre.  Later  the  same  day,  the  appellant
    telephoned the post office and made threats to kill another worker.

 9. A notice of a decision to make  a  deportation  order  was  made  on  8
    October 2008. On 20 October 2008 a notice  of  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order was made against the appellant's wife  and  children.
    Those decisions were appealed but  the  appeals  dismissed  and  appeal
    rights exhausted on 10 May 2010 following an oral permission hearing in
    the Court of Appeal.

10. The appellant was kept in immigration detention  after  his  period  of
    imprisonment ended on 16 April 2009. He was released  from  immigration
    detention on 22 February  2011  following  a  decision  of  Mr  Justice
    Beatson in the High Court.

11. On 3 May 2011 the appellant made an  application  for  the  deportation
    order against him to be revoked, relying on a fresh asylum claim to the
    effect that the family were stateless and a claim under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR. The refusal on 10 October 2012 of  that  application  is  the
    subject of the appeal before me.

12. The respondent now accepts that the appellant's wife and  the  children
    cannot be deported or expected to leave the UK.

Preliminary Issues

13. Mr Ahmed made an application for an adjournment. A  number  of  reasons
    were put forward in support of the adjournment request.

    Adjournment ground 1


14. Firstly, Mr Ahmed maintained  that  the  new  solicitors  had  not  had
    sufficient time to prepare the case adequately.

15. I did not find that this reason for  adjourning  the  hearing  had  any
    merit for a number of reasons.

16. As he confirmed at the hearing, when the appellant had previously  been
    before me on 15 August 2013, he  sacked  his  previous  legal  advisers
    because they were unable to confirm that the hearing that day would  be
    the  definitive  last  stage  in  his  case;  he  wanted  finality  and
    considered that they were  in  some  way  profiting  from  the  ongoing
    proceedings. Having  sacked  his  legal  advisers,  the  appellant  was
    without a legal representative and requested an adjournment. I  granted
    that adjournment. The appellant agreed that the next hearing should  go
    ahead whether or not he had managed to obtain legal representation. The
    appellant cannot be held to that agreement, of course, and confirmed on
    12 September 2013 that his instructions were now that the appeal should
    not go ahead without further time being afforded for preparation.

17. It remains the case that there has been one adjournment of this  matter
    already at the request of the appellant and that is a  factor  weighing
    against a further adjournment now, particularly where the appellant has
    had at least some legal advice since then.

18. Further, the correspondence before me indicated that the new solicitors
    were instructed by 20 August 2013 at the latest, over 3 weeks prior  to
    the hearing. There was nothing before me  to  indicate  that  they  had
    taken any steps to expedite any delay in  the  appellant's  file  being
    transferred to them. I gave the appellant his own copy of the  tribunal
    bundle on 15 August 2013, in any event, which contained  the  essential
    documents. It was my view  that  there  had  been  sufficient  time  to
    prepare the appeal for hearing.

19. Further, the respondent's decision in this matter  was  made  nearly  a
    year ago and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  made  in
    January 2013. This  appeal  follows  the  extensive  history  of  other
    proceedings from as long ago as 1999 concerning the appellant  and  his
    family, set out above. As above, there has already been one adjournment
    of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  This  is  a  case  in  which  the
    principles of fairness and justness call for a final determination.

     Adjournment ground 2

20. Mr Ahmed's second ground for requesting an  adjournment  was  that  the
    appeal could  not  properly  proceed  until  the  respondent  confirmed
    whether the Bosnian  authorities  accepted  that  the  appellant  is  a
    Bosnian citizen and disclosed a letter dated 11 September 2009 from the
    Bosnian authorities relating to his citizenship and return.

21. The hearing before me is to establish whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made an error on a point of law. Judge Astle and Mr  Sherward  did  not
    have the letter of 11 September 2009 before them. There was nothing  to
    show that they had been asked to adjourn in order for that letter to be
    provided or in relation to any aspect of the appellant's  claim  to  be
    stateless or unreturnable.

22. Mr Ahmed did not provide any explanation as to why the  legal  advisers
    who had represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal   (and
    in the litigation which gave rise to the letter of 11  September  2009)
    had not put it before the First-tier Tribunal.

23. I could not see any ground in law  for  adjourning  the  error  of  law
    hearing for a document that  could  have  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but was not, no reason having been given for  that  being  so.
    This was really an argument directed towards  re-opening  the  evidence
    rather than something of relevant to the error of law challenge. I  did
    not find that this ground for an adjournment had any merit.

    Adjournment ground 3

24. The third reason given to justify an adjournment  was  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had not made a decision on the application dated 5 August 2013
    for the appellant's three British children to be joined  as  interested
    parties under Rule 9 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

25. I asked Mr Ahmed to show how the three British children being joined as
    interested parties would make any substantive difference to the  appeal
    given that their best interests fell to be weighed as a primary  factor
    and their rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  were  fully  before  me
    following Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39. Mr Ahmed was unable  to  identify
    any aspect of  the  British  children's  circumstances  that  would  be
    treated differently in substance if  they  were  joined  as  interested
    parties.

26. Mr Ahmed referred to the fact that the children were interested parties
    in the judicial review proceedings before Mr Justice Beatson. That  did
    not appear to me to have any relevance here. Before the High Court, the
    respondent was maintaining that the British children could  be  removed
    with the rest of the family. That was the conflict arose  that  led  to
    the British children being represented separately. It  does  not  arise
    here.

27. Again, this was not a point  that  was  raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

28. I did not find that this reason for  adjourning  the  hearing  had  any
    merit.

29. I proceeded to refuse the application dated 5 August 2013 for the three
    British children to be joined as interested parties under Rule 9 of the
    Procedure Rules as nothing before me showed that this was necessary  in
    order for the appeal to be determined justly and fairly.

    Adjournment ground 4

30. Mr Ahmed's final submission was that there  was  no  prejudice  to  the
    public interest in an  adjournment.  I  was  unclear  as  to  where  my
    jurisdiction in that regard lay, as the public  interest  is  a  matter
    usually argued in an Article 8 proportionality assessment.  It  is  not
    something that I am required to consider under the Procedure Rules when
    considering an adjournment.  I have given my view in [16] on  the  need
    for finality in this matter. I  did  not  find  that  this  ground  for
    adjournment had any merit.

Variation of Grounds of Appeal

31. Having been refused an adjournment, Mr Ahmed sought to vary the grounds
    of appeal.

    Variation of Grounds of Appeal dated 12 August 2013

32. First of all, Mr Ahmed sought to rely on an earlier application to vary
    dated 12 August  2013,  drafted  by  previous  counsel.  Those  grounds
    maintained that the grounds should be varied to include a challenge  to
    the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal's under paragraph A362  of
    HC395 (the new  Immigration  Rules).  The  argument  was  that  as  the
    application to revoke the deportation order was made  prior to  9  July
    2012 when the new Immigration Rules came into force, the panel was  not
    entitled to consider the new Rules. By way  of  justification  for  the
    omission of this ground from those submitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal, the point was stated to be  "Robinson  obvious"
    in line with R v SSHD, ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162.

33. I declined to vary the grounds to include this challenge for  a  number
    of reasons.

34. As the application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
    refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  so  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, there have been two sets of grounds appeal  in  this  matter.
    Both were prepared by a firm of solicitors specialising in  immigration
    law. Neither set of grounds  argued  that  the  new  Immigration  Rules
    should not be applied.
35. Mr Ahmed sought to argue that the new Immigration Rules should not have
    been applied but was unable to take me  to  any  primary  or  secondary
    legislation or any transitional provisions that showed this to be so.

36. He referred to the comments in the case of MF (Article 8 -  new  rules)
    Nigeria [2012] UKUT  00393  on  retrospectivity.  That  was  an  appeal
    against a decision to make a deportation order, that decision  and  the
    appeal decision of the First-tier Tribunal  both  made  before  9  July
    2012. In the appeal before me the decision is against a decision  dated
    10 October 2012 to refuse to revoke a deportation  order.  It  did  not
    appear to me that this case could be usefully compared with MF.

37. In any event, this ground is not material, so has no merit  and  should
    not be admitted. The argument is that only a  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment should have been conducted.  The First-tier Tribunal carried
    out that assessment, however. They specifically indicate that  this  is
    what they did at [52], referring in terms to the freestanding Article 8
    claim,  distinguishing  it  from  their  consideration  under  the  new
    Immigration Rules as "there is no test of exceptionality". There is  no
    suggestion in any of the formulations of the grounds before me that the
    second stage Article 8 assessment was tainted by the  consideration  of
    that claim under the new Immigration Rules.

38. Mr Ahmed conceded that the other grounds in the application to vary the
    grounds of appeal dated  12  August  2013  were  misconceived  as  they
    related to automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act 2007. This is
    an appeal against a decision to revoke  deportation  order  made  under
    Section 3 (5) of the Immigration Act 1971 as the respondent deemed  the
    appellant's deportation to be in the public good.

    Variation of Grounds of Appeal in Skeleton Argument dated 11  September
    2013

39. Mr Ahmed also submitted at paragraph 4 (c)  of  his  skeleton  argument
    that a further "Robinson obvious" variation in the  grounds  of  appeal
    should be permitted. He argued that:

             "The FTT erred  in  failing  to  take  into  consideration  the
             failure by  the  Bosnian  Authorities  to  issue  a  ETD  [thus
             amounting to a failure to recognise the appellant as a  citizen
             of Bosnia/denial of citizenship] which was a significant factor
             in determining the validity of the deportation order; the claim
             for protection under the refugee/human rights  Conventions  but
             also in the overall assessment of proportionality under article
             8(2)."

40.  Insofar  as  it  concerns  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection, the application to vary the grounds to include
    the appellant's statelessness or inability to return  him  cannot  have
    merit  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  upheld  at  [44]  to   [46]   the
    certification of the Refugee Convention claim under Section 72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  found  that  the
    appellant was excluded from  Humanitarian  Protection  because  of  the
    seriousness of his offences. Those findings are not challenged  in  any
    of the formulations  of  grounds  of  appeal  before  me.  Indeed,  the
    determination at [42] records that it was conceded that  the  appellant
    was not entitled to asylum.

41. I indicate below why the proposition that the  appellant  is  stateless
    and unreturnable is not made out. Even if it were, that alone would not
    necessarily found a claim for asylum, humanitarian protection or  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

42. The assertion that the appellant is stateless and unreturnable  is  not
    accurate. The First-tier Tribunal had  before  it  documents  from  the
    judicial review lodged by the appellant and his family  which  resulted
    in the decision dated 23 February  2011  of  Mr  Justice  Beatson.  His
    decision sets out at [14], [17], [18], [27], [29], [32]  and  [88]  how
    the appellant has not  compiled  with  the  emergency  travel  document
    procedures and has been inconsistent in the information he has provided
    about his history and that of his family on a number of  occasions.  At
    [87] Mr Justice Beatson found that the appellant "bears a  considerable
    degree of responsibility for the time it is  taking  the  Secretary  of
    State to deal with the Bosnian authorities."

43. The First-tier Tribunal  dealt with the appellant's proposition that he
    was stateless and unreturnable in their assessment under Article 8.  At
    [62] the panel indicated that:

             "We are not satisfied at this stage that there is no  realistic
             prospect of him being removed. We were told that the  file  has
             recently been transferred to a new  caseworker.  We  have  seen
             form the judgement of Beatson J  that  the  Appellant  has  not
             always been  corporative  (sic)  in  completing  the  necessary
             paperwork. There have been inconsistencies in the details given
             by him of his name and identity, including where  he  was  born
             and where he was married.  In  the  circumstances  any  present
             difficulties do not cause us to depart from our assessment".


44. The "assessment" that they decline to  depart  from  was  that  it  was
    proportionate for the  appellant  to  be  deported  to  Bosnia.  In  my
    judgement, [62] and  the  other  references  in  the  decision  to  the
    appellant being a  Bosnian  citizen  show  that  they  dealt  with  the
    assertion of statelessness and whether the appellant could be  returned
    but found against him. A ground of appeal stating  that  they  did  not
    deal with this part of the case could only amount to  disagreement  and
    is without merit therefore.

    Conclusion on Application to Vary the Grounds of Appeal

45. I therefore declined all of the applications to  vary  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

46. I should merely add that having announced that decision, when Mr  Ahmed
    began his oral submissions he sought to argue that the  decision  under
    the new Immigration Rules disclosed an error on a point of law. When  I
    queried this, he accepted that he could not do so as there had been  no
    application to vary the grounds of appeal to include such a challenge.

Grounds of Appeal

47. Having dealt at some length on the grounds  that  do  not  fall  to  be
    addressed by me, I turn to those that do.

48. The  admissible  grounds  relate  only  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment of the second stage or freestanding Article 8 consideration.



49. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  were that :

        a. the panel should have adjourned for a further expert  report  on
           reoffending


        b. there was inadequate consideration of the  evidence  in  various
           regards:

                i) the appellant's wife would have difficulty caring for the
                   children if the appellant  was  deported  and  her  grief
                   would impact adversely on the children
               ii) the wife intended to go to Bosnia with the appellant
              iii) the implications for the children of the  wife  going  to
                   Bosnia
               iv)  the  respondent  did  not  contact  the  Office  of  the
                   Children's Champion (OCC).
                v) the appellant would face discrimination in Bosnia
               vi) he would not be accepted as Bosnian
              vii) attempts to remove him over an extended  period  of  time
                   had failed
             viii) the length of time since the offence was  committed,  the
                   appellant's   conduct   since   release,   strength   and
                   durability of family life,  likelihood  of  contact  from
                   abroad, social and cultural  ties  to  the  UK  and  very
                   little to Bosnia


   47. Permission was refused and much of the renewed grounds of appeal  to
       the Upper Tribunal were  the  same  but,  in  combination  with  the
       additional point of insufficient  consideration  of  the  children's
       rights to grow up with both of their parents, the ground as a  whole
       were found to be arguable.


   Discussion


   48. I did not find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  refusing  to
       adjourn to obtain an addendum report from a  forensic  psychologist.
       The panel gave reasons for refusing to adjourn at [3]. That decision
       was clearly open to them as they had a report on the point  already,
       the need for an addendum was  not  raised  at  the  Case  Management
       Review some two months earlier and nothing mentioned on  the  matter
       until the day of the  hearing.  There  had  been  adequate  time  to
       provide such a report and it was unclear why an addendum  would  not
       be ready for a further 6 weeks.


   49. It is my view that the remainder of the grounds  amount  only  to  a
       disagreement with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  an
       attempt to reargue the appeal without disclosing any error of law.

   50. The panel set out the appellant's case at [14] to [18]. It  set  out
       the view of the independent social worker in some detail at [26]  to
       [34]. It set out the view of the independent  forensic  psychologist
       at [35] to [38]. Those reports contained the evidence in support  of
       the appellant's case at its highest, setting out the issues relating
       to the family as a whole and the  children  in  particular  and  the
       appellant's risk of reoffending that the  grounds  assert  that  the
       panel did not deal with adequately. The First-tier Tribunal  clearly
       considered all that was put forward in support of the appeal as they
       were required to do. Having done so, it was clearly open to them  to
       find that deportation was proportionate given the seriousness of the
       offence and the family having managed relatively  well  without  the
       appellant for some years whilst he was in prison.

   51. When conducting the Article 8 assessment, the panel established  the
       best interests of the children first at [54]  to  [57]  and  weighed
       them as a primary factor. It  noted  at  [55]  that  the  respondent
       accepted that the best  interests  of  the  children  were  for  the
       appellant not to be deported to Bosnia. It indicated at  [61]  that:
       "[o]f particular concern to us is the plight of  the  children"   if
       separated from their father and that "[w]hatever his sins, they  are
       not the fault of the children." There is no merit  in  the  argument
       that the First-tier Tribunal did not address the best  interests  of
       the children adequately.

   52. The panel set out the Boultif  factors  at  [61]  and  proceeded  to
       assess  those  factors  that  were  relevant   in   the   subsequent
       paragraphs, the seriousness of the  offence,  length  of  residence,
       ties to Bosnia and so on.

   53. As above, they rejected the appellant's  claim  to  be  stately  and
       addressed the difficulties in returning the appellant to  Bosnia  at
       [62] and did not find this sufficient to show that he was  stateless
       or unreturnable such that his  deportation  could  be  shown  to  be
       disproportionate.

   54. The panel  set  out  the  evidence  as  to  the  intentions  of  the
       appellant's wife accurately at [56] and did not err  in  finding  at
       [61] that she did  not  intend  to  return  to  Bosnia.  The  wife's
       evidence varied. It was  not  categorically  that  she  intended  to
       return to Bosnia with the appellant and take the children there.  In
       her witness statement she requests at [12] that she and the children
       be allowed to remain in the  UK  independently  of  the  deportation
       proceedings against  her  husband.  The  social  worker  report  was
       equivocal as to her intentions, stating  at  [34]  of  the  addendum
       report that this "may or may  not"  be  the  wife's  choice  if  the
       appellant was deported. As pointed out by Mr Mills,  the  record  of
       proceedings records her as stating that she did not want  to  go  to
       Bosnia but also did not want the appellant to go back.

   55. The appellant seeks to argue that the failure of the  respondent  to
       contact the OCC should have led the First-tier Tribunal to find  the
       respondent's decision unlawful or  made  the  Article  8  assessment
       inadequate to the extent that the appeal should be  allowed.   I  do
       not agree. The panel  noted  at  [55]  that  it  appeared  that  the
       respondent had not contacted the OCC. Mr Mills  conceded  before  me
       that this was the case at the time of the hearing before the  First-
       tier Tribunal. There was no application made for the  appeal  to  be
       adjourned in order for that reference to be made,  however,  and  it
       does not appear to have been a matter on which the panel were  asked
       to place significant weight.

   56. In any event, the respondent is not obliged to follow  the  comments
       of the OCC even if an opinion is obtained. Nor is the  Tribunal.  As
       above, the First-tier Tribunal had two detailed social work  reports
       before them which they took into account and  found  the  children's
       best interests weighed as a primary  factor  against  the  appellant
       being deported, expressing "particular concern" about the  children.
       It is difficult to see what more a reference to the OCC  could  have
       added.

   57. For all of these reasons, I did not find that it had been shown that
       the First-tier Tribunal erred in law when dismissing the appeal.

Decision

   58. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  disclose  an
       error on a point of law and shall stand.

   59. The application dated  5  August  2013  for  the  appellant's  three
       British children to be joined as interested parties under Rule 9  of
       the Procedure Rules is refused for the reasons set out at  [26]  and
       [30].

Anonymity

I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal in  order  to
avoid the likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant's children  as
a result of the matters covered in this determination.


Signed:[pic]
Upper  Tribunal   Judge   Pitt                                   Dated:   23
    September 2013
