
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00353/2018
                                                               DA/00354/2018
                                                               HU/08808/2016
                                                               HU/08809/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr Justice Goss
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GL
                                     HC
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the claimants:     Ms R Chapman, instructed by JCWI
For the appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is a decision to which both judges have contributed.

 2. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Loke promulgated 15.7.19, dismissing the claimants'
    linked appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of  State,  dated
    30.3.15 and 22.5.18, to refuse their human rights claims and to  remove
    them from the UK pursuant to the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016
    (the Regulations).

 3. The crucial issue in the appeal is  whether  the   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in law in finding that the criminal offending behaviour  of
    the  two  claimants  did  not  represent  a   'genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society,' and whether that conclusion within the range  of  findings
    open to the judge on the evidence before the  Tribunal  and  adequately
    reasoned.

 4. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 29.8.19, finding that, whilst the judge's reasoning is clear,
    it  is  arguable  that  the  offences  for  which  the  claimants  were
    convicted, resulting in  sentences  of  imprisonment,  "fell  into  the
    category of an  extreme  case  which  therefore  demanded  a  different
    outcome and as such it is arguable that the judge erred in law."

 5. Thus, the matter came before  us  sitting  as  a  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10.12.19.

 6. The tribunal has received the Secretary of State's  skeleton  argument,
    drafted by Mr A McVeety and dated 25.9.19, and the claimants'  Rule  24
    Response, drafted by Ms R Chapman and dated  18.11.19.  We  have  taken
    these into account along with  the  helpful  oral  submissions  of  the
    representatives at the hearing before us.

Error of Law

 7. For the reasons set out below, we have  concluded  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the making of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Relevant Background & Chronology

 8. The relevant background can be summarised as follows.

 9. The two claimants were in a relationship with  each  other  in  Jamaica
    before coming to the UK. Their son, J, was born in Jamaica in 1998.

10. HC came to the UK as a visitor in 1998. He failed to return to  Jamaica
    and became an overstayer. In  2000,  he  attempted  to  regularise  his
    immigration status after marrying a British citizen. The  marriage  was
    regarded as a sham and leave  was  refused.  He  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted in 2005.

11. GL came to the UK as a visitor in  2000,  leaving  J  in  Jamaica.  She
    failed to return and became  an  overstayer.  In  2004  she  married  a
    British citizen, as a result of which she was granted Leave  to  Remain
    until 2006. In 2005 J was granted leave to enter the  UK  to  join  his
    mother GL. In 2006 GL and J were granted Indefinite Leave to Remain  on
    the basis of the relationship with the British citizen.

12. GL and HC married in the UK in 2007. Their second child S was  born  in
    the UK in 2008 and is a British citizen. HC was granted Leave to Remain
    until 2012 as the spouse of a person settled in the UK.

13. Following conviction after trial at the Inner London  Crown  Court,  GL
    and HC were sentenced for a series of criminal offences  of  fraud  and
    related conduct on 13.10.11. GL was convicted of entering into  a  sham
    marriage with a British citizen so as to  obtain  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain for herself and J by deception. GL was sentenced to a total term
    of 8 years 9 months' imprisonment. For his part in the offences, HC was
    sentenced to a term of 3 years  imprisonment.  We  have  addressed  the
    nature of the offending behaviour separately, below.

14. Their children J and S were taken into the care of the local authority.
    They were returned to the care of HC after his release from  prison  in
    October 2014. GL was released from prison  the  following  year.  Their
    third child SS was born in 2017.

15. In the meantime, in November  2014  both  claimants  were  served  with
    decisions to deport them from the UK and the deportation order was made
    on  20.3.15.  Following  further  submissions,  on  22.5.18  a  further
    deportation decision was made under the Regulations.

16. On 23.5.18 the claimants  appealed  the  decisions  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Applying regulations 23 and 27, Judge Loke concluded that the
    evidence did not  demonstrate  that  the  claimants  posed  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the requirements  of  public
    policy or public security to justify removal. He  consequently  allowed
    the appeal of both appellants on both EEA and human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The grounds of application for permission to appeal,  largely  repeated
    in the Secretary of State's skeleton argument, are, first, that despite
    referring to the Judge's Sentencing Remarks (JSR) at [14] and  [15]  of
    the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to  take
    into account the "egregious and wanton  dishonesty  of  GL,  identified
    there, which was reflected in the severe sentence GL received."

18. The second ground asserts that the  offences  were  serious  enough  to
    engage the Bouchereau EU:C:1977:172  test  endorsed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal at [71] of its decision in SSHD v Robinson [2018] EWCA  Civ  85,
    as "being the kind of extreme case in  which  past  conduct  alone  may
    suffice as constituting a present threat to the requirement  of  public
    policy."

19. The third ground submits that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law at [33] of the decision in relying on  the
    opinion of the Advocate-General in  Bouchereau  that  it  was  only  in
    exceptional cases, where the personal conduct of an  alien  had  caused
    "deep public revulsion," that public policy  required  removal  on  the
    basis of previous conduct alone. The Secretary of State argued that  at
    [66] of Robinson the Court of Appeal had rejected that proposition.

Preliminary Matters

20. At the outset of the hearing before us we sought to  clarify  with  the
    two representatives the ambit of  the  appeal  and  the  issues  to  be
    determined by the Upper Tribunal.

21. No issue was taken by Ms Chapman as to whether either of the  claimants
    was now entitled to permanent residence under the Regulations,  on  the
    basis of five years residence.  She  conceded  that,  unlike  a  family
    member of an EEA national, a  derivative  right  to  reside  under  the
    Regulations does not lead to a right of permanent residence.

22. A point canvassed at the hearing, but which was not pursued  by  either
    party, was whether the removal  decision  invalidated  GL's  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain so that the third child was not a British  citizen.  We
    consider this issue irrelevant to our considerations.

The Offending Behaviour

23. Between [12]  and  [15]  of  the  decision,  the  judge  described  and
    summarised the nature of the claimants' offending  behaviour.  We  have
    carefully read and taken fully into account the JSR, which followed the
    conviction of both claimants after trial.  Their  criminal  conduct  is
    described by the sentencing judge in some detail.  We  have  summarised
    below the essential features.

24. GL first entered into a sham marriage  in  order  to  obtain  leave  to
    remain and British citizenship. She then inveigled  her  way  into  the
    life of an elderly man and when he died forged his will. As  a  result,
    she was able to take over his home, which she let out  to  another  for
    rent, and emptied his bank account. She employed contractors to work on
    the home but failed to pay them, so that one of them was unable to  pay
    the rent on his own home and had to move out. GL continued with similar
    conduct in relation to a second deceased victim, forging a second will,
    attempting to take over this second person's home, took funds from  her
    bank account, and impersonated this person to purchase items  for  GL's
    own home. When the police investigated, she fabricated a claim that the
    victims had threatened to shoot her and  members  of  her  family.  She
    fabricated documents to support her case at trial.

25. The JSR makes clear that these offences were at the very highest end of
    the spectrum for  this  type  of  offending.  The  judge  described  GL
    engaging in dishonest conduct, motivated by personal  interest,  greed,
    ruthlessness, and a  complete  disregard  for  others.  She  sought  to
    manipulate others and lied with an ease  and  appetite  the  judge  had
    rarely experienced. The  duration  of  the  conduct  and  the  type  of
    offending meant that a  custodial  sentence  was  inevitable.  She  was
    responsible for forging  wills  and  milking  the  estate  of  deceased
    victims, frustrating the rightful heirs. In defending herself, she  was
    prepared to besmirch the character of others who were entirely innocent
    victims of her machinations. This, the judge described as  a  dishonest
    and wicked course of action. At every step she  lied  and  deceived  to
    seek to  prosper  personally.  The  offences  were  aggravated  by  her
    persistent  claims  during  the  trial  that  another  person  was  the
    instigator in an effort to escape criminal liability. In doing so,  she
    sought to soil the impeccable characters of two people.

26. HC's involvement was to seek to benefit from the illegal acquisition of
    the second person's home, knowing full well the bogus circumstances  in
    which he and GL came into possession of the property. They  both  stood
    to make substantial financial  gain  from  their  dishonest  course  of
    conduct. He also chose to produce a forged document intended to falsely
    bolster his defence at trial. The judge stated that he had "exposed his
    dishonesty to the core". In a range of 3 to 6 years, the judge  imposed
    3 years imprisonment.

27. We  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  underestimate  the
    seriousness and appalling nature of the offending behaviour. At [15] of
    the decision, Judge Loke described the offences as being on  any  view,
    "utterly despicable." At [33] of the decision  he  found  the  offences
    "undoubtedly  serious".  However,  having  carefully   considered   the
    relevant case authorities, the judge rejected the suggestion  that  the
    criminal conduct fell into the category of  an  extreme  case  so  that
    removal was justified on the basis of the  offences  alone.  The  judge
    went on to conduct a balancing exercise, concluding that the  facts  of
    the offences "fell far short of justifying removal."

The Relevant Regulations

28. The claimants' respective rights under the Regulations are on the basis
    of a derivative right to reside as the  primary  carers  of  a  British
    citizen, namely their three children. Although  the  children  obtained
    their present status as British citizens through  GL's  sham  marriage,
    the Secretary of State has not taken  any  steps  to  deprive  them  of
    citizenship.

29. In its decisions, the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  GL  has  a
    derivative right to reside in the UK  under  Regulation  16(5)  as  the
    primary carer of a British citizen but did not accept that HC also  has
    a derivative right to reside. At [27] to [30] of  the  impugned  First-
    tier Tribunal decision, Judge Loke  found  that  HC  also  fell  to  be
    considered as a primary carer,  noting  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    conceded that both GL and HC had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with their three children, that they all lived  together  as  a  family
    unit, and that it was in the best interests of the children to continue
    as part of the  family  unit.  In  the  circumstances,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge concluded that HC fell within regulation  16(8)  and  as
    both parents had assumed equal care  responsibility  simultaneously  on
    the birth of their children, HC was not excluded by regulation  16(10),
    so that he also has a derivative right to reside in the UK.

30. Despite the assertions to the contrary  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions, at the outset of the appeal hearing Ms Cunha  accepted  that
    both claimants did have a derivative right to reside in  the  UK  under
    regulation 16 on the basis of being the primary carers of their British
    citizen children. Given this concession, we do  not  need  to  consider
    further the ambit of regulation 16.

Justification for removal from the UK under the Regulations

31. In the impugned decision of 22.5.18, the Secretary of State  considered
    that deportation of both GL and HC was justified on serious grounds  of
    public policy and public security, pursuant to regulations 23 and 27.

32. As currently in force, regulations 23 and 27 are as follows:

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         23.-(1) A person is not entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
         Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11  if  a  refusal  to  admit  that
         person is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
         public health in accordance with regulation 27.

         (2) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue  of  regulation  11  if  that  person  is  subject  to  a
         deportation  or  exclusion  order,  except  where  the  person   is
         temporarily admitted pursuant to regulation 41.

         (3) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of regulation 11 if  the  Secretary  of  State  considers
         there to  be  reasonable  grounds  to  suspect  that  the  person's
         admission would lead to the misuse  of  a  right  to  reside  under
         regulation 26(1).

         (4) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
         as the family member of an  EEA  national  under  regulation  11(2)
         unless, at the time of arrival-

             (a) that person is accompanying the EEA  national  or  joining
             the EEA national in the United Kingdom; and

             (b) the EEA national has a right to reside.

         (5) If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion  of  the
         EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  is  justified
         on the grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health
         in accordance with regulation 27 the Secretary of State may make an
         order prohibiting that person from entering the United Kingdom.

         (6) Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8),  an  EEA  national  who  has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             (a) that person does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to
             reside under these Regulations;

             (b) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 27; or



             (c) the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified on grounds  of  misuse  of  rights  under
             regulation 26(3).

         (7) A person must not be removed under paragraph (6)-

             (a) as the automatic consequence of  having  recourse  to  the
             social assistance system of the United Kingdom; or

             (b) if that person has leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
             under the 1971 Act unless that person's removal  is  justified
             on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
             health in accordance with regulation 27.

         (8)  A  decision  under  paragraph  (6)(b)  must  state  that  upon
         execution of any deportation order arising from that decision,  the
         person against whom the order was made is prohibited from  entering
         the United Kingdom-

             (a) until the order is revoked; or

             (b) for the period specified in the order.

         (9) A decision taken under paragraph (6)(b) or (c) has  the  effect
         of terminating  any  right  to  reside  otherwise  enjoyed  by  the
         individual concerned."

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
         public health

         27.-(1) In this regulation, a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a) has a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 and
             who] has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in
             the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for in
             the Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
             General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.

         (5) The public policy  and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
         proportionality;

             (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c) the personal  conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;

             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;

             (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
             the absence of a previous criminal  conviction,  provided  the
             grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         (7) In the case of a relevant decision taken on grounds  of  public
         health-

             (a) a disease that does not have epidemic potential as defined
             by the relevant instruments of the World  Health  Organisation
             or is not a  disease  listed  in  Schedule  1  to  the  Health
             Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010(18); or

             (b) if the person concerned is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  any
             disease occurring after the three month  period  beginning  on
             the date on which the person arrived in  the  United  Kingdom,
             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

             (8) A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.)."

The First-tier Tribunal's Assessment

33. We noted that at [31] of the decision, the  judge  suggested  that  the
    respondent considered that deportation of the claimants  was  justified
    on 'serious grounds'  of  public  policy  and  public  security,  which
    affords a higher level of protection to those with a permanent right of
    residence. In fact, the decision in relation to HC made clear  that  it
    was not accepted that he met entitlement  to  permanent  residence  and
    thus he could not benefit from the higher  level  of  protection  under
    regulation 27(3). Both representatives agreed with our assessment  that
    despite the statement at [31] the judge proceeded correctly in relation
    to both  claimants  by  adopting  the  lowest  standard  of  protection
    provided for under regulation 27.

34. It is clear that the judge made a careful consideration as  to  whether
    the removal of the claimants was justified on grounds of public  policy
    or public security on the basis that that their conduct represented, "a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct  of
    the person  and  that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be  imminent,"
    (regulation 27(5)(c)).

35. The judge took into account the nature of  the  criminal  behaviour  of
    both claimants, and as stated above, at [15]  of  the  decision,  found
    that "On any view, these offences are utterly despicable."

36. At [32] to [33] the judge concluded that  the  offences  did  not  fall
    within the 'past conduct alone' test set out in the ECJ's  decision  in
    Bouchereau EU:C:1977:172, at [28] and [29] that:

         "The existence of a previous criminal conviction can  ...  only  be
         taken into account in so far as the circumstances which  gave  rise
         to that conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting  a
         present threat to the requirements of public policy.

         Although, in general, a finding that such a threat  exists  implies
         the existence in the individual concerned of a propensity to act in
         the same way in the future, it is possible that past conduct  alone
         may constitute such a threat to the requirements of public policy."

37. At [33] of the  decision,  the  judge  noted  that  in  Bouchereau  the
    Advocate General suggested that it was only in exceptional cases, where
    the personal conduct of an alien had caused  "deep  public  revulsion,"
    that public policy required his removal on the basis  of  the  previous
    conduct alone.

38. The judge correctly observed that this approach was cited with approval
    in  Robinson.  The  facts  in  Robinson  involved  supplying  class   A
    controlled drugs for which the defendant was sentenced to  imprisonment
    for 2 years 6 months. At [71] of the Court of Appeal's judgement,  Lord
    Justice Singh, with whom the other Lord Justices  agreed,  stated  that
    what is intended is "the kind of extreme case  in  which  past  conduct
    alone may suffice as constituting a present threat to the  requirements
    of public policy", which  public  policy  he  observed  was  a  broader
    concept than a threat to the public.

39. In order to understand the nature of such an extreme case, the Court of
    Appeal in Robinson, reviewed a number of other decisions, some of which
    we have summarised below.

40. In Straszewski v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1245, Moore-Bick LJ  stated  that
    grave importance is to be attached to the right of free movement  which
    can be interfered with only in cases where the  offender  represents  a
    serious threat to some aspect of public policy or public security:

         "Save in exceptional cases, that is  to  be  determined  solely  by
         reference to the conduct of the offender (no doubt  viewed  in  the
         context of any  previous  offending)  and  the  likelihood  of  re-
         offending.  General  considerations  of   deterrence   and   public
         revulsion normally have no part to play in  the  matter.  In  these
         respects, the  principles  governing  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals in general differ significantly from those  which  govern
         the deportation of EEA nationals  who  have  acquired  a  permanent
         right of residence... (emphasis added)."

41. At [80] of Robinson, the Court of Appeal held that Bouchereau continues
    to bind the courts of this country, being a decision  of  the  ECJ.  At
    [85] Lord Justice Singh stated:

         "...I am also of the view that the sort of case that the ECJ had in
         mind in Bouchereau, when it  referred  to  past  conduct  alone  as
         potentially being sufficient, was not the present sort of case  but
         one whose facts are very  extreme.  It  is  neither  necessary  nor
         helpful to attempt an exhaustive definition but the  sort  of  case
         that the court was thinking of was where, for example, a person has
         committed grave offences of sexual abuse or violence against  young
         children," (emphasis added).

42. The Court of Appeal went on to note that in ex  p  Marchon  [1993]  IAR
    384, the defendant was convicted of an offence of conspiracy to  import
    4 � kg of a Class A controlled drug (heroin). He was  sentenced  to  11
    years' imprisonment. The offence was described by the Court  of  Appeal
    in Marchon as "especially horrifying" and  "repugnant  to  the  public"
    because it had been committed by a doctor.

43. It  follows  from  the  above  that  in  normal  circumstances,  public
    revulsion has no part to play in the Bouchereau  'past  conduct  alone'
    test. The facts must be 'exceptional' and/or 'very extreme'. Whilst  it
    is impossible to provide an exhaustive definition, the Court of  Appeal
    had in mind cases typified as those involving grave offences of  sexual
    abuse or violence against young children. It is clear from a reading of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision, particularly between [32] and [33] of
    the decision that Judge Loke applied his mind to  the  Bouchereau  test
    and carefully considered whether the offending behaviour of GL  and  HC
    fell to be considered as one  of  those  very  exceptional  or  extreme
    cases. He concluded that it did not.

44. During submissions by  both  representatives  we  queried  whether  the
    Secretary of State was right to consider both claimants as being in the
    same category of a very extreme and/or exceptional case  in  the  sense
    intended in  Bouchereau  and  Robinson.  The  offences  were  certainly
    despicable and repulsive, as reflected by the sentences imposed. GL was
    sentenced to 8 years and 9 months as the 'prime mover' in a  series  of
    offences of fraud and dishonesty. However, HC  received  only  3  years
    imprisonment for his limited role in only  two  of  25  counts  on  the
    indictment. Ms  Cunha  maintained  that  HC  had  participated  in  and
    benefited from the same appalling offending behaviour, even though  his
    participation was more limited, so that  he  also  met  the  Bouchereau
    test. Ms Chapman argued that it was plain that there was a  distinction
    to be drawn between GL on the one hand and HC on the other,  marked  by
    the length of sentence imposed but also reflected in the JSR. After due
    consider of both arguments, we are satisfied that whether or not GL met
    the Bouchereau test, HC's conduct falls far from being within the  same
    category as GL's offending behaviour.

45. In considering whether there was an error of law in the making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, we remind ourselves  that  we  are
    not making the assessment of the offending behaviour for  ourselves  as
    judges of first instance. What we have to  consider  is  whether  Judge
    Loke was entitled to reach the conclusion that the offending  behaviour
    in this case did not reach the Bouchereau test. We have asked ourselves
    whether the appalling offending  behaviour  of  GL  and/or  HC  was  so
    obviously  very  extreme  or  exceptional,  causing  such  deep  public
    revulsion, that to conclude that the Bouchereau test was not met  would
    be irrational and therefore an error  of  law.  We  find  that,  whilst
    serious and truly dreadful, the offending behaviour in  this  case  was
    not such as to admit of only one conclusion on  this  issue.  Whilst  a
    different judge  may  have  reached  a  different  conclusion,  we  are
    satisfied that the judge's finding on this issue was open to her on the
    facts of the case and was adequately reasoned. It follows that we  find
    no error of law on this ground of appeal.

46. The third ground  of  appeal  suggested  that  Judge  Loke  misdirected
    herself on the Bouchereau principle and that in Robinson the  Court  of
    Appeal had rejected the Advocate General's  proposition  that  "it  was
    only in exceptional cases, where the personal conduct of an  alien  had
    caused deep public revulsion that public policy required his removal on
    the basis of the previous conduct alone." We pointed out  to  Ms  Cunha
    that this  assertion  of  a  misdirection,  repeated  in  the  skeleton
    argument, is misconceived. The Court of Appeal at [66] of Robinson  did
    not reject that proposition. What they did was to  agree  with  counsel
    for the Secretary of State that the suggestion by the Advocate  General
    that offending behaviour must also be based on  "an  imperative  reason
    relating to public security" was not adopted by and did not feature  in
    the ECJ's decision in Bouchereau. Ms Cunha accepted the  force  of  the
    argument and in the circumstances did not pursue the  third  ground  of
    appeal.

47. The remaining ground and issue relates to the remaining  paragraphs  of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision, particularly in [34], in which  Judge
    Loke conducted her assessment as to  whether  the  claimants'  personal
    conduct represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to public policy or public security to justify  removal,  applying  the
    various considerations prescribed under regulation 27.   We  note  that
    the judge stated that propensity to commit further offences was crucial
    to that assessment. The judge then set out a number  of  factors  taken
    into account, listed (a) to (e) in [34].

48. Again we  remind  ourselves  that  we  are  not  ourselves  making  the
    assessment but considering the submission of the  Secretary  of  State,
    represented by Ms Cunha, that despite referring to the JSR, Judge  Loke
    failed to take into account the 'egregious and  wanton  dishonesty'  of
    GL, reflected in the severe length of imprisonment imposed. However, we
    are satisfied that the decision makes clear that  the  judge  did  take
    full account of the nature of the offending behaviour. At  the  end  of
    [34] the judge made  it  clear  that  the  evidence  had  been  "viewed
    overall" and there is reference within that paragraph to the JSR.

49. We have  carefully  considered  whether  the  judge  provided  adequate
    reasoning to justify the conclusion that their offending behaviour  did
    not pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
    one of the fundament interests of society. We note  that  reliance  was
    place in particular on the length of time since the  offending  conduct
    in 2011 and that no further offending has occurred since their  release
    from prison. It was also relevant  that  the  OASYS  report  from  2017
    assessed GL's risk of reoffending as low. Similarly, the 2017 probation
    report assessed GL's risk of harm to the public as  low  and  concluded
    that there was a low risk of offending generally. More significantly, a
    more recent probation report  from  May  2019  confirmed  that  GL  had
    attended all probation appointments and completed an array of  courses,
    as a result of which her risk of causing serious harm to the public was
    assessed as low and the risk of offending generally was  also  assessed
    to be low.

50. Whilst at this final stage the judge might have referred again  and  in
    more detail in this assessment to  the  seriousness  of  the  offending
    behaviour, it is clear that in a relatively short decision,  the  judge
    gave anxious consideration to the offending behaviour giving rise to an
    increased public interest in removal of the claimants. That the judge's
    remarks at [15] of the decision describing the offending  as  being  at
    the very highest end of the spectrum for that  type  of  offending  and
    concluded that on any view  the  offences  were  "utterly  despicable,"
    indicate that the seriousness of the conduct was at  the  forefront  of
    the judge's assessment. Further, the  very  fact  that  the  judge  was
    mindful of the Bouchereau test and had, for that  reason,  at  [32]  to
    [33] of the decision carefully considered the level of  seriousness  of
    the offending behaviour in relation to the category of a  very  extreme
    and exceptional case such as to cause 'deep public revulsion'  provides
    a  strong  and  clear  indication  that  the  assessment  was  properly
    balanced.

51. Considering the facts of this case and the decision very carefully,  we
    are satisfied that the judge did  not  overlook  and  took  fully  into
    account the serious offending behaviour, particularly of  GL.  However,
    the judge was bound by the requirements of regulation 27(5)(c) that the
    personal conduct "must represent a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat". There was  strong  and  uncontradicted  evidence  that
    notwithstanding the seriousness of the offending behaviour some 8 years
    previously, the risks of further offending or harm to the  public  were
    consistently low.

52. It is also to be  noted  that  under  regulation  27(5)(e)  a  person's
    previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves  justify   the
    decision. 27(5)(b) also  provides  that  the  decision  must  be  based
    exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned,  which
    would include behaviour since the  offences  were  committed.  27(5)(a)
    also  requires  the  decision  to  comply   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality.

53. It was for the judge to assess on the evidence whether the requirements
    justifying removal were met in this case. Whilst a different judge  may
    have reached a different conclusion about one or both of the claimants,
    we are satisfied that the findings was open to the judge on  the  facts
    of the case and that she has provided adequate reasoning to support the
    conclusion reached. We find no error in the  way  in  which  the  judge
    conducted the assessment.

54. It follows from the above, that we find no error in the making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that the appeal of the Secretary
    of State must be dismissed.

Decision

55. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     We do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and  the
                    appeal of each claimant remains allowed.

                    We make no order for costs.




     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 13 December 2019



