

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00633/2013
                                                               DA/00634/2013
                                                               DA/00635/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2013                             |On 4th November 2013         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE POOLE

                                   Between

                              RASOUL GHOLAMPOUR
                              FATEMAH HAGHNEGAT
                              ARIANA GHOLAMPOUR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Shibli of Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Appeal History

   1. The appellants are all citizens of  Iran.   They  were  born  16/9/79,
      18/3/86 and 1/6/2010 respectively.  They  are  husband  and  wife  and
      infant daughter.  The respondent made deportation orders on  15  March
      2013 together with decisions to refuse to grant  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and leave to remain under Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the  ECHR.
      The first and second appellants had arrived in the United  Kingdom  in
      June 2005.  The first appellant claimed asylum upon arrival  with  the
      second appellant as his dependent.  The claims were  refused  in  2007
      and all appeal rights exhausted by October 2007.   Neither  the  first
      nor second appellant returned to Iran.  The third appellant  was  born
      in the United Kingdom in 2010.  During the course of  2010  the  first
      appellant was convicted of possession of extreme  pornographic  images
      and with regard to conspiracy to traffic  persons  within  the  United
      Kingdom  for  sexual  exploitation.   In  the  same  year  the  second
      appellant was convicted of conspiracy to traffic  persons  within  the
      United Kingdom for sexual exploitation.  They were sentenced to twenty
      seven months and fifteen months respectively.  As a result  the  first
      and second appellants were liable  to  automatic  deportation  and  in
      December 2011 the second appellant claimed asylum for a second time.

   2. All three appellants jointly appealed the  respondent's  decisions  of
      March 2013 upon the grounds that the decision was  not  in  accordance
      with the Immigration Rules and was unlawful under Art 3 of  the  Human
      Rights Act (sic) and the Refugee Convention. Their appeals came before
      Judge of the first-tier Tribunal Jackson sitting  with  Mr  D  Bremmer
      (Non Legal Member)(the Panel) on 18 June 2013.  They were  represented
      by Counsel.  In a determination promulgated on 8 July 2013  the  Panel
      dismissed all aspects  of  the  appeals  namely  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection, human rights and an appeal against a  decision  under  the
      Immigration Rules.

   3. Leave to appeal was sought alleging error of law in the way  that  the
      Panel dealt with the second appellant's claim for  asylum  based  upon
      her conversion to Christianity.  The relevant parts  of  the  "grounds
      for permission" are as follows:

           "2.   The panel accepted that the second applicant was a genuine
                 convert to Christianity [95].  As set out by the  panel  at
                 [93] as per HJ (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
                 Department  (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC31, the correct approach  is
                 assessing whether a person would be  at  risk,  or  whether
                 they would modify their behaviour in order to  avoid  risk,
                 was formulated by Lord Rogers at Paragraph 82:

                 "82.  If so, the tribunal must then ask itself  whether  it
                    is satisfied on the available evidence that  gay  people
                    who lived openly would be liable to persecution  in  the
                    applicant's country of nationality.

                    If so, the tribunal must go  on  to  consider  what  the
                    individual applicant would do if  he  were  returned  to
                    that country.

                    If the applicant would in fact live openly  and  thereby
                    be exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has  a
                    well-founded fear of persecution  -  even  if  he  could
                    avoid the risk by living "discreetly".

                    If on the other hand, the tribunal  concludes  that  the
                    applicant would in fact live  discreetly  and  so  avoid
                    persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do
                    so.

                    If the  tribunal  concludes  that  the  applicant  would
                    choose to live discreetly simply because that was how he
                    himself  would  wish  to  live,  or  because  of  social
                    pressures, eg, not wanting to distress  his  parents  or
                    embarrass his friends, then his  application  should  be
                    rejected.  Social pressures of that kind do  not  amount
                    to  persecution  and  the  Convention  does  not   offer
                    protection against them.  Such a  person  has  no  well-
                    founded fear of persecution  because,  for  the  reasons
                    that have nothing to do with any fear of persecution, he
                    himself chooses to adopt a way of life which means  that
                    he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he  is
                    gay.

                    If, on the other hand, the  tribunal  concludes  that  a
                    material reason for the applicant living  discreetly  on
                    his return would be a  fear  of  the  persecution  which
                    would follow if he were to live openly  as  a  gay  man,
                    then, other things being equal, his  application  should
                    be accepted.  Such a person has a well-founded  fear  of
                    persecution.  To reject his application  on  the  ground
                    that he could avoid the persecution by living discreetly
                    would be to defeat the very right which  the  Convention
                    exists to protect - his right to live freely and  openly
                    as a gay man without fear of persecution.  By  admitting
                    him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly
                    as a gay man without fear of persecution, the  receiving
                    state gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
                    application  a  surrogate  for   the   protection   from
                    persecution which his country of nationality should have
                    afforded him."

              3. The panel having accepted that  the  second  applicant  was
                 genuine Christian convert; then went on to  find  that  she
                 would be unable to express her Christianity  as  openly  as
                 she currently does in the UK [98].

           4.    The panel have then misdirected  themselves  regarding  HJ
                 (Iran),  in  that  they  considered  whether   the   second
                 applicant would be able to tolerate living in a  way  where
                 she is unable to actively proselytise [98].   The  test  is
                 whether she would, as a consequence of a  genuine  fear  of
                 being persecuted, modify her  behaviour.   The  panel  have
                 found that the applicant would have to behave  less  openly
                 as a Christian in Iran, but have then  failed  to  consider
                 the steps next steps as set  out  in  Paragraph  82  of  HJ
                 (Iran)."

   4. Leave to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in a
      decision dated 26 July 2013.  It was noted in that  decision  that  it
      was "...contended that, if the second were to ultimately succeed, this
      would have a  knock-on  effect  on  the  position  of  the  two  other
      appellants with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR".

   5. The Judge, in granting leave, noted as follows:

           "It is arguable the Panel erred in, having accepted  the  second
           appellant is a Christian convert, failing to apply  the  correct
           test as set out in HJ (Iran) 2010 UK SC 31 when considering,  at
           paragraph 98 of the  determination,  how  the  second  appellant
           might behave upon return to Iran and why

The Hearing

   6. Each representative made a submission.  A note of those submissions is
      contained within the record of proceedings.  In summary  we  noted  as
      follows.

   7. Mr Shibli indicated that the Panel has misapplied the decision of  HJ.
      They had set out the correct test but had applied it in  an  incorrect
      way.  Mr Shibli referred us  to  paragraph  95  of  the  determination
      wherein the Panel accepted that the second appellant had converted  to
      Christianity.  That paragraph records that the second appellant  spoke
      passionately about her faith.  There were witnesses  in  support.   At
      paragraph 98 the Panel recorded what the  second  appellant  would  be
      giving up with regard to her faith should she be returned.  The Panel,
      in the submission of Mr Shibli, had adopted what he described  as  the
      "old HJ test".  There would be a marked  change  in  the  way  that  a
      Christian could exercise his/her faith in going to  Iran.   She  would
      need to be discreet and proceed with caution.  The  concept  of  house
      churches would replace the normal structure of a  church.   Mr  Shibli
      also referred to the case of SZ and JM (Christians FS Confirmed)  Iran
      CG 2008 (UKAIT 00082 and in particular paragraph 140 of that decision.
      It should be asked of the second appellant whether or not she could be
      reasonably expected to tolerate the way she would  have  to  live  her
      life as a Christian in Iran.

   8. Mr Shibli referred us to the original bundle of documents to enable us
      to consider whether the second appellant would need to be changing the
      way she proclaimed her faith.  He referred us to  letters  of  support
      and the changes that she would have to adopt.  In  essence  she  would
      need to "keep a low profile".  One example was that she  is  currently
      used to taking visiting friends to her church.  She would not be  able
      to do that in Iran.

   9. Mr Walker referred us to paragraph 98 of  the  Panel's  determination.
      Her current church does not require her to proselytise.  There was  no
      material error and the appeal should be dismissed.

  10. After retiring to consider the matter we returned to announce that  we
      found no error of law  within  the  Panel's  determination  and  their
      decisions would be confirmed.

Findings

  11.  The  Panel  had  before  them  an  extremely   complicated   set   of
      circumstances with regard to the three appellants.  The  determination
      that was produced is a well reasoned document dealing with all aspects
      of the various issues that were before  the  Panel.   The  matter  now
      before us is far more concise and relates only to the manner in  which
      the  Panel  dealt  with   the   second   appellant's   conversion   to
      Christianity.  However despite the concise  nature  of  the  issue  it
      would have a "knock-on" effect in respect of the other two  appellants
      as it would be a case of the three of them  remaining  together  as  a
      family in the United Kingdom or being deported together as a family to
      Iran.

  12. The determination of the Panel noted the evidence  placed  before  it.
      Dealing specifically with the second appellant and her  conversion  to
      Christianity it was noted (paragraph 28) that  she  had  converted  to
      Christianity in 2010  being  baptised  a  year  later.   She  attended
      church.  Whilst in prison she had a dream that was interpreted for her
      as a message from God (para 34).   She  participated  in  bible  study
      classes twice a week and participated in voluntary activities for  the
      church.  At paragraph 37 she had informed her friends, colleagues  and
      neighbours and her parents.  She shared  her  story  to  assist  other
      vulnerable people. She chose Christianity as it was the  only  way  to
      stay safe and live life correctly (para 40) and that  as  a  Christian
      she felt that she could  do  anything  and  would  be  protected.   If
      returned to Iran she would not give up her Christian beliefs and would
      continue to pray and tell other people about it including sharing  the
      gospel.

  13. In summary Mr Shibli directs us to the  findings  of  the  Panel  with
      regard to the genuineness of  the  second  appellant's  conversion  to
      Christianity but he seeks to challenge the conclusions of the Panel in
      the way that they dealt with HJ Iran.  Mr Shibli  contends  that  they
      directed themselves under the "old" HJ as set  out  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal rather than the subsequent Supreme Court version.  We disagree.
        Mr Shibli properly directs us to paragraph 82 of the  Supreme  Court
      decision (reproduced above). It is very  clear  that  the  Panel  from
      paragraph 93-99  considered  very  carefully  the  second  appellant's
      position in Iran given her accepted conversion to  Christianity.  They
      made clear findings as to the way  the  second  appellant  lives  (and
      would live in Iran) at paras 95 to 97.    They  decided  (for  reasons
      given) that  the  appellant's  current  Christian  practices  did  not
      include proselytising or a requirement to do so.  Any modification  of
      her behaviour as a Christian would not be of any  significant  effect.
      In essence she would be able to behave in very similar way to the  way
      she does now.  There was certainly no evidence before the  Panel  that
      as a Baptist she would be required to publically  "spread  the  word".
      They made a clear finding that she would not be required  unreasonably
      to suppress her basic religious  identity.   Certainly  there  was  no
      evidence before the Panel that  the  second  appellant  currently  did
      anything  other  than  live  discreetly  with  her  religion  and  the
      consideration given by the Panel does accord with the "test"   set out
      by Lord Rogers in paragraph 82 of the Supreme Court decision.

Decision

  14. There was no error of law.

  15. The appeals are dismissed.

  16. No anonymity order has been  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
      application was  made  to  us  and  we  therefore  make  no  anonymity
      direction.








                               Signed






                               N Poole
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 4th November 2013




