
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: DA/00089/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2014                              |On 8 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                             Michal Angelopolous
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye instructed by Prime solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Greece born in Sierra  Leone  appeals  with
    permission  against  the  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Miller
    dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order and to refuse him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on asylum, humanitarian protection, or human rights grounds.

Factual matrix

 2. In the present case, the facts found by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    were as follows.  The applicant was born in March 1992 in Sierra Leone,
    and travelled to Greece with his family when he was about 2 years  old.
    He became a Greek citizen and when he came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2008, he was about 16 years old.  His step-father remains in Greece and
    the appellant visited him there in 2009.  His mother now lives  in  the
    Netherlands and his natural father may be living there too.

 3. The appellant asserted that he left Greece because  of  racist  attacks
    experienced there; the respondent accepted that,  since  he  is  black,
    that he was likely to have been harassed and discriminated  against  by
    the Greek police before coming to the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant's criminal history in the United Kingdom is set out in an
    EEA NOMS 1 report prepared on 25 March 2013.   The  applicant  had  two
    convictions in 2010, when he was 17 or 18 years  old.   The  first,  in
    June 2010, was for the use of threatening words and behaviour; in  July
    2010 he was convicted of being drunk and disorderly  on  a  night  bus,
    screaming at a member of the public; and in addition,  during  2010  he
    was involved in a fight at the social services office for which he  was
    banned from that office for six months, was a suspect in an ABH  charge
    with two others, and was the subject in May 2010 of a rape  allegation,
    as well as an arrest for being in possession of an offensive weapon  in
    a public place and a public order offence, towards the end of 2010.

 5. From 2011-2012, during his relationship with his former partner,  there
    is a record of nine domestic violence incidents, including an  occasion
    when the applicant dragged her when 35 weeks pregnant, and another when
    he punched her in the face while she was  holding  her  baby.   All  of
    those incidents were fuelled by heavy drinking.

 6. On 28 December 2012 the appellant attacked his former partner  as  they
    came out of a nightclub.  Both parties were drunk. The appellant blamed
    his former partner for making him drink.  He  hit  his  former  partner
    repeatedly with his fists, knocked her to  the  ground,  and  continued
    striking her in the face with his clenched fists while she lay  on  the
    ground.  The appellant's former partner sustained a large cut above her
    eye, a black eye, cuts to her face requiring stitches, a swollen jaw, a
    chipped tooth, and grazing, scratching and cuts to her right foot.  The
    sentencing judge described it as a 'very, very serious  attack  indeed'
    and even after giving credit for a guilty plea at the  case  management
    hearing, the appellant was sentenced to two  years'  imprisonment.   At
    the end of his sentence, he remained in immigration detention  and  the
    deportation order was made.

 7. The appellant's sister lives in the United Kingdom and they  are  close
    in age.  She had a child herself in August 2010.  She is training as  a
    hairdresser and looking after  her  child.   She  would  not  be  in  a
    position  to  exercise  effective  supervision   of   the   appellant's
    behaviour. While he was in prison, she did  not  visit  him.  (She  did
    attend the hearing today.)

 8. The appellant is the  subject  of  a  restraining  order  made  by  the
    sentencing judge preventing him until further  notice  from  contacting
    his former partner or her son,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  save
    through solicitors or social services in relation to the child  or  the
    child's affairs.   There is inconclusive DNA evidence as to whether the
    appellant is his father. The boy is now a looked  after  child  in  the
    care of social services, with a view to adoption:   the  applicant  has
    the right to one letter a year.

 9. The appellant had only worked as  an  employee  for  a  few  months  in
    McDonalds but stated that he had been working cash in hand at  markets.
    The appellant was  said  to  speak  eight  languages:   Greek,  French,
    Albanian, German, Russian, Creole, Mende and English.  His  educational
    achievements were low: while in prison, he was identified as  dyslexic,
    but completed English Level 2 and studied for a Level 2 IT course while
    in prison.  The appellant claimed  to  have  a  Maths  A-level  but  no
    evidence to support that has been produced.

10. The report records that, according to social  services,  the  appellant
    had previously been a regular cannabis smoker, but that he denied  ever
    having used drugs.  He  did  admit  to  having  a  problem  with  heavy
    drinking and stated  that  he  wanted  to  address  it.   However,  the
    appellant had failed to  comply  in  2010  with  an  Alcohol  Treatment
    Requirement, a community service penalty.

11. He produced various certificates obtained in prison, showing that on 24
    October 2013 he completed two programmes run by the Rehabilitation  for
    Addicted Prisoners Trust (RAPt) on Living Safely and Drug  and  Alcohol
    support; that on an unspecified date, he  achieved  the  NCFE  Level  1
    Award in Creative Craft using Art and Design; that  he  was  awarded  1
    Credit  at  Level  1  for  Personal   and   Social   Development   (for
    understanding length, weight and capacity); and material connected with
    the Thinking Skills Programme, which is  the  subject  of  the  present
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal determination. I deal with that in
    more detail below.

12. There was evidence regarding his education, showing that the  appellant
    attended Lewisham College in 2008-2009  and  achieved  the  16-18  ESOL
    Foundation and numeracy qualifications at level E1 and E1/E2.  In 2009-
    10, the appellant began courses for 16-18 Maths, English and vocational
    studies, at levels of E2 and  E2/E3.   He  withdrew  from  all  of  the
    courses in September  2009  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  education
    thereafter.

First-tier Tribunal determination

13. The appellant relied on a witness statement from his sister,  and  both
    of them gave oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge considered all the evidence before  him.   He  concluded
    that the appellant did not have  a  'genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship' with his former partner's son, whether or not  the  child
    was his. There was evidence that the appellant had kept in  touch  with
    his step-father in Greece and had visited him  in  2009,  but,  on  his
    account, they lost contact in 2012.  The judge considered that they had
    had a reasonably strong relationship which had probably deteriorated as
    a result of the appellant's alcohol abuse.  He placed little weight  on
    the sister's evidence, since she  had  not  visited  the  appellant  in
    prison and in particular, he did not consider it likely that she  would
    be able to help him rehabilitate himself in the community  if  he  were
    discharged there.

14. The crucial paragraphs for the purpose of this appeal are paragraphs 36-
    39 of the determination:

         "36. The question obviously arises, nevertheless, as to the  extent
         to which the  appellant  has  reformed.   I  take  account  of  the
         certificates which he has received, as a result of  the  programmes
         he has undergone whilst in prison.  However, it is apparent that  a
         considerable number of the pages of the 'Thinking Skills' programme
         report, dated the 11th December 2013, are missing, and  it  is  not
         clear whether he ever completed his workbook, to which reference is
         made in a letter of the same date.  It  stated, under  the  heading
         'Open Participation': 'There  were  times  that  he  appeared  less
         willing to try new skills  and  he  did  not  always  complete  the
         between session tasks'.  As I have said,  given  the  fact  that  a
         large number of the  pages  of  the  report  are  missing,  I  have
         considerable concerns as to what  else  was  contained  within  the
         report.

         37.  It is  important to look at the EEA NOMS1  report,  which  was
         prepared following a  request  made  on  the  24th  May  2013.   It
         provides further details regarding his offending, and  rather  more
         information with regard  to  where  he  was  living  following  his
         arrival in the United Kingdom, than  is  evidenced  elsewhere.   It
         assesses the likelihood of reconviction as being OGP-77% (high) and
         OVP-81% (very high) and the risk of serious harm to others as being
         high in the case of a known adult and high to other members of  the
         public.  With regard to children, he is assessed as being a  medium
         risk.

         38.  In the light of all that I have stated, I do consider that the
         personal conduct of  the  appellant  would  represent  'a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat' were  he  discharged  into
         the community here.   ..."

Permission to appeal

15. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds:
    failure to take into account material evidence (the  complete  Thinking
    Skills  report);  insufficient  weight  given  to   his   attempts   to
    rehabilitate himself; failure to consider rehabilitation  by  reference
    to the decision in Essa v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) Netherlands [2013]  UKUT  316  (IAC);
    failure to take full account of section 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    HC 395 (as amended); and the best interests of the  child,  his  former
    partner's  son.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  considered   the
    proposed grounds of appeal and then concluded that there  was  arguable
    merit only in the judge's having  apparently  overlooked  much  of  the
    Thinking Skills Report.  Permission to appeal was granted only on  that
    ground.

Error of law hearing

16. At the hearing today, I was provided with a full copy of  the  material
    concerning the Thinking Skills course. The appellant's  representative,
    Mr Adewoye, was instructed that the appellant had completed the course,
    but on the face of the documents before me, that is plainly  incorrect.
    The material before me, which Mr Adewoye  says  was   provided  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, albeit there is no full copy of it  in  the  file,
    consists of three documents:

          a) A letter from HMP Highpoint to the appellant dated 11 December
             2013, acknowledging 'completion of your session work  for  the
             Thinking Skills Programme' and stating that there would  be  a
             course review on Friday 20  December  2013,  after  which  the
             appellant would be given a 'Further Workbook' and  two  months
             in which to complete it.

          b) A certificate  recording  that  the  appellant  'attended  the
             Thinking Skills Programme (TSP)  at  HMP  Highpoint,  December
             2013'.

          c) A copy of a TSP Post Programme Report dated 11 December  2013,
             of which all 15 pages are now before me.

17.  The first point to make is that, given the chronology, the certificate
    is not a certificate of completion of the TSP  Programme,  but,  as  it
    expressly states, a certificate of attending the December 2013  session
    work.  No copy of the 'Further Workbook' appears in the bundle.

18. The second question is the weight which the Post Programme Report  will
    bear.  The pages which were not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    when he considered the application were pages 2, 4, 6, 8,  10,  12,  14
    and 15.  There appears to have been a  photocopying  error:  presumably
    the original was double-sided and  only  the  odd-numbered  pages  were
    copied.

19. The report  notes,  on  page  2,  that  the  appellant's  OASys  report
    identified that he needed to develop his  ability  to  engage  in  pro-
    social activities, manage his emotions, and consider  the  consequences
    of his actions, as well as developing his ability to understand others'
    views and those of the wider community, and challenge his  pro-criminal
    attitudes.   The appellant  had  previously  had  counselling  for  his
    trauma and flashbacks caused by seeing his uncle and others die  during
    the war in Sierra Leone, presumably before he was two years old,  since
    that is when he is said to have left Sierra Leone.  It  was  considered
    that he could benefit from further counselling. The report records that
    at one point during his imprisonment, the appellant was placed on basic
    regime for fighting, after someone made a remark about his mother.   He
    was aware that 'he has difficulty with emotional control'  but  when  a
    further  difficulty  occurred  during  the  basic  regime  phase,   the
    appellant did manage not to fight again.  The appellant on page  4  had
    stated that 'he no longer drinks alcohol' and was  said  to  understand
    the importance of avoiding it in future.  He had  'shown  some  insight
    into the benefits of avoiding previous drinking friends and places that
    have a focus on alcohol consumption'.  It is  difficult  to  know  what
    weight a statement that the appellant no  longer  drinks  alcohol  will
    bear, given that he has been in  prison  since  his  conviction,  where
    presumably there is little or no alcohol available to him. The box  for
    'Participant's comments' on page 4 is blank.

20. In section 2 of the report, headed  'The  Conditions  of  Success',  as
    noted in the determination, it records  that  during  the  course,  the
    appellant indulged in 'side talking and play fighting' and  had  to  be
    reminded to  focus  on  the  Thinking  Skills  Programme  to  which  he
    'maintained some openness' (page 5 of the  report).  On  page  6,  that
    comment continues,  recording  that  when  he  was  'side  talking  and
    laughing  [he]  made  efforts  to  stop  when  asked  by  facilitators,
    demonstrating  more  respectful  behaviour.   [He]  is  encouraged   to
    maintain his respectful behaviour should he engage in future courses in
    order for  him  to  gain  the  most  from  them'.   Under  the  heading
    'Supportive Participation', the report  records  that  'at  times'  the
    appellant demonstrated support on the programme and was  involved  with
    discussions.  The box for 'Participant's comments' on page 6 is blank.

21. Under section 3, headed 'Participant's understanding  and  action'  the
    report records that it was only during the course  that  the  appellant
    recognised that his former partner had not forced him to drink  alcohol
    on the night he attacked her.   The appellant 'recognised the signs  of
    his emotional arousal as clenching his fists  and  gritting  his  teeth
    while screwing his face up' and that in  future  he  would  'keep  calm
    using thought stopping and thinking of the costs and benefits  of  what
    he is doing', as well as watching television and going to the gym.  The
    evidence is repeated and slightly amplified concerning  two  incidents,
    the first of which  involved  a  fight,  and  the  second,  during  the
    punishment for the first offence, where he had  restrained  himself  by
    'considering the consequences of remaining  on  basic  regime  and  its
    impact on his deportation case'.  Again, the box headed  'Participant's
    comments and suggestions' on page 8 is blank.

22. The next section of the report is headed 'Problem solving  Module'  and
    contains further consideration of the fighting incident, and  the  need
    for the appellant to address the risk of deportation and  seek  contact
    with his son.  Again, the 'Comments' box on page 10 is blank.

23. The 'Positive Relationships Module' begins on page 10 and  finishes  on
    page  12,  with  another  blank  'Comments'  box.   The  appellant  had
    considered 'areas where he may have been controlling in the  past'  and
    considered how to distance himself from  his  alcohol  drinking  social
    circle.  He 'showed some ability to consider others' perspectives':  he
    was aware that his former partner's son would be feeling  abandoned  as
    the appellant had not been in touch with  him.   As  a  result  of  the
    programme, the appellant wrote the boy a letter and sent a card through
    social services.  The appellant stated that he had grown up  without  a
    father himself and did not want his son to 'suffer the same fate'.   He
    realised that in order to be a role model for his  son,  he  needed  to
    'stay offence free  and  free  from  alcohol  to  prove  he  can  be  a
    responsible parent'.

24. Section four on page 13 is a  summary  of  recommendations.   Page  15,
    which  includes  provision  for  signature  by  the  facilitators,  the
    supervisor, and the appellant, is not completed and bears no signatures
    or dates.

25. I do not consider that the omitted pages improve the  appellant's  case
    on rehabilitation or risk to the public.  The picture which emerges  is
    of a young man who has real difficulty with his  emotions  and  temper,
    whose ability not to return to alcohol is asserted  but  untested,  and
    who, even knowing that it might affect  this  deportation  appeal,  got
    into at least one fight in prison.   The  documents  before  me  cannot
    reasonably be described, as in the grounds  of  appeal  they  were,  as
    evidencing the appellant having complete the TSP  programme  in  record
    time over 11 days rate than two  months.  The  appellant's  involvement
    with this course appears to have ground to a halt when he was given the
    feedback form:  he did not complete any of the 'Comments' boxes (all of
    which, coincidentally, were on the omitted even numbered pages) and the
    form was not signed off.  There is no sign of the  workbook  which  was
    intended to  record  his  progress  over  the  next  two  months.   The
    certificate produced does no more than record  his  attendance  at  the
    December 2013 course.

Legal Framework

26. The appellant is an EEA citizen and accordingly a  decision  to  remove
    him can be made only under regulation 19  with  regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended).
    The  appellant conceded at the hearing that he was not a person who, by
    reason of having  acquired  permanent  residence,  could  benefit  from
    paragraph 21(3) of the Regulations, or who  could  show  more  than  10
    years  residence  here,  thereby  engaging  the  'imperative   grounds'
    provision in paragraph 21(4).

27. The relevant provisions in relation to the removal of EEA citizens  who
    have neither permanent residence nor residence in excess  of  10  years
    are set out in paragraphs 19 and 21 of the Regulations as follow:


         "19.- Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom


         ... (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who  has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if- ...  (b)  the
         Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  the  person's  removal  is
         justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health in accordance with regulation 21...


         (5) A person must not be removed under paragraph (3) if  he  has  a
         right to remain in the United Kingdom by virtue  of  leave  granted
         under the 1971 Act unless his removal is justified on  the  grounds
         of public policy, public security or public  health  in  accordance
         with regulation 21.


         21. - Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public
         health grounds


         (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
         health. ...


         (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

              (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
              proportionality;
              (b) the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
              conduct of the person Concerned;
              (c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
              represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
              affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;
              (d) matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
              which relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not
              justify the decision;
               (e) a person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
              themselves justify the decision.


         (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

28. The Upper Tribunal  has  given  guidance  on  the  operation  of  these
    provisions in Essa, the judicial headnote of which, so far as  relevant
    to this appeal, is as follows:

         "...3. For those who at the time of determination are or  remain  a
         present threat to public policy but where the factors  relevant  to
         integration  suggest  that  there  are  reasonable   prospects   of
         rehabilitation, those  prospects  can  be  a  substantial  relevant
         factor in the proportionality balance as to whether deportation  is
         justified. If the claimant cannot constitute a present threat  when
         rehabilitated, and is well-advanced in  rehabilitation  in  a  host
         state where there is a substantial degree of  integration,  it  may
         well very well be disproportionate to proceed to deportation.

         4. At the other end of  the  scale,  if  there  are  no  reasonable
         prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat  and
         is likely to remain so for the indefinite future, it cannot be seen
         how the prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a  significant
         factor  in  the  balance.  Thus,   recidivist   offenders,   career
         criminals, adult offenders who have failed to engage with treatment
         programmes, claimants with propensity to commit sexual  or  violent
         offences and the like may well fall into this category.

         5.  What is likely to be valuable to a  judge  in  the  immigration
         jurisdiction who is considering risk factors is the extent  of  any
         progress made by a person during the sentence and  licence  period,
         and any material shift in OASys assessment of that person."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

29.  The evidence in this application did not indicate any shift at all  in
    the OASys assessment of the appellant, since only one  such  assessment
    was relied upon.  The progress made between  sentence  and  licence  is
    unimpressive.  The appellant cannot rationally be described  as  'well-
    advanced in rehabilitation' as set  out  in  subparagraph  (3)  of  the
    headnote: on the contrary, he is a recidivist offender,  an  adult  who
    has failed to engage with treatment problems  and  has  the  propensity
    still to commit sexual or violent  offences.  He  did  not  insert  any
    comments in the comments boxes on the assessment;  it  is  unsigned  by
    anyone; he fidgeted and talked in the sessions and had to  be  reminded
    to  concentrate;  he  committed  a  further  offence  while  in  prison
    (contrary to his evidence at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing);  and
    although the writers of the report have done their best to put  a  good
    spin on his behaviour, there is very little in the report  to  indicate
    that the appellant was making real efforts to change his ways.

30. I am satisfied, on the evidence, that even had the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge addressed his mind to the even pages and page 15, the  signatures
    page of the document, it would not have changed his assessment  of  the
    appeal and he would still have dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    Any error by him in overlooking the full version of the  TSP  Programme
    Report, if indeed the full version was before him, is not  material  to
    the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.

Date:                                                                 Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
