


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00181/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 13 January 2017                  |On : 17 January 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  9
August 2015 to refuse his human rights claim  and  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
deportation order previously made against him on 26 November 1999.

The appellant is a  citizen  of  Morocco,  born  on  21  January  1963.  His
immigration history  is  long  and  protracted  but  I  shall  endeavour  to
summarise it as follows.


The appellant arrived in the UK on 12 May 1991 with leave to  enter  as  the
spouse of a British national and was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on
that basis on 5 May 1992. In May 1994 his  marriage  was  dissolved.  On  18
September 1995 he was convicted of indecent assault and was sentenced  to  7
years' imprisonment and recommended for deportation. He  served  four  years
of his sentence. He unsuccessfully appealed against  a  decision  to  deport
him and on 26 November 1999 a Deportation Order was  made  against  him.  He
was deported from the UK on 8 June 2000.


On 25 December 2000 the appellant was refused  leave  to  enter  the  UK  as
being in breach of the conditions of the Deportation Order. He  was  granted
temporary admission but absconded and remained in the UK in  breach  of  the
Deportation Order.


In  2001  the  appellant  entered  into  a  relationship  with  AS,  a  dual
Irish/British national and they had two children  together,  LB  born  on  3
April 2005 and AB born on 12 March 2006. AS  also  had  a  daughter  from  a
previous relationship, ALS, born on 22 April  1997.  On  26  June  2006  the
appellant was detained by the immigration authorities following  a  domestic
dispute between himself and AS. He was served  with  removal  papers.  On  4
July 2006 he made an application for leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds
on the basis of his relationship with a British  national.  The  application
was refused and the appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal
was dismissed on 23 November 2006. The appellant then  made  an  application
for an EEA residence card as the  partner  of  an  EEA  national,  but  that
application was refused  in  April  2007  and  the  respondent  set  removal
directions on 25 April 2007 for the appellant's removal  from  the  UK.  The
appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was dismissed  on  1
October 2007. The removal did not take place.


On 3 June 2008 the appellant applied for a certificate of approval to  marry
his partner. They were married on  14  September  2009.  In  July  2010  the
appellant made a further application for an EEA residence card on the  basis
of his marriage to AS. The application was refused  on  28  September  2010.
The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  appeal  was
dismissed on 21  April  2011  and  was  subsequently  upheld  by  the  Upper
Tribunal in February 2012, finding that AS had no rights under  EU  law  and
that the appellant could not, therefore, claim any  derivative  right  to  a
residence certificate through her. That decision was in turn upheld  by  the
Court of Appeal in December 2012 in the case  of  Harrison  (Jamaica)  &  AB
(Morocco) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
1736. Removal directions were set to remove the appellant to  Morocco  on  5
November 2013 and  he  was  detained  pending  removal.  He  petitioned  the
European Court of Human Rights to place a stay on his  removal  pursuant  to
Rule 39, but was unsuccessful.


The appellant then made a request on 29 October 2013 for revocation  of  the
deportation order previously made  against  him.  On  4  November  2013  the
respondent rejected the appellant's submissions and refused  to  revoke  the
deportation order. On 5  November  2013  the  appellant  lodged  a  judicial
review claim in the Upper Tribunal to challenge the  respondent's  decision.
Permission was refused on the papers and  the  appellant  then  renewed  his
application  to  an  oral  hearing.  He  made  further  submissions  to  the
respondent, relying on an expert report from an independent  social  worker,
Mr Peter Horrocks.  The  respondent  then  made  a  further  decision  on  6
February 2014, refusing  the  appellant's  application  and  certifying  his
human rights claim and the decision  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  as
clearly unfounded under section 94(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002. A supplementary decision was made by the  respondent  on  8
May 2014. The appellant amended his judicial  review  grounds  to  challenge
those decisions and in a  judgment  handed  down  on  27  April  2015  Upper
Tribunal Judge Rintoul in AB, R (on  the  application  of)  v  Secretary  of
State  for  the  Home  Department  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  352,   quashed   the
certification of the appellant's claim.

The respondent then withdrew the decisions of 6  February  2014  and  8  May
2014 and reconsidered the appellant's application to revoke the  deportation
order.  In  a  decision  of  9  August  2015  the  respondent  refused   the
appellant's human rights claim and refused to revoke the deportation  order,
but gave him an in-country right of appeal against that  decision.  That  is
the appeal relevant to these proceedings.


In the decision of 9 August  2015,  the  respondent  considered  the  expert
report from the independent  social  worker,  Mr  Peter  Horrocks,  and  the
decisions of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal in  the  appellant's
appeal in 2011/2012, noting Mr Horrocks' view about the  detrimental  effect
that the appellant's deportation would have on  his  two  children  and  his
step-daughter, and on his wife who suffered from mental health problems  and
had in the past threatened suicide.  The  respondent  concluded  that  there
were no very compelling circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in
deporting the appellant or in revoking the deportation  order  made  against
him on 26 November 1999.


The appellant then appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  Peart  on  12  September  2016.  An
adjournment application was made on behalf of the appellant,  in  order  for
lawyers to be instructed to apply for contact with his children, further  to
the breakdown of his marriage, and in order to  await  the  outcome  of  the
Supreme Court judgment on Article 8. The application was refused,  with  the
Tribunal noting that no contact application had  been  made  to  the  family
courts and no  matrimonial  solicitors  instructed,  despite  the  appellant
having lived apart from his family since  April  and  being  denied  contact
with his children since July. The Tribunal  heard  from  the  appellant  who
gave evidence as to how he had a close relationship with  his  children  and
with his step-daughter whom he regarded as his own  daughter.  He  told  the
Tribunal that prior to  his  marriage  break-down  and  moving  out  of  the
matrimonial home in April he had been actively involved  in  the  children's
lives. He said that he had only one sibling, a sister, remaining in  Morocco
and he did not get on well with her,  and  the  rest  of  his  family  lived
elsewhere. He  was  currently  living  with  a  friend.  The  Tribunal  also
considered a statement given by AS on 25 October 2013 prior to the  marriage
break-down and the independent social worker's report prepared  in  December
2013, giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt as to  his  relationship
with his children.


Judge Peart found that the best interests of the  children  were  to  remain
with their mother and have contact with their father and  he  accepted  that
it was not in their  best  interests  for  the  appellant  to  be  deported.
However, having considered all other matters he concluded that that did  not
amount to very compelling circumstances outweighing the public  interest  in
the appellant's deportation and he did not consider that the impact  of  his
deportation on the children would be unduly harsh. He dismissed  the  appeal
on all grounds.


The appellant sought permission to appeal  Judge  Peart's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the grounds that he had failed to apply relevant  guidance
set out in the Strasbourg jurisprudence; he had misdirected himself  on  the
relevance of rehabilitation and post-offending conduct;  he  had  failed  to
consider the relevance of the respondent's delay in removal as  relevant  to
the  public  interest;  he  had  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
considering that the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Morocco;  and  he  had
misapplied the undue harshness/ compelling circumstances test.


Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
was subsequently granted on 21 November 2016 by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
Mailer on the grounds that the judge had  arguably  failed  to  have  proper
regard to the guidance contained in the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 13 January 2017.

Mr Khubber made lengthy submissions expanding upon the  grounds  of  appeal.
He relied upon the case of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 662 in so far as it  referred  at  [38]  to
the significance of Strasbourg jurisprudence and submitted that Judge  Peart
had failed to give consideration to the relevant factors set  out  in  cases
such as Uner v. The Netherlands - 46410/99 [2006] ECHR 873  which  ought  to
have formed part of the proportionality balancing exercise. There  had  been
a failure to consider the various factors in the  appellant's  favour,  such
as the lack of subsequent offending, the appellant's  lengthy  absence  from
Morocco and lack of ties to that country, the adverse impact of  deportation
on the children, the appellant's compliance with immigration  control  since
2006, and the delay by the Home Office in carrying out  deportation  action.
Mr Khubber submitted, with respect to ground two, that the judge's  approach
to rehabilitation was wrong and that he had failed to consider the  relevant
issue which was the future risk of re-offending, and  the  fact  that  there
had been no re-offending. As to the third ground, Mr Khubber submitted  that
the judge had referred to windows of opportunity  for  the  Home  Office  to
remove the appellant but  had  not  taken  the  respondent's  inaction  into
account in the balancing exercise and had only reacted  to  the  appellant's
own actions without taking any initiative.  As  to  the  fourth  ground,  Mr
Khubber  submitted  that  the   judge's   conclusion   on   relocation   was
inconsistent with his recording of the evidence and that his  finding,  that
the  appellant  could  turn  to  relatives  for  support  in  Morocco,   was
inconsistent with the appellant's evidence as to  his  lack  of  ties.  With
regard to the  fifth  ground,  Mr  Khubber  submitted  that  the  judge  had
misapplied the unduly harsh/ compelling circumstances test.  He  had  failed
to appreciate the strong basis for the  children's  best  interests  in  the
appellant not being deported and the extent of the adverse impact  that  his
deportation would have on them. Mr Khubber referred to the two  new  Supreme
Court cases, Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
[2016] UKSC 60 and Makhlouf v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
(Northern Ireland) [2016] UKSC 59. He submitted that the judge had erred  by
considering the immigration rules to  be  a  complete  code  in  deportation
cases, when the Supreme Court in Ali had found that not to be the  case.  He
had erred by  considering  only  the  public  interest  and  by  failing  to
consider the other  relevant  factors,  including  in  particular  the  best
interests of the children.


Mr Kotas submitted that, on the  contrary,  the  judge  had  considered  all
relevant factors and included all the factors  set  out  in  the  Strasbourg
jurisprudence in Uner. The judge was fully aware of  the  appellant's  post-
offending conduct. Mr Kotas relied on the cases  of  Danso  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596,  PF  (Nigeria)  v  The
Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  251  and  The
Secretary of State for the Home Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
1012 in regard to the weight to be  attached  to  rehabilitation  and  post-
offending  conduct.  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  judge   had   properly
considered the  delay  in  taking  action  against  the  appellant  and  the
question of the appellant's integration into Morocco and had not  misapplied
the unduly harsh and very  compelling  circumstances  test.  The  judge  had
taken the appellant's case at its highest and had made no errors of law.


In reply, Mr Khubber reiterated the points previously made.


Consideration and findings.

It is the appellant's case that Judge Peart's decision elevated  the  public
interest consideration, considering the  immigration  rules  as  a  complete
code, and failed to conduct  a  proper  proportionality  balancing  exercise
taking  into  account  relevant  factors   set   out   in   the   Strasbourg
jurisprudence.  However  I  do  not  find  myself  in  agreement  with  that
assessment of the judge's decision. On the contrary,  I  consider  that  the
judge undertook a full and careful consideration  of  all  relevant  factors
and took a particularly generous approach to the  appellant's  circumstances
by considering his case at its very highest and giving  weight  to  previous
evidence, such as his wife's statement and the independent  social  worker's
report, which was favourable to the appellant.

Whilst Mr Khubber submits that the judge failed to follow  the  guidance  in
the case of NA, it is plain from his decision  at  [52]  that  he  had  full
regard to the findings in that case  and  I  see  nothing  in  his  decision
suggesting that he did not appreciate and follow the  approach  set  out  at
[38] of NA. Nowhere in that paragraph or any other case does it  state  that
there has to be specific reference and citation of Strasbourg  jurisprudence
and I reject Mr Khubber's submission that there was a failure by  the  judge
to consider such matters either in substance or in  form.  On  the  contrary
each of the factors set out in Boultif v Switzerland - 54273/00 [2001]  ECHR
497 and reproduced in Uner at [57] and [58], so far as  they  were  relevant
to the appellant's case, were clearly and cogently addressed by  the  judge.
It is relevant to note, in any event, that Mr  Khubber's  submission  as  to
the weight to be attached to the Strasbourg jurisprudence has to be seen  in
the light of the Court of Appeal's findings in AJ (Zimbabwe) at [47]:


      "So does its reliance on the Strasbourg  authorities  in  this  field.
      Although they have some relevance in helping to  identify  potentially
      relevant factors, tribunals  will  be  in  error  if  they  apply  the
      principles without recognising that the UK has chosen to put  a  heavy
      premium on the removal of foreign criminals. As Jackson LJ pointed out
      in NA (Pakistan) para.39, it is  for  each  state  to  determine  what
      weight to give to the public interest in deporting foreign  criminals,
      and accordingly article 8 assessments may vary  from  state  to  state
      even where the factual circumstances are  essentially  the  same.  The
      general framework of Strasbourg law as established in  cases  such  as
      Maslov cannot  simply  be  slavishly  applied.  The  premise  of  that
      jurisprudence departs from the UK approach in two important  respects.
      First, it does not give the same significant weight to  the  need  for
      deporting foreign criminals as the UK does; and second,  it  sees  the
      public interest principally in terms of the potential damage caused by
      the particular individual re-offending,  whereas  that  is  merely  an
      element - and by no means even the most important  element  -  of  the
      relevant public interest as perceived in the UK. Applying the criteria
      in Maslov without modifying them to take account of the particular way
      in which the UK views the public interest, fails to view the article 8
      assessment through the lens of the Immigration Rules  and  will  cause
      tribunals to go astray, as in this case."

The factors  set  out  in  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  to  which  Mr  Khubber
referred in particular in his grounds and submissions  as  not  having  been
considered  by  the  judge  included  the  lack  of  post-offending  adverse
conduct, the existence of positive  conduct,  the  isolated  nature  of  the
offence, compliance with immigration control since offending  and  delay  in
removal action by the authorities. However those  were  plainly  matters  to
which the judge  gave  consideration.  At  [61]  the  judge  considered  the
appellant's immigration history; at  [62]  he  considered  the  respondent's
delay or inaction in removing him when the opportunity  arose;  at  [63]  he
considered the isolated nature of the offending, the  length  of  time  that
had since passed and the lack of further offending; at  [64]  he  considered
the appellant's compliance with immigration control since 2006; and at  [65]
and [66] he considered the appellant's ties to the UK and Morocco.  At  [67]
he considered those matters again in his conclusion. The best  interests  of
the appellant's children and step-daughter were considered by the  judge  at
length at [55] to [57] and at [70] to [72]. I therefore find no merit in  Mr
Khubber's submission that the judge erred by failing  to  consider  relevant
matters in assessing proportionality.

Neither do I consider that there was any misdirection by the  judge  in  his
consideration of rehabilitation and  post-offending  conduct.  It  is  clear
from his findings at [63] that the judge appreciated the distinction in  the
significance of rehabilitation in EEA and non-EEA cases and he  relied  upon
the judgment in PF (Nigeria) in that respect. I do not  find  merit  in  the
assertion in the grounds, and in Mr Khubber's  submission,  that  the  judge
failed to appreciate and take into account the appellant's positive  conduct
and lack of re-offending. That  was  a  matter  to  which  he  clearly  gave
consideration at [63], but there was no requirement for  him  to  place  any
more weight upon that factor than he did. As Mr Kotas submitted, that was  a
matter specifically considered by the Court of Appeal  in  Danso,  at  [20],
and AJ (Zimbabwe) at [47], and the judge's consideration of the  matter  was
consistent with the approach taken in those cases.


With regard to the third ground, it was Mr  Khubber's  submission  that  the
respondent had had an opportunity to remove the appellant between  2007  and
2009 and from 2013 but failed to do so and that the  judge  had  understated
the respondent's inaction and delay in the balancing exercise.  However  the
judge fully considered the matter at [62] when he referred to  the  "windows
of opportunity". Mr Kotas' submission was that the  idea  of  the  appellant
entering the UK in breach of a deportation order and  then  criticising  the
respondent for  failing  to  make  sufficient  efforts  to  remove  him  was
unpalatable. I agree. The judge was perfectly entitled to place  the  weight
that he did upon the matter at [62]. The same can be said of  the  assertion
that the judge failed to give weight  to  the  appellant's  compliance  with
immigration control since 2006, which  the  judge  properly  considered  and
addressed at [64].


As for the assertion that the  judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the
matter of relocation to Morocco, I see no  reason  why  the  judge  was  not
entitled to conclude at [66] that the  appellant  would  have  relatives  to
turn to for support in Morocco, or why such a  conclusion  was  inconsistent
with his findings at [30]. In any event the question of whether or  not  the
appellant had family remaining in Morocco  was  not  a  decisive  matter  in
considering whether he could  reintegrate  in  Morocco  and  the  judge  was
perfectly  entitled  to  conclude  that  there  were  no  very   significant
obstacles to his integration, as he did, for the reasons given, at [69(c)].


The  final  ground  of  appeal  is  that  the  judge  misapplied  the  undue
harshness/ compelling circumstances test. However, again, I  find  no  merit
in the grounds. There is no basis whatsoever for  the  submission  that  the
judge focussed only on the public interest, and unduly elevated  the  public
interest,  without  taking  account  of  other  relevant  factors.  On   the
contrary, the judge gave detailed consideration to whether  the  appellant's
separation from  his  children  was  unduly  harsh,  applying  the  relevant
approach in KMO (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)  [2015]  UKUT  543  and  MM
(Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1)  [2016]
EWCA Civ 617 and giving full consideration to  the  best  interests  of  the
children. As Mr Kotas submitted, the  judge  was  particularly  generous  in
that regard and considered the appellant's case at its very highest,  giving
weight to the expert report from  the  independent  social  worker  and  the
appellant's wife's supportive statement despite the fact that that  evidence
was prepared in different circumstances two years previously.  By  the  time
of the appeal hearing the appellant had separated from his wife and  had  no
contact with his children nor had he  commenced  any  legal  proceedings  to
gain access and contact, but the judge proceeded on the basis  that  contact
and access would be resumed and that the relationship between the  appellant
and his children were as previously stated.

The judge  went  on  to  give  detailed  and  cogent  reasons,  based  on  a
consideration of all  relevant  matters  including  those  set  out  in  the
Strasbourg jurisprudence, for concluding that there were no very  compelling
reasons  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  That  was   a
conclusion he was fully entitled  to  reach  on  the  evidence  before  him,
considering in particular the serious nature of  the  appellant's  offending
and his conduct in returning to the UK in breach of a deportation order  and
absconding for a number of years, and despite the positive  aspects  of  his
case  which  were  fully  considered  by  the  judge.  There   was   nothing
inconsistent in such a conclusion, and in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
appellant's  circumstances  and  approach  to  relevant  matters,  with  the
decision in Ali or  Makhlouf.  Whilst  the  judge  said  at  [47]  that  the
immigration rules comprised a complete code in Article 8 deportation  cases,
contrary to the clarification since given by the Supreme  Court  in  Ali,  I
find that nothing material arises from that, given the matters  relevant  to
the appellant's case, and I find no error of law in the judge's approach  to
Article  8.  All  relevant  factors  had  been  thoroughly   and   carefully
considered by the judge and accorded the relevant weight  in  the  balancing
exercise and there was nothing further  for  him  to  consider  outside  the
rules.


The judge's  decision  is  a  detailed  and  thorough  one,  addressing  all
relevant  matters  and  including  a  full  and  proper  assessment  of  the
appellant's Article 8 claim, as consistent with relevant jurisprudence.  The
judge reached a proper conclusion on the evidence before him  and  in  light
of the circumstances of the appellant's case. For all of the  reasons  given
above, I conclude that the grounds of appeal do not disclose any  errors  of
law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.









                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
