
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00180/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2021                     |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M I H
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Georget, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Welsh)  promulgated  on
    23 April 2020.  By its decision, the Tribunal allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, dated, 18 March  2019
    to deport him from the United Kingdom.

Introduction:

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Hotak  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did make an anonymity order without giving  any
    reasons in the decision. The Upper Tribunal  gave  directions  for  the
    appellant's representatives to provide grounds as to why  an  anonymity
    direction was necessary. At the hearing, Counsel  Mr  Georget  informed
    the Tribunal that he did not seek to advance any grounds as to why such
    an order would be necessary.

 1. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department as the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Hotak  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The decision to deport was made under Regulation 27 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"). The
    appellant's case was that the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the Regulations,  and/or  that  it  was
    incompatible with his rights under Article 8  of  the  Convention,  and
    thus unlawful by reason of S.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. By a decision and reasons promulgated on the 23 April  2020,  the  FtTJ
    (Judge  Welsh)  allowed  the  appeal,  and  whilst  finding  that   the
    respondent had established that the appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present, and sufficiently serious threat to public policy or  security,
    for reasons of proportionality  he  reached  the  conclusion  that  his
    deportation was not justified or proportionate under the Regulations.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed and permission to appeal was granted by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Buchanan) on the 20 May 2020.

 5. The hearing took place  on  23  April  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.  The advocates  attended  remotely  via
    video. There  were  no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial
    technical problems  were  encountered  during  the  hearing  and  I  am
    satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases  by
    the chosen means.

 6. I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz and Mr Georget for their clear and  helpful
    written and oral submissions.

Background:

 7. The Appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands. The appellant's personal
    history is set out in the decision letter and the decision of  the  FtT
    (Judge Welsh). The appellant's father moved  from  Afghanistan  to  the
    Netherlands. The appellant, his mother and siblings joined him in  that
    country in or about 1996 or  1997.  At  the  time  the  appellant  left
    Afghanistan he was five years of age.

 8. Throughout the time they lived in  the  Netherlands  they  lived  as  a
    family unit until December 2006 and the family relocated to the UK.

 9. It is stated that the appellant's father shortly after this  time  left
    the family home and returned to the Netherlands.

10. On 26 July 2018 the respondent notified him of the intention to make  a
    deportation  order  pursuant  to  Regulation  27  of  the   Immigration
    (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016  Regulations")
    following his conviction after trial, on 17 July 2018 of the offence of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm which he was sentenced to a term
    of improvement of 30 months. By the date of his conviction, he had been
    convicted on four occasions for nine offences. The offences  and  those
    convictions date from 9 December 2004 to 15 December 2010 and  comprise
    two offences involving acts of  violence,  four  offences  relating  to
    damage to  property  and  two  offences  of  dishonesty.  He  was  also
    reprimanded on 18 December 2008 for an offence of battery.

11. The appellant's legal advisers submitted representations on his  behalf
    in a letter dated 14 August 2018, and 21 January 2019. The  summary  of
    the representations made are set out at [3] of the FtTJ's decision.

      1) That the appellant's family fled to  the  Netherlands  as  refugees
         from Afghanistan when the appellant was very young.

      2) The appellant and his rest of his family with victims  of  domestic
         violence at the hands of the appellant's father.

      3) The family moved to the UK in December 2006 when the appellant  was
         15 years of age.

      4) He lives with his mother and siblings.

      5) He has built up a strong network of friends since his arrival.

      6) He has a mental health condition.

      7) He is a registered care of his mother who suffers from physical and
         mental abilities.

      8) With the assistance of his  family  in  the  appropriate  care  and
         support in the UK, he can be rehabilitated.

12. In a decision taken on 18  March  2019,  the  respondent  rejected  the
    appellant submissions.

13. In relation to his length of residence, the respondent considered  that
    the appellant had not demonstrated that  he  had  been  living  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of  10  years  or  that  he  had
    acquired permanent residence. Consequently, the relevant  decision  was
    taken on grounds of public policy. By reference to schedule  1  of  the
    2016  regulations,  the  respondent  determined  that  the  appellant's
    offending behaviour, his convictions, his response to sentences and the
    assessment of risk by the probation service demonstrated that there was
    a real risk that he would offend in  the  future  and  thereby  pose  a
    genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of the UK society.

14. As to the issue of proportionality, the respondent considered that  the
    decision to deport was proportionate and justified  having  taken  into
    account evidence as his mental health, the lack of social and  cultural
    integration  into  the  UK,  that  English  is  widely  spoken  in  the
    Netherlands so he would be able to  form  a  private  life  and  secure
    employment and that he would have access to the Dutch welfare system

15. Separate consideration was given under Article 8 of the ECHR.

16. The appellant appealed the decision, and his  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Welsh) on 23 January 2020. During the course
    of the hearing, he heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his  younger
    sister and his older sister alongside documentary evidence submitted on
    behalf of the appellant and  that  of  the  respondent  (identified  at
    [11]).

17. The  FtTJ's  assessment  and  factual  findings  are  set  out  between
    paragraphs [15] - [65].

18. The FtTJ's assessment began with the  issue  of  residence.  The  judge
    found and recorded that counsel on behalf  of  the  appellant  accepted
    that the appellant could not demonstrate a right of permanent residence
    under Regulation 6. It appears that it was  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that Regulation 8 applied. The factual basis being  that  the
    appellant had lived as part of the same household as his sisters whilst
    in the Netherlands and that he had been both dependent on  his  sisters
    and living in the same household as them since have  been  resident  in
    the UK. At paragraphs [15 - 19] the judge set out  his  conclusions  on
    that issue and having applied the  decision  in  AA  (Algeria)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1741, he concluded that whilst in the Netherlands,  the
    appellant and his sisters were living in  the  parents'  household  and
    thus the appellant could not satisfy the requirements of  Regulation  8
    and thus could not establish a permanent right to reside in the UK.  It
    follows from that submission that the relevant decision  was  therefore
    taken on grounds of public policy.

19. At paragraphs [20 - 36] the FtTJ undertook an assessment of whether the
    appellant presented a genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting the fundamental  interests  of  society,  namely  maintaining
    order,  preventing  social  harm,  and  protecting  the   public.   His
    conclusion was  in  the  affirmative  and  set  out  his  reasoning  by
    reference to the evidence before him.

20.  The judge found him to be a persistent offender have been convicted of
    10 offences and one reprimand between December 2004 and July  2018.  He
    did not find the offending of seven years between the commission of the
    offence of attempted robbery in 2009 and the commission of the  offence
    in February 2007 to break the chain of offending. However, he concluded
    that the index  offence  was  similar  in  nature  and  seriousness  to
    previous offending and thus it marked a "resumption of  past  behaviour
    not an aberration in the behaviour of an otherwise changed man."

21. The judge set out the sentencing remarks relevant to  the  most  recent
    offence at [23] noting that the appellant with a friend of  his  played
    an equal and similar role in an unprovoked attack on the victim. Whilst
    the knife had not been used, the judge found that it was produced by or
    to the appellant,  his  co-defendant  having  threatened  to  stab  the
    victim.  The  judge  noted  that   the   appellant   did   not   accept
    responsibility for his part in the offence and the view set out in  the
    PSR was of the same view reported in the OASys's assessment.

22. By reference to his medical records at [27]  the  FtTJ  summarised  the
    relevant factual issues namely that he had a long-standing  history  of
    reacting inappropriately to conflict  or  perceived  conflict  combined
    with the abuse of alcohol. Whilst in  custody  issues  around  conflict
    were discussed, the judge found that the comments made demonstrated  an
    inability to control his temper and gave examples at [28].

23. In making an assessment of risk, the judge gave significant  weight  to
    the assessment made  by  the  probation  officers  which  was  that  he
    presented a medium risk of serious harm to public. However,  the  judge
    recorded that his behaviour had notably improved in the last two months
    of custody; he was recorded as spending his time productively  and  not
    demonstrating a negative attitude towards staff and  having  no  issues
    with other prisoners.

24. At [31] the FtTJ  considered  whether  intervention  could  assist  the
    appellant made reference to  a  12-month  supervision  order  that  was
    imposed which led to a significant period of seven years  when  he  did
    not offend. Judge also considered that during that period  he  grew  up
    given that the time of the offence he was 17 years of  age.  The  judge
    also considered as assessment about  the  absence  of  real  change  in
    attitude and that it needed to be considered in the context of the fact
    that he had not had any substantial therapeutic intervention whilst  in
    prison or on licence. This was based on the evidence from the probation
    service and stated that he had not completed any  programs  because  of
    funding shortages and that he remained on a waiting list.

25. The FtTJ then consider the issue of  proportionality  of  the  decision
    balancing the public and policy and public security  requirements  with
    the factors relevant to his private life, family live in those  matters
    set out in Regulation 27 and Schedule 1 to the Regulations.

26. Dealing with family life, the FtTJ set out his assessment of this issue
    at paragraphs [38]-[47]. He found that the appellant's  ties  with  his
    family in the UK were "very  strong"  and  that  there  was  a  "mutual
    dependency between family members that would not ordinarily be expected
    in a family where the children are adults". The judge found as ties  of
    dependency to be as a result of the extremely  difficult  circumstances
    experienced by appellant and his family  throughout  their  lives.  The
    judge made reference to the circumstances in which the  family  had  to
    flee Afghanistan and that they suffered brutality at the hands  of  the
    pen's father which led to the  appellant  assuming  a  protective  role
    towards mother and siblings putting their needs above his own.

27. The judge recorded that he found the evidence given  by  the  appellant
    and his family members concerning this background to be both  "credible
    and reliable" being supported by documentary evidence,  not  undermined
    by any consistency lack of detail inherent plausibility  and  that  the
    witnesses and evidence given support was  done  honestly  and  "without
    exaggeration".

28. At [40] the judge found that the appellant and his  family  had  always
    lived as a family unit and that their flight from  Afghanistan  to  the
    Netherlands in 1996 to avoid persecution. As a result of  the  domestic
    circumstances which were "extremely difficult"  led  to  the  appellant
    taking a caring role in relation to his mother and siblings, far beyond
    that which should be expected of a child. The nature of  the  abuse  is
    set out at paragraphs [41]-[42].

29. At  [43  -  44]  the  FtTJ  concluded  that  the  evidence  before  him
    demonstrated that the  emotional  consequences  of  the  unsettled  and
    violent family life was severe for all  family  members  and  that  the
    appellant  had  reported  trauma  prior  to  the  custodial   sentence.
    Reference was made to the appellant's mental health and the effect upon
    family members. When the  family  were  abandoned  by  the  appellant's
    father, it led to the appellant taking on a caring role which had  been
    of particular importance to the family as a result of  the  appellant's
    mother's disabilities. References also mater her serious ill-health  at
    [44]. References further made to the role undertaken by  the  appellant
    within the family home and how that affected  and  assisted  the  other
    family members involved.

30. The FtTJ  at  [46]  considered  the  appellant's  position  within  the
    household and from the conclusion that this was  as  a  result  of  him
    having chosen to take on the responsibility and to  accept  the  "self-
    sacrifice" that it had entailed. He  also  concluded  that  the  school
    records demonstrated  that  the  appellant  had  exhibited  a  positive
    attitude and was clever;  he  had  studied  between  2007  -  2011  and
    evidence demonstrated that he had provided a high level of  commitment,
    was respectful and was positive to both teachers and other students.

31. At [47] the judge concluded that the evidence demonstrated  the  family
    members enjoyed an unusually strong emotional and  practical  ties  and
    that the deportation of the appellant would have a "significant adverse
    effect on him and his family."

32. The FtTJ addressed the issues of the appellant's private life at [48] -
    [57]. The judge reached the conclusion that the appellant was  socially
    and  culturally  integrated  into  the  UK  and  that  there  would  be
    impediments to his integration into the Netherlands.

33. He set out his reasoning within those paragraphs  taking  into  account
    his history and having arrived as a family in  2006  and  that  he  had
    remained in the UK ever since. The judge took into account  his  length
    of residence of 13 years and gave significant weight to that factor not
    only on account of the length of time but because of his  age  and  his
    previous history. The judge found that this was the longest  period  of
    time that he had spent in any country. Taking into account his age when
    he arrived in the Netherlands, he concluded that "the  focal  point  of
    his life with his family, not the wider community".

34. The judge also considered  that  the  extent  of  his  integration  was
    demonstrated by the fact that despite not coming to the UK until 15  he
    was perfectly fluent in English. The appellant had studied  in  the  UK
    until 2011 when he assumed the role of carer for his mother. The  judge
    considered the evidence, including the documentary  evidence  which  he
    found demonstrated that the appellant was fully integrated into college
    life, for a good relationships with teachers  and  other  students.  He
    obtained qualifications and the judge gave "significant weight" to  his
    participation, his studies and positive attitude to other students  and
    staff and found that his "life experience to date  must  have  required
    showed great fortitude to engage so positively."

35. Against those positive factors, the judge took into account the absence
    of wider integration from 2011 observing that it was  partly  explained
    by his role within the family as a carer. However, the judge took  into
    account the commission of his criminal offending at  the  end  of  that
    period and also the index offence which had led to the proceedings  for
    deportation (at [51]).

36. Having balanced the relevant factors, judge concluded that he gave "far
    greater weight to the positive indications and the negative  ones"  and
    concluded overall that "he was socially and  culturally  integrated  in
    the UK".

37. At paragraphs [53 - 57] the FtTJ set out his reasoning  in  support  of
    his conclusion the personal circumstances of the  appellant  were  such
    that  there  would  be  impediments  to  his   integration   into   the
    Netherlands.

38.  He  identified  a  number  of  factors;  that  the  appellant   social
    integration into the Netherlands was limited and he had  not  preserved
    any ties to that country. His time  there  was  during  a  period  when
    because of his age, his family rather than  the  community  would  have
    been the focal point of his life and that the separation for the  wider
    community was intensified by the fact  that  both  he  and  his  family
    members entered as foreigners thus they would not  have  been  able  to
    assist him to adapt. Reference was also made  to  the  conduct  of  the
    appellant's father (at [54]). The judge took into account his education
    but that it was limited by events that occurred whilst  at  school  and
    set out at [55].

39. The judge considered the evidence that  pointed  the  other  way  which
    included his  ability  to  communicate  would  only  be  slightly  read
    restricted and that he would be able  to  pick  up  the  language  once
    again. He made reference to  the  educational  qualifications  and  his
    perfect English and taking into account his mental health difficulties,
    he did not find that would prevent him from forming friendships.

40. However, the judge concluded that having weighed up those positive  and
    negative factors reach the conclusion that there would  be  impediments
    to his integration into the Netherlands.

41. At paragraphs [58]-[64] the FtTJ addressed the issue of rehabilitation.
    His  conclusion  on  the  issue  was  that  there  was  a  prospect  of
    rehabilitation and  such  a  prospect  would  be  strengthened  by  the
    appellant remaining in the UK  with  his  family.  At  [60]  the  judge
    summarised again the factual findings that he had made in  the  earlier
    part of his decision. He then went on to identify a number  of  factors
    which  led  him  to  conclude   that   there   was   a   "prospect   of
    rehabilitation". At [61] the judge took what he described as a  "common
    sense view" about the consequences of the conduct of  his  father  upon
    the appellant and the family members. At [62] the judge returned to the
    appellant's engagement with medical professionals which the judge found
    that led to a "degree of acknowledgement by the  appellant  that  there
    are other ways of coping with conflict other than the one  that  he  is
    thus far chosen and that there are the people who can help and change."
    Whilst the judge had earlier indicated that the issue of alcohol  abuse
    was something that he could not admit the judge took into account  that
    that had in fact been acknowledged to the professionals  in  prison  as
    being a relevant factor.

42. At [63] the judge considered further the  prospects  of  rehabilitation
    taking into account the nature of the offences and  that  the  majority
    bar one was committed whilst he was a juvenile.  The  judge  identified
    two factors which  when  combined  led  him  to  conclude  overall  the
    prospects of rehabilitation would be "greater in the  UK  than  in  the
    Netherlands". The two factors  began  by  an  assessment  of  his  age,
    reference being made also to his residence in the UK is the  only  time
    that he had experienced ability. He had had a  positive  experience  of
    school which had not had in the Netherlands, he had assumed the role of
    carer which the judge considered  reflected  positive  aspects  of  his
    personality and character. The judge also identified that the appellant
    was about to commence as part  of  his  licence  conditions  a  program
    designed to address is offending behaviour. The judge  found  that  the
    relationship with the doctors in prison showed  that  he  was  able  to
    engage proactively which had provided a benefit to  him.  Reference  is
    further made to the last  period  of  supervision  with  the  probation
    service which is followed by a period of seven years without committing
    an offence.

43. At [64] the  judge  took  into  account  as  a  supporting  factor  the
    appellant sense of responsibility towards his family and their  support
    for him described  as  "unwavering"  which  he  identified  as  a  very
    important factor  in  finding  ways  to  address  the  root  causes  of
    offending. The judge found that that, combined with the  help  that  he
    would receive from probation  service  would  not  be  present  in  the
    Netherlands.

44. In respect of the issue of rehabilitation, the judge made it plain that
    that was a factor which he gave "only limited weight" (at [59]).

45.  The  conclusion  reached  after  balancing  the  relevant  factors  of
    proportionality against the earlier findings set out at paragraphs  [20
    - 36], was that the appellant's deportation would  be  disproportionate
    and thus the decision to deport was not  justified  on  the  particular
    factual circumstances of this appellant's case.

46. The respondent sought permission to appeal, and permission was  granted
    by Judge Buchanan on 20 May 2020.

The applicable legal framework:

47. The appellant is  an  EU  citizen.  Under  Article  20  of  the  Brexit
    Withdrawal Agreement the conduct of EU Citizens, their family  members,
    and other persons, who exercise Citizens' rights under  the  Withdrawal
    Agreement, where that conduct occurred before the end of the transition
    period, 31 December 2020, shall be considered under the  provisions  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC  which  gives  effect  to  the  free  movement  of
    persons. This means that in this appeal it is the EU standards and  not
    the UK standard that applies to any decision to deport, which are  more
    favourable to the appellant than those applying under UK law.

48. The deportation of EEA nationals  (in  the  circumstances  as  set  out
    above) is subject to the regime set out in  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('The EEA Regulations') which were made
    under section 2  of  the  European  Communities  Act  1972  by  way  of
    implementation of Directive 2004/38 on the right  of  citizens  of  the
    Union and their family members to move and  reside  freely  within  the
    territory of Member States. The Directive sets conditions that must  be
    satisfied before a  Member  State  can  restrict  the  rights  of  free
    movement and residence provided for by EU law.

49. Reg.23(6)(b) permits the removal of an EEA national if the Secretary of
    State decides that that person's removal is  justified  on  grounds  of
    public policy:

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         23.- ...

             (6)  ... an EEA national who has entered the United Kingdom or
         the family member of such a national who has entered the United
         Kingdom may be removed if-"

                  (a)  ...

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
                      removal is justified on grounds of public policy,
                      public security, or public health in accordance with
                      regulation 27; or

                  (c)  ..."

50. When the Secretary of State considers if removal is justified on public
    policy grounds the decision must be taken in accordance with reg.27 and
    in particular the six principles set out at reg.27(5):

         "Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security and
         public health

         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security, or
         public health.

             ...

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-"

                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
                      proportionality.

                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned.

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                      genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat
                      affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                      society, taking into account past conduct of the
                      person and that the threat does not need to be
                      imminent.

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                      which relate to considerations of general prevention
                      do not justify the decision.

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                      themselves justify the decision.

                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                      even in the absence of a previous criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of
         public policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who
         is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7)  ...

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements
         of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of public
         policy, public security, and the fundamental interests of society
         etc.)."

51. Schedule 1 provides as follows:

         CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY AND THE
         FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

         Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or public security values: member States enjoy considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by the EU Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own
         standards of public policy and public security, for purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
         nationality or language does not amount to integration in the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a person may be regarded as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present, and sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or around
         the same time as-"

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence.

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of
             society.

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was
             in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of not demonstrating a threat (for example, through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.

         6.   It is consistent with public policy and public security
         requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions may be taken
         in order to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right otherwise
         conferred by these Regulations in the case of abuse of rights or
         fraud, including-"

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter, or assisting another
             person to enter or to attempt to enter, a marriage, civil
             partnership, or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)  fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain or
             assisting another to obtain or to attempt to obtain, a right
             to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.   For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-"

             (a)  preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the
                  immigration laws and maintaining the integrity and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area.

             (b)  maintaining public order.

             (c)  preventing social harm.

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties.

             (e)  protecting public services.

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a conviction (including where the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities to take such
                  action.

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such as offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).

             (h)  combating the effects of persistent offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if taken in
                  isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the
                  requirements of regulation 27).

             (i)  protecting the rights and freedoms of others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking.

             (j)  protecting the public.

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an EEA decision against a
                  child).

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
                  values.

52. Reg.27(5)(c) requires the personal conduct  of  the  person  threatened
    with removal to represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat" affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.  Those
    interests are listed (the list in each case is non-exclusive) at  reg.7
    and para.7 of schedule 1 to the Regulation.

53.  Reg.27(6)  requires  the  Secretary  of  State  to  take  account   of
    considerations such as  the  individual's  family  situation,  age  and
    length  of  residence  and  integration   into   the   United   Kingdom
    (reg.27(6)).

54. Reg.27(8) requires a court or tribunal considering if the  requirements
    of the Regulation are met to "have regard to" schedule 1. The  schedule
    broadly provides guidance on  how  the  Tribunal  should  approach  the
    question of whether the Secretary of State's decision has been made  in
    accordance with reg.27. For example, paras.2 and 4 provide guidance  on
    the subject of integration (see reg.27(6)), para.3 provides guidance on
    the question of whether the relevant person poses a  "genuine,  present
    and  persistent  threat"  (see  reg.27(5)(c))  and  para.5  deals  with
    proportionality (reg.27(5)(a)).

55. The principles set out at reg.27(5) represent mandatory guidance.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

56. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-to-
    face hearing and that this could take place  via  Skype.  Both  parties
    have indicated that they were content for the  hearing  to  proceed  by
    this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral
    submissions to be given by each of the parties.

57. Before the Upper Tribunal, the Secretary of State was represented by Mr
    Diwnycz and the appellant represented by Mr Georget of Counsel who  had
    represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

58. Mr Diwnycz, on behalf of the respondent indicated to the tribunal  that
    he did not seek to make  any  oral  submissions  but  relied  upon  the
    grounds as drafted and the two sets of written submissions dated 1 July
    2020 and 6 November 2020.

59. Mr Georget had also provided a Rule 24 response dated 13 November  2020
    and made oral submissions to the tribunal.

60. It is not necessary to set out the submissions of each of  the  parties
    as I will set out  the  relevant  aspects  of  those  submissions  when
    dealing with the grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
    and my consideration of those issues.

61. I am grateful for the submissions made by  each  of  the  advocates.  I
    confirm that I have taken them into account and have  done  so  in  the
    light of the decision of the FtTJ and the material that was before him.

Discussion:

62. The grounds seek to challenge the FtTJ's assessment  of  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

63. The first ground advanced on behalf of the respondent submits that  the
    FtTJ failed to provide adequate reasoning for the overall findings that
    it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the   appellant   to   the
    Netherlands.

64. Regulation 27 prevents the removal of an EEA national present in the UK
    except on grounds of public policy and public security. If that test is
    not met, then the person may not be removed. There is, at  that  stage,
    no proportionality assessment. It is only if there are serious  grounds
    of public policy and public security  that  it  is  then  necessary  to
    address the additional requirements imposed by  regulation  27(5):  "it
    must also be taken in accordance with the  following  principles",  and
    see MC (Essa) principles recast) Portugal  [2015]  UKUT  520  (IAC)  at
    [29b]. The first of those additional requirements is that the  decision
    must comply with the "principle of proportionality"  -  see  regulation
    27(5)(a).

65. The "principle of  proportionality"  to  which  reference  is  made  in
    regulation 27(5)(a) is taken from  Article  27(2)  of  the  Freedom  of
    Movement Directive. It derives from a general principle of EU law  that
    "the content and  form  of  Union  action  shall  not  exceed  what  is
    necessary to achieve the objectives of the Treaties" - see article 5(4)
    of the Treaty on European Union. That principle is  separate  from  the
    test of proportionality under the European Convention on Human  Rights,
    as distilled in Bank Mellat v Her Majesty's Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC
    39; [2014] AC  700  per  Lord  Reed  JSC  at  [74].  The  principle  of
    proportionality under EU law requires consideration of two questions  -
    see R v Lumsdon v Legal Services Board [2015] UKSC 41;  [2016]  AC  697
    per Lord Reed and Lord Toulson JJSC at [33]:

         "...  first,  whether  the  measure  in  question  is  suitable  or
         appropriate to achieve the objective pursued; and secondly, whether
         the measure is necessary to achieve that objective, or  whether  it
         could be attained by a less onerous method."

66. The approach to be taken in assessing whether  removing  a  fundamental
    freedom  under   the   Treaties   accords   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality was explained thus by Lord Toulson at [55]-[56]:

         "55. ...the court must determine whether the measure is suitable to
         achieve the legitimate aim in  question  and  must  then  determine
         whether it is no more onerous than is required to achieve that  aim
         if there is a choice of equally effective  measures.  The  position
         was summarised by Advocate-General Sharpston  at  para  89  of  her
         opinion in Commission of the  European  Communities  v  Kingdom  of
         Spain (Case C-400/08) [2011] ECR I-1915, a case concerned with  the
         right of establishment:

             'Whilst it is true that a member state seeking  to  justify  a
             restriction on a fundamental  Treaty  freedom  must  establish
             both its appropriateness and its proportionality, that  cannot
             mean, as regards appropriateness, that the member  state  must
             establish that the restriction is the most appropriate of  all
             possible measures to ensure achievement of  the  aim  pursued,
             but simply that it is not inappropriate for that  purpose.  As
             regards proportionality, however, it is necessary to establish
             that no other measures could have been equally  effective  but
             less restrictive of the freedom in question.'

         56.  The justification for the restriction tends to be examined  in
         detail,  although  much  may  depend  upon  the   nature   of   the
         justification, and the extent to  which  it  requires  evidence  to
         support it. For example, justifications based on moral or political
         considerations may not be capable of being established by evidence.
         The same may be true of justifications based  on  intuitive  common
         sense..."

70.  Thus, the principle of proportionality under the Treaties does  not  in
    all circumstances incorporate the proportionality balance that  is  the
    fourth of the Bank Mellat criteria  -  namely  whether  "balancing  the
    severity of the measure's effects on the rights of the persons to  whom
    it applies against the importance of the objective, to the extent  that
    the measure will contribute to its achievement,  the  former  outweighs
    the latter.

71.  However, in this  particular  context  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union has treated the principle of  proportionality  under  EU
    law in a similar way as the test for proportionality under Article 8 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights - see Orfanopoulos and others v
    Land Baden-Würtenberg C482/01 [2005] 1 CMLR 18 at [95]-[99]:

         "95. ... the examination on a case-by-case basis  by  the  national
         authorities of whether there is  personal  conduct  constituting  a
         present threat  to  the  requirements  of  public  policy  and,  if
         necessary, of where lies the fair balance  between  the  legitimate
         interests in issue must be made  in  compliance  with  the  general
         principles of Community law.

         96.  It is for  the  competent  national  authority  to  take  into
         account, in its assessment of where lies the fair  balance  between
         the legitimate interests in issue, the particular legal position of
         persons subject to Community law and of the fundamental  nature  of
         the principle of the free movement of persons...

         97.  Moreover, it is necessary to take into account the fundamental
         rights whose  observance  the  Court  ensures.  Reasons  of  public
         interest may be invoked to justify  a  national  measure  which  is
         likely to obstruct the exercise of  the  freedom  of  movement  for
         workers only if the measure  in  question  takes  account  of  such
         rights...

         98.  It must be noted, in that  context,  that  the  importance  of
         ensuring the protection of the family life of  Community  nationals
         in order to eliminate obstacles to the exercise of the  fundamental
         freedoms  guaranteed  by  the  Treaty  has  been  recognised  under
         Community law. It is clear that the removal of a  person  from  the
         country where close members of his family are living may amount  to
         an infringement  of  the  right  to  respect  for  family  life  as
         guaranteed by Article 8 of the ECHR, which is among the fundamental
         rights, which, according  to  the  Court's  settled  case-law,  are
         protected in Community law...

         99.   Finally,  the  necessity  of  observing  the   principle   of
         proportionality  must  be  emphasised.  To   assess   whether   the
         interference envisaged  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
         pursued, in this instance the protection of public policy,  account
         must be taken, particularly, of the nature and seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the  person  concerned,  the  length  of  his
         residence in the host Member State, the period  which  has  elapsed
         since the commission of the offence, the  family  circumstances  of
         the person concerned and the seriousness of the difficulties  which
         the spouse and any of their children risk facing in the country  of
         origin of the person concerned (see, as regards Article  8  of  the
         ECHR, Boultif v Switzerland (54273/00) [2001] ECHR  493,  paragraph
         48)."

72.      Aside from complying  with  the  principle  of  proportionality,  a
    Regulation 27 decision may only be made  after  having  regard  to  the
    other factors set out in Regulation 27(5) and (6).  These  include,  on
    the one hand, the question of whether the person represents a  genuine,
    present,  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
    fundamental  interests  of   society,   and,   on   the   other   hand,
    considerations such as the family of the person. Although expressed  in
    the Regulation as separate requirements, the Upper  Tribunal  has  held
    that  they  fall  for  assessment  when  addressing  the  principle  of
    proportionality - MC at [29b] and [29f]. What is required,  both  under
    the Directive and the 2016  Regulations  is  a  "wide-ranging  holistic
    assessment" - see MC at [29j].

73.  The respondent's submissions are based on the premise that as the  FtTJ
    assessed the appellant's conduct to remain  a  threat  to  society  the
    remaining issues identified by the FtTJ had been inadequately reasoned.

74.  Within that general  submission,  the  grounds  challenge  the  factors
    identified by the FtTJ as relevant to the  proportionality  assessment.
    In particular, the reasoning underpinning the assessment of his  social
    and  cultural  integration  in  the  UK  and  secondly,  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation.

75.  The advocates before the  tribunal  have  addressed  those  two  issues
    separately. I therefore address the submissions relevant to  the  issue
    of social and cultural integration.

76.  In this context the respondent  advances  three  points.  Firstly,  the
    judge found the appellant have been integrated in  the  UK  by  forming
    relationships with peers and teachers while studying  from  arrival  in
    2007 until he took over as a carer in 2011. However, it  is  said  that
    this period of time spent looking after his siblings  and  mother  does
    not and should not be characterised as "integration". The second  point
    made in the grounds is that the appellants integration was tarnished by
    as offending and his relationship with friends being "those  with  whom
    he used to drink alcohol" and this was not  factored  into  the  FtTJ's
    assessment. Thirdly, it is submitted that the period since 2011  covers
    a greater period than that where integration  was  considered  to  have
    occurred and therefore was capable of weakening integration as was  the
    time spent in custody.

77.  In his written rule 24  response  Mr  Georget  submitted  that  it  was
    difficult to see the relevance of  those  submissions  to  the  overall
    assessment of proportionality and that even if made out, they were  not
    findings directly material to the outcome. Firstly,  because  this  was
    not an article 8 appeal and the Part 5A section 117C (4) considerations
    did not apply and secondly, because there was no  point  raised  as  to
    whether the apparent integration had been broken  by  his  imprisonment
    (see paragraph 10 of the written submissions).

78.  In his oral submissions, he sought to  clarify  that  approach  on  the
    basis that the respondent sought to consider individual elements rather
    than considering the overall balance of factors  which  the  judge  had
    taken into account in the assessment of proportionality.

79.  In my judgement the respondent is correct to state that  the  issue  of
    social and  cultural  integration  was  a  material  consideration  and
    relevant to the proportionality balance  as  recognised  by  Regulation
    27(5) (a) in conjunction with regulation 27(6) which refers to  factors
    such as age, state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
    life in the UK, P's and cultural integration into the UK and the extent
    of links in P's country of origin. Furthermore Schedule 1 of  the  2016
    Regulations also make  a  reference  to  integration  and  that  having
    "extensive  familial  or  societal  links  of  persons  of   the   same
    nationality and language does not amount to integration."

80.   I consider the point made on behalf of the appellant  is  that  whilst
    social and cultural integration is cited as a relevant factor, and this
    is plain from the Regulations, it is not  the  only  factor  which  the
    judge  took  into  account   in   his   overall   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the decision to deport.

81.  When  addressing  the  grounds  of  challenge,  having  considered  the
    substance of them and how they are framed, I agree with Mr Georget  who
    characterised the challenges advanced as being a  "reasons  challenge".
    This is  supported  by  reference  in  the  grounds  to  inadequacy  of
    reasoning in support of  the  proportionality  assessment  set  out  at
    paragraphs 4, 8 and 12 of the grounds.

82.   In  this  context  I  remind  myself  of  the  following  well   known
    jurisprudence which is also set out in the written submissions.

83.  Citing Floyd LJ in UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at  [19],
    a passage recently approved by Popplewell LJ in  KB  (Jamaica)  v  SSHD
    [2020] EWCA Civ 1385 at [16]:

         "...

             "19. I start  with  two  preliminary  observations  about  the
             nature of, and approach to, an appeal to the  UT.  First,  the
             right of appeal to the UT is "on any point of law arising from
             a decision made by the [FTT] other than an excluded decision":
             Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ("the  2007  Act"),
             section 11(1) and (2). If the UT finds an error of law, the UT
             may set aside the decision of the FTT and remake the decision:
             section 12(1) and (2) of the 2007 Act. If there is no error of
             law in the FTT's decision, the decision will stand.  Secondly,
             although "error of law" is widely defined, it is not the  case
             that the UT is entitled to remake  the  decision  of  the  FTT
             simply because it does not agree with it, or because it thinks
             it can produce a better  one.  Thus,  the  reasons  given  for
             considering there  to  be  an  error  of  law  really  matter.
             Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH (Sudan) v SSHD at [30]:
              "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirection's
             simply because they might have reached a different  conclusion
             on the facts or expressed themselves differently.""

84. In so far as the duty to give reasons is concerned, a judge need do  no
    more than "identify and record those matters which were critical to his
    decision" (English v Emery Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] 1 WLR 2409  per
    Lord Phillips MR, cited  with  approval  by  Brooke  LJ  in  R  (Iran).
    Another dictum cited by Brooke LJ - that of Griffiths LJ in Eagil Trust
    Co Ltd v Pigott-Brown [1985] 3 All ER 119 put it thus:

         "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient  detail  to
         show the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and the reasons
         that have led him to his decision. They need not  be  elaborate.  I
         cannot  stress  too  strongly  that  there  is  no  duty   on   [an
         adjudicator], in giving his reasons, to deal  with  every  argument
         presented by [an advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient
         if what he  says shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT],  the
         basis on which he has acted, and if it be  that  the  [adjudicator]
         has not dealt with some particular argument but it can be seen that
         there are  grounds on which he would have been entitled  to  reject
         it, [the IAT] should assume that he acted  on those grounds  unless
         the appellant can point to convincing reasons leading to a contrary
          conclusion."

85. When addressing the grounds concerning social and cultural  integration
    and in the light of the decision of the FtTJ, the  relevant  paragraphs
    are at [48]-[57]. Those paragraphs relate to the FtTJ's  assessment  of
    the appellant's private life and take into account not only  the  issue
    of social and cultural integration in the  UK,  but  the  other  issues
    identified in the Regulations that concern the links to the country  of
    nationality, or  as  the  judge  considered  them  whether  there  were
    impediments to integration to the  country  of  his  nationality.  That
    assessment also considered the appellant's length of residence  in  the
    host state and his age at arrival.

86. Those findings can be summarised as  follows.  The  FtTJ  accepted  the
    evidence of all the witnesses concerning the appellant's history  which
    was supported by the documentary evidence placed before the  FtT.  This
    demonstrated that the family came to  the  UK  in  2006  and  that  the
    appellant had been resident in the host state since that date and  thus
    is length of residence  was  13  years.  The  judge  gave  "significant
    weight" to the length of residence, not only on the basis of the length
    of time but because of his age and  his  previous  history.  The  judge
    found the length of residence to be the longest period of time spent in
    any one country and contrasted is length of residence in Afghanistan of
    only five years and having spent 10 years in the Netherlands.

87. As to the time spent in  the  Netherlands  and  the  relevance  to  his
    integrative links, the judge considered that the  focal  point  of  his
    life with his family and not the wider community. The judge  took  into
    account and placed weight on his language and that "the extent  of  his
    integration was demonstrated by the fact that  despite  not  coming  to
    this country until he was 15 years  old,  he  is  perfectly  fluent  in
    English" (at [50]).

88. The judge considered his educational history and that he studied the UK
    from his arrival in 2007 up until 2011 when  he  assumed  care  of  his
    mother. In this context, the judge considered the documentary  evidence
    which he found to demonstrate that he was "fully integrated in  college
    life, forming good relationships  with  teachers  and  other  students"
    (also at [50]). Reference was made  to  the  appellant  and  gain  some
    qualifications which the judge then set out. The judge also went on  to
    find "I give significant weight to his participation with  his  studies
    and his positive attitude to other students and staff  given  that  the
    appellant's life experiences to date must have  required  him  to  show
    great  fortitude  to  engage  so  positively."  The  reference  to  the
    appellants "life experiences" were directly referable to the assessment
    made of the conduct of the appellant's father to the appellant and  his
    family members including physical and verbal abuse  and  the  emotional
    consequences which are found to be "severe for all family members"  (at
    [41] - 44]).

89. When looking at those paragraphs, the FtTJ set out  particular  factual
    circumstances relevant to this appellant in reaching the  overall  view
    taken as to the extent of his social and cultural integration.

90. As can be seen from those paragraphs, they included matters relevant to
    the proportionality assessment including his age, length  of  residence
    in the host state. As identified by Mr Georget the appellant had  lived
    in the UK since the age of 15 for a period of 13 years  of  was  almost
    half of his life. The level of integration was  also  characterised  by
    specific features of his private life which the judge identified as his
    language, type of integration in the UK based on  the  length  of  time
    spent in any country and that at the time he spent in  the  country  of
    nationality was characterised as  integrative  links  with  his  family
    rather than the wider community. Mr Georget also points to the  factual
    circumstances which the judge accepted concerning the tragic nature  of
    the personal history and previous history circumstances in  Afghanistan
    of witnessing and fleeing war  and  also  when  in  the  state  of  his
    nationality being a victim of  abuse.  The  other  factors  taken  into
    account  relate  to  his  educational  links  and  success  in  college
    notwithstanding the difficult dramatic circumstances which are outlined
    in the judgement.

91. In my judgement, when those paragraphs are read together, it is not the
    case as the grounds submit that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons. The grounds at paragraph (7) do not provide any  basis  for  a
    challenge to the factual findings based on inadequacy of reasoning.  At
    best, paragraph 7 of the grounds provides  other  reasons  to  disagree
    with the judge's factual findings and assessment. For  example,  it  is
    stated that the judge found the appellant be integrated  by  virtue  of
    forming relationships with his peers and teachers from studying in 2007
    until he took over as carer in 2011 thereafter looked after his  mother
    and that this "did not  amount  integration".  Similarly,  the  written
    submissions at paragraph (4) (dated  1/7/20)  refer  to  the  appellant
    being unemployed and no evidence of social ties outside of the family.

92. In my view  none  of  those  submissions  identify  any  inadequacy  of
    reasoning in the FtTJ's assessment of the issue of social and  cultural
    integration in the  host  state.  They  make  reference  to  individual
    elements such as the time spent on education and the longer time  spent
    looking after his mother but failed to  take  into  account  the  other
    factors and reasoning underpinning the overall  assessment,  which  was
    specific to the appellant including his background, length of residence
    type of residence, language skills in the context of his arrival,  age,
    qualifications,  and  education.  In  my  view  there  is  no  lack  or
    deficiency of reasoning in that assessment.

93. Insofar as the grounds and the submissions of the respondent  challenge
    the assessment made by the judge at paragraphs 51 on the basis that the
    judge failed to say why the positive factors  outweighed  the  negative
    (paragraph 8 of the grounds) and that it was not clear how  the  weight
    was apportioned in terms of adequacy of reasoning (paragraph 4  of  the
    written submissions), neither of those submissions are made out.

94. At paragraph [51] the FtTJ set out the factors which militated  against
    his earlier  assessment  and  thus  identified  the  absence  of  wider
    integration after he left college in 2011, and the absence of  evidence
    of friends in the commission of crimes at the end of the period. Whilst
    those factors were identified, the judge also noted that  the  lack  of
    evidence of wider integration of  2011  was  partly  explained  by  the
    appellant assuming the care of his mother (although not  wholly).  That
    finding was supported by the earlier  factor  assessment  at  paragraph
    [43] and  the  description  of  the  emotional  consequences  from  the
    appellant's father's conduct, the abandonment of the  family  [44]  and
    the appellant taking on the caring role which had  been  of  particular
    importance to the family as a  result  of  his  mother's  physical  and
    psychiatric  disabilities  (at  [44]).  Importantly  at  [46)  a  judge
    considered the role of the appellant as carer and why  he  had  assumed
    that role and concluded from the evidence that it was not as  a  result
    of having the lack of drive, commitment, or abilities as  his  siblings
    but because he chose to take on the responsibility and accept the "self-
    sacrifice". His earlier positive academic record was put in the balance
    when reaching that finding.

95. Therefore, the earlier assessment  was  relevant  to  the  balance  and
    weight attached to the negative factors identified at [51].  The  judge
    did not fail to take into account the appellant's offending history and
    the weight attributable to that within the balancing  exercise.  In  my
    judgement, when the paragraph is read as a whole, the FtTJ carried  out
    a balancing exercise at [48] and [52], taking into account the positive
    features and the negative features indicative of  social  and  cultural
    integration before reaching his conclusion on that balance.  Therefore,
    the grounds of challenge in this respect are not made out.

96. The written grounds at paragraph 8 assert that the finding at  [53]  is
    inadequately reasoned and  also  contradictory.  It  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent that the judge did not make it clear why there
    were impediments to integration when the  impediments  identified  were
    minimal. This was a point  relied  upon  by  Mr  Diwnycz  in  his  oral
    submissions.

97. The written submissions at paragraph 5  also  submit  that  the  FtTJ's
    reasoning for impediments to his integration were predicated  upon  his
    age. The respondent observes under the immigration rules  there  is  an
    acceptance after seven years it is  likely  a  child  will  develop  an
    independent private life; and  10  years  a  child's  life  is  not  an
    inconsiderable period of time. Whether or not the appellant was bullied
    at school would not preclude him from having  formed  some  friendships
    over a decade. It is said  that  the  judge  simultaneously  found  his
    controlling father prevented him from phoning other children. The judge
    in any event found that the appellant would be able to communicate  and
    could form friendships whilst having  transferable  educational  skills
    (at paragraph 56 and 57).

98. At paragraph [53] - [57] the FtTJ  assessed  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances and considered whether  there  were  impediments  to  his
    integration to the receiving state. This is a factor identified in  the
    Regulations albeit on the basis of links to the  state  of  nationality
    (Regulation 27(6)).

99. Insofar as the grounds challenge paragraph [53] as  being  inadequately
    reasoned, such a challenge fails to take into account the reasoning for
    reaching  the  conclusion  expressed  at  [53]  although  set  out   at
    paragraphs [54 - 57]. When those  paragraphs  are  read  together,  the
    judge in my view gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  which  were
    evidence-based as to why he reached the overall view that the  personal
    circumstances of the appellant would constitute an  impediment  to  his
    integration to the receiving state or in other words the lack of links.

100. When read together the judge  identified  the  limited  nature  of  the
    social integrative links there (see paragraph [54] when read  alongside
    paragraph [49], he has  not  preserved  any  ties  to  the  country  of
    nationality, his resident in the host state that  during  a  period  of
    time when his focal point had  been  on  his  family  rather  than  the
    community, his  separation  (or  rather  link  of  integration  to  the
    Netherlands) was intensified by  the  fact  that  he  and  his  parents
    entered as foreign nationals and his parents  have  not  been  able  to
    assist him in his adaptation to life and also by  the  conduct  of  his
    father which was expressly addressed at [54] and when read in the light
    of the factual findings at [40]and [41].

101. At [55] a judge considered  the  educational  links  to  the  receiving
    state but found it was limited due to the appellant being  bullied  and
    set out the independent evidence of this in his decision. At paragraphs
    [56] and [57] the judge proceeded to identify  the  factors  militating
    against this taking into account his ability to communicate  that  that
    would only be "slightly restricted" by the language  barrier  and  that
    whilst he had been speaking English for 13 years, it  would  be  likely
    that he could pick up the language after time and at [57]  referred  to
    the relevance of his educational qualifications. In addition, the judge
    took into account his mental health found that that would  not  prevent
    him from forming friendships nor would having undertaken  the  care  of
    his mother thus the inference  from  his  findings  were  that  it  was
    something which could be replicated in the Netherlands.

102. When those paragraphs are read together in my view and contrary to  the
    grounds, there is no inadequacy of reasoning nor is there  any  failure
    to balance the relevant factors identified by the judge. Indeed, it  is
    plain that the language employed by the judge referring  to  "balancing
    all the  factors"  (at  [52])  and  that  he  identified  the  positive
    indicators set out at paragraph [53 - 55] and placing more weight  upon
    those  than  the  negative  factors   identified   at   [56].   Barring
    irrationality, the relevant weight attached  to  those  factors  was  a
    matter for the judge.

103. I see no contradiction in the findings as the grounds and  written  and
    oral submissions assert and, in my judgement, there is no merit in  the
    suggestion made the judge failed to resolve any  conflict  of  opinion,
    but in fact carried out a balance of the positive and negative  factors
    identified from the overall evidence.

104. The second area identified in the grounds advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent relates to the issue of rehabilitation.

105. The grounds at (9) and (10) set  out  the  challenge  to  the  decision
    where it is submitted that at paragraph [63] the reasons given  by  the
    judge in support of his finding that there were stronger  prospects  of
    rehabilitation in the UK than in  the  Netherlands  were  reasons  that
    predated the index offence and therefore had no bearing on the issue of
    current rehabilitation. The second point made in the  grounds  is  that
    within the judge's reasoning  there  was  a  conflict  of  findings  by
    referring to the prospects of  rehabilitation  being  reinforced  by  a
    period of non-offending when the judge had found his offending  was  an
    escalation (at paragraph [21]).

106. Paragraph 10 of the grounds challenge the findings  made  at  [64]  and
    that the judge failed to take into account the  decision  of  MC  (Essa
    principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC).

107. On behalf of the appellant Mr  Georget  submitted  that  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation was an issue  to  which  the  judge  only  gave  limited
    weight. He submitted that whilst it been argued that there was  a  lack
    of reasoning, the  decision  at  [61]  set  out  a  number  of  factors
    including  the  offence  considered  in  the  light  of  his  traumatic
    experiences, some element of learned  behaviour  and  more  importantly
    that he had engaged with  medical  professionals  and  the  degree  and
    acknowledgement of change.

108.  He  further  submitted  that  when  weighing  up  the   prospects   of
    rehabilitation in the UK at [63] the FtTJ reached the  conclusion  that
    there were greater prospects in the  UK  than  the  Netherlands  having
    identified he had the support of  his  family,  the  contact  with  the
    probation service and  by  the  negative  referenced  memories  of  the
    Netherlands and the limited experience  that  he  had  had  there.  The
    experiences that he did have the judge had found to  be  traumatic  (at
    [56]).

109. Mr Georget submitted that if it was being suggested that there  was  an
    absence  of  reasoning  as  to  why  the  appellant  could  not  access
    rehabilitation in the Netherlands, when considering the  issue  of  his
    licence, the judge took into account that the appellant  was  about  to
    commence a program that addressed his offending behaviour and therefore
    being supervised by the probation service in the UK was relevant to the
    prospects of rehabilitation.

110. Lastly, he submitted that the  judge  had  not  reached  an  irrational
    conclusion that in the UK that he would  have  family  support  whereas
    there would be none  in  the  Netherlands.  Given  his  very  difficult
    childhood and the circumstances in the Netherlands, the judge carefully
    considered the factual circumstances and the competing  factors.  Thus,
    he  submitted  even  if  not  every  judge  would  have  reached   that
    conclusion, it was one that was  open  to  the  judge  on  the  factual
    findings that he made and thus  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  his
    decision.

111. I have considered the submissions of the parties relevant to the  issue
    of rehabilitation.

112. It is important to note that the assessment made of this issue was  not
    one elevated to an issue that was accorded "significant weight" but one
    which the judge considered was  worthy  of  weight  but  only  "limited
    weight" (at [59] and [65]). I do not think that this is  recognised  in
    the submissions advanced on  behalf  of  the  respondent  who  seek  to
    characterise the judge's assessment as one which featured significantly
    in his decision. However, I accept that this was  a  factor  which  was
    material to the overall assessment proportionality and thus  I  address
    the criticisms made.

113.  In  relation  to  the  issue  of   rehabilitation,   in   Essa   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC) it was held that  for
    those who at the time of determination are or remain a  present  threat
    to public policy but where the factors relevant to integration  suggest
    that there are reasonable prospects of rehabilitation, those  prospects
    can be a substantial relevant factor in the proportionality balance  as
    to whether deportation is justified. If the claimant cannot  constitute
    a  present  threat  when  rehabilitated  and  is   well   advanced   in
    rehabilitation in a host state where there is a substantial  degree  of
    integration, it may well very well be disproportionate  to  proceed  to
    deportation. At the other end of the scale, if there are no  reasonable
    prospects of rehabilitation, the claimant is a present  threat  and  is
    likely to remain so for the indefinite future, it cannot  be  seen  how
    the prospects of rehabilitation could constitute a  significant  factor
    in the balance. Thus, recidivist  offenders,  career  criminals,  adult
    offenders  who  have  failed  to  engage  with  treatment   programmes,
    claimants with propensity to commit sexual or violent offences and  the
    like may well fall into this category.

114. In MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520  (IAC)  it  was
    held that:

         (i)  Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions taken
         on public policy, public security, and public health grounds  under
         regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

         (ii) It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned  is
         found to represent a genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).

         (iii)    There is no specific reference in the expulsion provisions
         of either Directive 2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).

         (iv) Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).

         (v)  Reference to prospects of rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
         prospects of a person ceasing  to  commit  crime  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [35]), not the mere possibility of rehabilitation. Mere  capability
         of rehabilitation is not to be equated with reasonable prospect  of
         rehabilitation.

         (vi) Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a factor  to
         be taken into account in the proportionality assessment required by
         regulation 21(5) and (6) ((Dumliauskas [41]).

         (vii)    Such prospects are to be taken into account  even  if  not
         raised by the offender (Dumliauskas [52])

         (viii)   Gauging such prospects  requires  assessing  the  relative
         prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State  as  compared
         with those in the Member State of origin, but, in  the  absence  of
         evidence, it is not to be assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in that other Member State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-  [53]
         and [59]).

         (ix) Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community  and  the  like  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [34]). However, lack of access to a Probation Officer or equivalent
         in  the  other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,  preclude
         deportation (Dumliauskas [55])

         (x)  In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
         residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a  weighty
         factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even when such  prospects  have
         significant weight,  they  are  not  a  trump  card,  as  what  the
         Directive and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is  a  wide-ranging
         holistic assessment. Both recognise that the more serious the  risk
         of reoffending, and the offences that  a  person  may  commit,  the
         greater  the  right  to  interfere  with  the  right  of  residence
         (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54]).

115. Whilst the grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  factor  into  the
    assessment his earlier findings of risk, at [60] the judge  set  out  a
    brief summary of the findings of risk which he had set  out  at  length
    earlier in the decision including the point raised by the respondent in
    the grounds that the appellant had not shown a  willingness  to  accept
    responsibility (at [60](3)). However, the FtTJ set out at [61]-[64] the
    reasoning which underpinned his conclusion that there was a prospect of
    rehabilitation in the UK that such a prospect would  be  likely  to  be
    strengthened by remaining in the UK with his family.

116. I see no legal error in the  approach  taken  by  the  judge  which  he
    described as a  "common  sense  view  about  the  consequences  of  him
    witnessing violence within the home" and  considering  the  appellant's
    previous background and in the light of the evidence and family members
    which the judge also recorded at [61]. The judge was entitled to  place
    some weight upon his engagement with the  medical  professionals  which
    had led to an acknowledgement by the appellant that  there  were  other
    ways of coping with conflict and that there were people who could  help
    him change. Whilst the  judge  had  earlier  identified  the  issue  of
    alcohol abuse in his findings and assessment of  risk,  the  judge  was
    entitled to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant  had  made  some
    acknowledgement to the medicals involved that this was a  factor  which
    triggered a loss of control even if he had not been able to acknowledge
    this to the judge.

117. The ground expressly challenges the FtTJ's reference at paragraph  [63]
    concerning the appellant's age. However, it has not been established at
    the judge was wrong to take account of the offending history  and  that
    all of his previous offences save for  one  had  been  committed  as  a
    minor/juvenile and this was linked to the question the judge  posed  at
    [63] as to whether any prospect of rehabilitation could be seen in  the
    light of the appellant getting older.

118. At [ 63] the judge identified the two relevant  factors  when  combined
    led him to conclude that the prospects of rehabilitation  were  greater
    in the UK than in the Netherlands. Under subsection (1) the FtTJ  again
    referred to his age being "not only the factor  in  play"  which  is  a
    reference to the earlier part of paragraph  [63]  but  contrasting  his
    time in the UK with that in the Netherlands as being the only time when
    he had "experienced stability". In the context of  his  education,  the
    judge  regarded  his  experience  in  the  UK  as  being  a   "positive
    experience" which contrasted to that in  the  Netherlands.  This  is  a
    reference to a finding at [55] and the problems that the appellant  had
    experienced in the Netherlands. Whilst the grounds appear to  challenge
    the reference made by the judge to his father being in the Netherlands,
    I do not consider that the judge was actively making a finding that the
    appellant would be at risk from his father but that the presence of his
    father outside of the home was a stabilising  factor.  The  judge  also
    considered that the appellant's assumption of the role of carer of  his
    mother  was  one  which  demanded  "a  great  deal  of   patience   and
    understanding".

119. In my view the second part of paragraph [63] has  more  relevance.  The
    judge identified that the appellant was about to commence, as  part  of
    his licence conditions a program designed  to  address  this  offending
    behaviour. On the evidence that the judge had assessed, he  found  that
    the appellant's relationship with the doctors  in  prison  demonstrated
    that others were able to engage in proactively and  when  they  did  so
    that there was a "tangible benefit" to the appellant. The judge set out
    "I am reinforcing this view  by  the  fact  that  his  last  period  of
    supervision with the probation service was  followed  by  a  period  of
    seven years without committing an offence." I do not read that sentence
    as in any way ignoring the offending history which the  judge  had  set
    out earlier in his decision at paragraph [31].

120.  At  [64]  the  FtTJ  took  into  account  the  appellant's  sense   of
    responsibility  towards  his  family  what  he   described   as   their
    "unwavering  support  of  him"  as  important  factors  to  assist  the
    appellant in finding ways to address the causes of his  offending.  The
    judge considered that this,  combined  with  the  assistance  from  the
    probation service that have been outlined in  the  preceding  paragraph
    would not be present in the  Netherlands.  He  finally  concluded  that
    "actual  evidence  of  rehabilitation  is  minimal,  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation are significantly stronger in  this  country  than  they
    would be in the Netherlands".

121. It is not the case as the respondent submits that the judge  overlooked
    or ignored the actual  evidence  of  rehabilitation.  He  did  not  and
    expressly stated that it was minimal  but  the  when  balanced  by  the
    identifiable factors, which included relative stability,  assuming  the
    role of carer of his mother which was a reflection of his  personality,
    his strong family life and his commencement of a program  part  of  his
    licence  conditions  which  was  a  specific  programme  to   addresses
    offending behaviour, and  that  there  was  reliable  evidence  of  the
    appellant being able  to  engage  proactively  which  was  a  "tangible
    benefit to him". This, the judge found,  was  reinforced  by  the  last
    period of supervision. I do not consider that  the  judge  ignored  his
    previous findings  concerning  risk  and  the  commission  of  offences
    following a last period of supervision but was seeking  to  demonstrate
    the prospects of success based on his history.

122. At [64] the judge identified two particular factors  missing  from  the
    Netherlands which included the importance of his family  combined  with
    the probation service in the United Kingdom. Mr  Diwnycz  in  his  oral
    submissions submitted that there was an absence of evidence as  to  the
    prospects of rehabilitation in the Netherlands and that in the light of
    the decision of Essa (as cited)  it  could  not  be  assumed  that  the
    prospects are materially different in the member state.

123. In my view this is a relevant point to make and as the decision  in  MC
    (Essa) states, the lack of a probation officer or its equivalent  in  a
    member state should not in general preclude deportation.  However,  the
    headnote at (ix) sets out matters which are relevant when examining the
    prospects   of   rehabilitation   which   include   family   ties   and
    responsibilities, accommodation, education, training,  employment,  and
    active membership of the community. As Mr  Georget  submitted  some  of
    those factors were identified by the judge as present on the  facts  of
    this case including the strong family ties the appellant had and as set
    out at [64] the "unwavering support" they could provide for  him  would
    be important for him to find ways  in  addressing  the  causes  of  his
    offending. Furthermore, his responsibilities towards his family and  in
    particular those  of  his  mother  were  also  identified  as  relevant
    factors.

124. While the absence of a probation officer and  lack  of  access  to  one
    does not necessarily preclude deportation, it does not  mean  that  the
    particular type of support offered by the probation service in  the  UK
    was an irrelevant factor. The judge expressly identified at  [63](2)  a
    particular program at the appellant was about to commence which  formed
    part of his licence  conditions  which  was  designed  to  address  his
    offending behaviour. As the FtTJ pointed out, the appellant had not had
    any proper therapeutic assistance previously due to  lack  of  funding.
    This issue was also considered in the light of the assessment  made  by
    the judge of his ability to proactively engage with  relevant  services
    based on the previous evidence following the supervision undertaken  by
    the probation service. I accept the submission made by Mr Georget  that
    the assessment made was  consistent  with  the  decision  of  Essa.  He
    further made the point that it had not been raised by the respondent at
    the FtT hearing that the licence conditions would in  fact  follow  the
    appellant to the Netherlands in the event of any deportation action.

125. Drawing those matters together, the FtTJ did not seek to  minimise  the
    earlier assessment concerning risk but did have regard to them  in  the
    assessment of the prospects of rehabilitation. As I have set out it  is
    important to note that the respondent's grounds do seek to elevate  the
    assessment as one to which the judge afforded significant weight in the
    overall proportionality  balance  and  in  my  judgement  that  is  not
    reflected in his decision given the express statement that he  made  at
    [59]  that  the  issue  merited  "limited  weight"  and  in  his  final
    conclusion in balancing exercise at [65] that this should only be given
    "some limited weight" in the overall balance.

126. The FtTJ's finding that the appellant's personal conduct represented  a
    genuine  present  in  sufficiently   serious   threat   affecting   the
    fundamental interests of society were not an end of  the  analysis  the
    FtTJ was required to carry out. It was necessary to undertake  a  wide-
    ranging holistic assessment of the factors identified in Regulation  27
    which involved the striking of the balance in seeking to protect public
    policy and having regard to the relevant factors. Whilst the respondent
    has sought to challenge two of those factors identifying the social and
    cultural integration and issue rehabilitation, there were other factors
    which the judge gave  significant  weight  which  included  the  strong
    family life of the appellant which he had established with  his  family
    members in the UK and in the light of and against the background of the
    traumatic and difficult circumstances that the judge had recorded  from
    the evidence set out in paragraphs [38 - 47]. The judge found that  the
    appellant's strong emotional and  practical  ties  were  also  relevant
    factors in the assessment of proportionality.

127. Mr Georget submitted that  the  grounds  as  drafted  were  a  "reasons
    "challenge. Where that is advanced there are two bases upon  which  the
    case can be made. Firstly, based on where the reasons are inadequate so
    that it is not possible to understand the judge's conclusion and do not
    show that he properly engaged with the relevant  issues  including  the
    evidence (see decision in Budhathoki (reasons for decision) [2014] UKUT
    00431. The Court of Appeal stated  in  English  v  Emery  Reimbold  and
    Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 605 at [16]:

         "justice will not be done if it is not apparent to the parties  why
         one has won and the other has lost."

    Secondly, the reasons given do not rationally support the conclusion or
    findings reached.

128. The  grounds  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  fall  into  the  first
    category, i.e., a "reasons  challenge".  However,  the  FtTJ  did  give
    adequate reasons as explained above and it cannot be said that  it  was
    unclear why the FtTJ found in his favour. Thus, as Mr Georget submitted
    it was a challenge to the rationality of the reasons give by the  FtTJ.
    The test of irrationality is a high one and an onerous one to meet.  It
    requires the tribunal to  be  satisfied  that  no  reasonable  tribunal
    properly directing itself could have reached the finding or  conclusion
    challenged. The  fact  that  a  tribunal  has  reached  what  might  be
    characterised as a generous view, for example in striking  the  balance
    between the public interest and individual circumstances  does  not  in
    itself necessarily establish an error of law.

129. At [65] the judge summarised  the  balancing  factors  in  his  overall
    decision and the relative  attribution  of  weight  to  the  particular
    factors identified giving very significant weight  to  the  appellant's
    strong family life, significant weight to his  private  life  and  some
    limited weight to the issue of rehabilitation  which  he  then  weighed
    against his earlier  assessment  of  risk  but  concluded  that  having
    weighed up those identifiable and relevant  factors,  the  decision  to
    deport was disproportionate and thus not justified on grounds of public
    policy. I agree with Mr Georget's characterisation that the decision is
    not one that is inadequately reasoned as  the  respondent  submits  but
    that it was clear from the decision as to why he reached the conclusion
    is that he did and that he did so in a coherent and balanced way.

130. As stated in  the  decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an
    evaluative exercise of this kind may admit of more than one answer.  If
    so, provided all the appropriate factors have been taken into  account,
    the decision cannot be impugned unless it is perverse or irrational, in
    a sense of falling outside the range of permissible decisions.

131. As Mr Georget submits it  has  not  been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the decision of the judge or  his  findings  of
    fact were either irrational or perverse and in light of the  foregoing,
    the judge properly considered the appropriate factors and made findings
    of fact based on the evidence before him. It may well be that this  was
    not the only outcome possible on the facts in  this  particular  appeal
    but the FtTJ directed himself correctly in law and that his conclusion,
    even if properly characterised as one that might be  thought  to  be  a
    generous one, does not disclose any legal error.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    allow the appeal stands.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated:   13 May 2021

