
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00342/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2013                             |On 27 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR JIMMY ROLAND DELGADO-VILLOTA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Furner, Legal representative of Birnberg Pierce
& Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of  a  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer and Ms V S
    Street JP, non-legal member) promulgated on 20 June 2013  following   a
    hearing at Taylor House on 11 June 2013.   For  ease  of  reference,  I
    shall refer to the Secretary of State, who was the original respondent,
    as "the Secretary of State" and to  Mr  Delgado-Villota,  who  was  the
    original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a  citizen of Colombia who was born on  13  June  1981.
    His immigration history was recorded in the determination of the  panel
    and can be summarised as follows.  He entered the UK on 4  October  199
    and claimed asylum, but that application was  refused  on  27  February
    2000 and an appeal was lodged. On 28  February  2001,  his  appeal  was
    dismissed and he was subsequently refused permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  He submitted a human rights claim on 9 May 2001.

 3. The following year, on 26 April  2002,  the  claimant  married  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in this  county  and  was  granted  a
    residence permit on 19 March 203 valid for  five  years.   Having  been
    granted permission to stay in the UK as the family  member  of  an  EEA
    national, he withdrew his human rights claim.

 4. The claimant applied for permanent residence  on  14  March  2008,  and
    although that application was refused by the Secretary  of  Srate,  his
    appeal against this refusal was allowed  on  25  February  2010,  under
    Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Although  the  claimant's  Spanish  wife  had
    returned to Spain  in  November  2008,  and  he  was  no  longer  in  a
    subsisting relationship with her, it would appear that by that time  he
    had acquired the right of permanent residence  under  the  Regulations.
    For this reason, permission was granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    and on 16 November 2010 the Upper Tribunal upheld the claimant's appeal
    under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  claimant  was  granted   permanent
    residency on 21 March 2011.

 5. On 29 May 2009 (before  his  right  to  permanent  residency  had  been
    established) the claimant was convicted of possessing a Class  A  drug,
    cocaine, with intent to supply and was  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'
    imprisonment.  He was also convicted of entering into an arrangement to
    facilitate acquisition, retention, use or control of criminal  property
    for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment  to  run
    concurrently with the other sentence of imprisonment imposed.  At  that
    time, the Secretary of State did not make a decision to deport him, but
    he was issued with a warning letter.

 6. After  the  claimant  had  been  granted  permanent  residence,  on  27
    September 2011, at the Inner London Crown Court, he was again convicted
    of possessing a Class A drug, cocaine, with intent to supply, and  also
    of possessing a Class B drug, amphetamine, with intent to  supply.   He
    was sentenced for these offences on 27  February  2012;  for  the  more
    serious offence of possessing the Class A drug with intent  to  supply,
    he was sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment and for the  other  offence
    he was sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment  concurrent  with  the
    sentence for the more serious offence.

 7. On 7 February 2013 the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order, and  it  was  the  claimant's  appeal  against  this
    decision which was allowed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel,  which
    decision is now being appealed by the Secretary of State.

 8. It is common ground that because this  claimant  now  has  a  permanent
    right of residence under paragraph 15 of  the  EEA  Regulations,  under
    Regulation 21(3) a decision to deport him cannot be  taken  "except  on
    serious grounds of public policy or public security".



The Panel's Decision

 9. As already noted  above,  the  panel  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal.
    Although the  panel  stated  that  "We  were  not  impressed  with  the
    appellant's manner  when  he  gave  evidence"  and  the  fact  that  he
    "appeared to be down-playing and distancing himself from the  offences"
    he had committed (at paragraph 27) and although in  that  paragraph  it
    considers  that  if  it  had  had  to  consider  Article  8   "in   the
    circumstances the principle of proportionality will be unlikely to have
    assisted the appellant", nonetheless, it considered (at  paragraph  28)
    "that since the decision primarily concerns Regulation 21 of  the  2006
    Regulations in accordance with  MG and VC  [2006]  UKAIT  0053,  it  is
    necessary in an EEA case to show a current propensity  to  reoffend  in
    order to make  out  any  kind  of  public  policy  or  public  security
    grounds".

10. Having considered that this was the test, (and that the burden was upon
    the Secretary of State to establish current propensity to  offend),  it
    considered itself "bound by the  more  recent  evidence  including  the
    Probation Service describing the appellant posing as  a  'low-risk'  of
    serious  harm  and/or  reconviction"  (at  paragraph  30).   The  panel
    acknowledged that there  was  "now  a  suggestion"  that  the  claimant
    realised "that he must rid himself of this cycle of offending" and that
    he had made efforts to do so whilst in prison, because  there  were  no
    discipline issues during this period.

11. On this basis, at paragraph 30 the panel considered that "we  find  the
    respondent has failed to establish to the relevant  standard  that  the
    appellant has a current propensity to reoffend".

12. For this reason, at paragraph 31, the panel concluded that "in all, the
    circumstances, we find the weight of evidence from  the  appellant  his
    witness and the probation  service  suggests  that  the  appellant  has
    changed in his view of this  serious  offending  and  that  he  is  now
    properly motivated to stay free from offending"  and  that  accordingly
    (at paragraph 32) it was unnecessary to consider Rule 21(5) of the 2006
    Regulations "taking into account Article 8 of the ECHR ... as  we  find
    that the respondent has failed to establish to  the  relevant  standard
    that there are serious grounds of public policy for the appellant to be
    deported, taking into  account  the  necessity  of  showing  a  current
    propensity to reoffend in accordance with the MG and VC decision."



Grounds of Appeal

13. The Secretary of State's grounds are contained in her  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It is submitted that the panel's  approach  when
    considering that it was unnecessary to consider paragraph 21(5) of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations  was  wrong,  first  because  it  failed  to  give
    consideration to what would amount to "serious grounds".  In particular
    (at paragraph 3 of the grounds) it is submitted that the panel had been
    wrong "not to give weight to the importance of preventing crime, public
    security,  immigration  control  etc.   that   fall   within   such   a
    consideration".

14. The crux of the Secretary of  State's  argument  contained  within  the
    grounds is contained at paragraph 7, as follows:

         "Inadequacy of reasoning

         7.   The panel consider that propensity  to  reoffend  is  a  major
             consideration in  their  reasoning  (see  paragraph  s.28-30).
             That matter is of relevance but only where Regulation 21(5) is
             considered. A low risk  of  reoffending  still  indicates  the
             risk, and it was incumbent upon the panel  to  assess  whether
             that low risk  still  meant  the  serious  grounds  of  public
             policy, together with the principles in Regulation 21(5)  were
             met."

15. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on 5 July 2013.



The Hearing

16. I  heard  arguments  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously. As my note of these submissions is contained in  the
    Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out below everything  which  was
    said to me during the course of the  hearing.   I  have,  however,  had
    regard to everything which was said before me, as well as  to  all  the
    documents contained within  the  file,  whether  or  not  the  same  is
    specifically referred to below.

17. The main argument made by Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Secretary of State
    was that even a low risk of reoffending needed to be considered.  Also,
    given that the claimant  had  served  two  terms  of  imprisonment  for
    serious offences, it was arguably perverse to say that  he  represented
    only a low risk of reoffending.

18. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Turner accepted, in answer to a  question
    from the Tribunal, that the panel did have to take into account even  a
    low risk of reoffending.   However,  the  panel  had  referred  to  the
    Tribunal case of MG and VC, in which at paragraph 12 the  Tribunal  had
    referred to the European case of Nazli and Others (External  relations)
    [2000] EUECJ C-340/97 as authority for the proposition that  a  current
    propensity to reoffend was required.  The panel made  findings  on  the
    basis of the probation  report,  taking  into  account  the  claimant's
    conduct in prison  and  after  release,  to  show  that  there  was  no
    propensity to reoffend.

19. When asked by the Tribunal where the panel had found that there was  no
    risk of reoffending, Mr Furner replied that the  panel  had  considered
    all the evidence and while it was correct that it had  found  that  the
    risk was stated to be low rather than nil,  nonetheless  it  considered
    that there was no propensity to reoffend and  that  was  a  sustainable
    finding.  Mr Furner then referred the Tribunal to  evidence  which  had
    been before the panel which indicated that the risk was  low  and  that
    the claimant was "very motivated" to address his offending.  The  panel
    had considered the evidence which was before it and had considered that
    the claimant had changed his views regarding offending. It was entitled
    to find there was no propensity to reoffend after the claimant had been
    assessed as the lowest risk.

20. Although Mr Furner accepted that the claimant's previous behaviour  had
    ruined his relationship, the evidence showed he  had  turned  his  life
    around and the assessment had to be concerned  with future risk.

21. In answer to an observation from the Tribunal that the  panel  did  not
    say that it had considered Rule 21(5) Mr Furner replied  that  although
    there may be serious grounds for deporting  a person under  Rule  21(3)
    it might nonetheless not be proportionate under Rule 21(5),  but  if  a
    judge had found that the Secretary of  State  did  not  get  past  Rule
    21(3), because of an absence of a risk of reoffending, it was  hard  to
    see what Rule 21(5) added.  If, as  Mr  Furner  submitted,  a  "current
    propensity to re-offend" is mandatory, it cannot be right that  because
    a judge has found that there is no current propensity to  reoffend,  he
    must nonetheless go on to  consider  Rule  21(5).   If  there  are   no
    serious grounds for deporting a person, then  the  decision  cannot  be
    saved by the proportionality principle.

22. In this particular case, the Secretary of State cannot show  that  this
    would have made any difference.   Also, at paragraphs 30  and  31,  the
    panel had regard to all the factors set out within Rule  21(5)  without
    saying that this is what it was doing.  What  Rule  21(5)  does  is  to
    impose a limitation on the Secretary of State's power  to  deport,  and
    when one looks at the matters which have to be considered  within  Rule
    21(5) the panel's decision was consistent with all of them.  The  panel
    did not rely on past convictions although it had regard to them.

23. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to  whether,  even  though
    the risk of reoffending might be low, it was nonetheless  a  real  one,
    and that the  offences  of  which  the  claimant  had  previously  been
    convicted did affect a  fundamental  interest  of  society,  Mr  Furner
    responded that that was not enough to save  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  There would still have to be a finding of  a  propensity  to
    reoffend.  In the case of MG and VC, the Tribunal had been dealing with
    an armed robber who had breached his  licence,  but  still  found  that
    because of the "low risk" of reoffending, his deportation simply  could
    not be justified.

24. In reply, Mr Tarlow submitted that a low risk was still a risk, and  in
    those circumstances it must have been  an  error  not  to  consider  in
    particular the provisions of Rule 21(5)(c), which is whether or not the
    "personal conduct of [the claimant] [represented]  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society". It would be wrong for this Tribunal to  conclude
    that the outcome of that  assessment  was  inevitable.  The  assessment
    needed to be made, and in failing to make that  assessment,  the  panel
    made a material error of law.  Its decision should  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

25. With regard to the findings of fact, there had been no  challenge  save
    that it was  perverse  to  find  that  the  claimant  did  not  have  a
    propensity to re-offend given the two serious  offences  which  he  had
    committed.  However,  it  was  acknowledged  that  this  had  not  been
    challenged in the grounds.

26. In answer to the observation of the Tribunal that  the  panel  had  not
    found that the claimant had a "current  propensity  to  re-offend",  Mr
    Tarlow submitted that the risk would need to be assessed  in  light  of
    that finding.  It was not  axiomatic  that  a  differently  constituted
    Tribunal would come to the same conclusions as this panel had come  to.
    The Tribunal could have come to a different conclusion on the  evidence
    before  it,  and  could  have  found  that  even  though  the  risk  of
    reoffending might be low, even a low risk was sufficient to engage Rule
    21(5)(c), which is to say that  the  claimant  represented  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

27. I allowed Mr Furner to make further submissions in  response  to  these
    submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, and he submitted  that
    the concept of "propensity to  re-offend"  did  not  carry  with  it  a
    concept of seriousness.  However, when the Tribunal referred Mr  Furner
    to paragraph 61 of the decision in Nazli, where the Tribunal  had  said
    that an EEA national who had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence
    could only be expelled  "if  that  measure  is  justified  because  his
    personal conduct indicates a specific risk of new and serious prejudice
    to the requirements of public policy" and that the court had not  there
    said this necessarily had to be more than a low risk, Mr Furner replied
    that that depended on an exercise of judgment, and that the panel   had
    exercised that judgment  in  paragraphs  30  and  31.   The  panel  had
    properly directed itself that it was for the Secretary of State to show
    that there was  a propensity to reoffend  and  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not led any evidence in this regard.

28. On consideration, it was accepted on behalf of  both  parties  that  if
    this Tribunal found that there was an  error  of  law  in  the  panel's
    determination such that the decision  would  have  to  be  remade,  the
    appropriate course in light of the Presidential Guidance which has been
    given would be for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for rehearing.  This was because of the degree of  fact  finding  which
    would be required, and also as Mr Furner pointed out, there would  need
    to be an Article 8 assessment, because although  the  panel  had  found
    that it would be very difficult  for  the  claimant  to  succeed  under
    Article 8, nonetheless this aspect of his case had  not  been  properly
    considered.

Bail

29. It is right that I record that subsequent  to  the  hearing,  following
    representations on behalf of the claimant by Mr Furner,  and  with  the
    agreement of the Secretary of State's case worker, Ms Andrea Collier, I
    varied the claimant's bail conditions, and allowed him  to  change  his
    address.



Discussion

30. The relevant parts of Regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations provide
    as follows:

         "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
    health ground



         21.  (1)      In these regulations a 'relevant decision' means  an
                  EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
                  security or public health.  ...

              (3)     A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a
                  person  with  a  permanent  right   of   residence   under
                  regulation 15 [which it is accepted that this claimant has
                  acquired by reason of being the family member  of  an  EEA
                  national  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the   requisite
                  period] except on serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
                  public security.  ...

              (5)     Where a relevant decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security it shall, in addition  to
                  complying  with   the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                  regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with  the  following
                  principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security in relation to a  person
                  who is resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker
                  must take account of  considerations  such  as  the  age,
                  state of health, family and  economic  situation  of  the
                  person, the person's length of residence  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, the person's  social  and  cultural  integration
                  into the United Kingdom and the extent  of  the  person's
                  links with his country of origin.  ..."


31. There is no reference in Regulation 21 to a need to establish  that  an
    applicant has a "propensity to offend".  What is  required  is  that  a
    decision can only be taken in respect of the person who has acquired  a
    permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 on "serious grounds of
    public policy or public security". When  considering  what  amounts  to
    such serious grounds, a decision to remove a person can only  be  taken
    if that person represents "a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".   It  is
    certainly arguable that even if this claimant  represents  only  a  low
    risk of committing further offences of dealing in Class A drugs  (which
    the courts have stated time and again affect the fundamental  interests
    of society) this in itself is  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society"
    as to justify the removal of this claimant as being on "serious grounds
    of public policy or public security".  It is this  argument  which  the
    Secretary of State says that the panel should have considered,  and  in
    respect of which it is said that the panel's failure to  consider  this
    was a material error of law.

32. In supporting the panel's view that in order to justify the deportation
    on "serious grounds" the Secretary of Srate needed  to  establish  that
    this claimant had a "propensity to offend", Mr Furner  relied  on  what
    the Tribunal had stated at  paragraph  12  of  MG  and  VC,  apparently
    relying on the European case of Nazli.  What was stated at paragraph 12
    of MG and VC was as follows:

         "12.   Subsequent  UK  cases  ...  have  held   that   particularly
             disgraceful criminal conduct may of itself meet  the  reaction
             of  deportation  of  an  EEA  national  without  reference  to
             propensity to reoffend but Nazli  ...  suggests  clearly  that
             those views were unsound as a matter of community law."

33. That is the only reference to the expression "propensity to offend"  in
    that judgment and in my view is not intended to mean anything more than
    that the Tribunal must  look  to  future  risk,  rather  than  to  past
    conduct.  This, after all, was what the court was saying  at  paragraph
    61 of Nazli, when it was held  that  a  state  had  to  show  that  the
    expulsion of such a person was "justified because his personal  conduct
    indicates  a  specific  risk  of  new  and  serious  prejudice  to  the
    requirements of public policy".

34. In other words, if one goes to what the Regulations actually  say,  the
    expression to which one must have regard is "risk" or "threat" that  is
    sufficiently serious as to justify a decision maker saying that removal
    is justified on "serious grounds" rather than "propensity  to  offend",
    which leaves open the question of how strong that propensity might  be.
    If the panel had found that this claimant did  not  pose  any  risk  of
    reoffending, or even only a nominal risk, its finding might  have  been
    sustainable (although on the facts of this case it may well  have  been
    perverse).  However, it found that he posed a low risk of  reoffending.
    In my judgment, that is still  a  risk  which  it  needed  to  consider
    properly, because the nature of the offending which might be  committed
    is such as to arguably affect  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.

35. Accordingly, I consider that the panel made a material error of law  in
    not considering first whether or not the Secretary of State's  decision
    could be justified on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security, and then whether, in any event,  such  a  decision  would  be
    proportionate, having  taken  into  account  the  factors  set  out  in
    Regulation 21(5) and (6).

36. Accordingly, the decision will have to be remade.

37. Having considered the representations made on behalf of  both  parties,
    and having had in mind also paragraph 7 of the Practice  Statements  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal, I consider that the appropriate procedure is  to  remit
    this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  considered  by  any
    panel, but not one including either  Judge  Metzer  or  Ms  Street.  My
    primary reason for so finding is that the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial finding which will be required in order for the decision to be
    re-made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective, it  is
    appropriate to remit this case back to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and direct that this appeal be remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal, sitting at Taylor House, for rehearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


