

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00665/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|13 November 2013                              |25 November 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                                Lord Matthews
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman

                                   Between

                                EDDIE KARWHOO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Kam Mak, Solicitor, MKM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a French national born on 20 March  1976  in  Liberia.
    On 15 January 2009 at Croydon Crown  Court  on  his  own  plea  he  was
    convicted of being knowingly concerned in the fraudulent evasion  of  a
    prohibition or restriction on the importation of a Class  A  controlled
    drug and was sentenced to a term of nine years' imprisonment.   He  had
    one previous conviction following his  arrest  on  29  March  2008  for
    driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol.  That resulted in  a  fine
    and a disqualification of 20 months.

2.   On 15 April 2009 he was served with a notice  of  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order and a  questionnaire  for  him  to  complete  and  to
    indicate why it would not be appropriate to make  such  an  order.   He
    responded by providing several reasons why he should not be deported to
    France.  These reasons were rejected by the Secretary of  State  and  a
    notice of deportation was served on 19 March 2013.  This  was  appealed
    by notice of appeal dated 28 March 2013, it  being  asserted  that  the
    decision to make the deportation order under  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and  to  remove  the  appellant  under  Regulation
    19(3)(b)  and  24(3)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 was not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  with  the
    Regulations.  It was also contended that his removal would be  unlawful
    under reference to Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

3.   For reasons which we shall explain shortly that appeal  was  successful
    but the Secretary of State has in turn appealed against that  decision.
    It will be convenient to maintain the designation of Mr Karwhoo as  the
    appellant and of the Secretary of State as the respondent.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the  deportation  of  the  appellant
    would be proportionate in terms of Regulation 21  but  disproportionate
    in terms of Article 8.

5.   The thrust of the  current  appeal  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to provide adequate reasons for the finding  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to deport the appellant due to his  family  life.   He
    had spent a considerable proportion of his residence in this country in
    prison and the family life he had with his  partner  and  children  had
    been extremely limited.  There were no reasons provided as to  why  the
    family could not relocate to  France  to  continue  their  family  life
    together,  which  they  stated  they   would   do.    There   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to their being able to do  so.   Even  if  his
    partner did not wish to relocate, contact could be  maintained.   There
    was no evidence that the appellant and his family were  dependent  upon
    each other and had been unable to cope without each other while he  was
    in prison or in separate countries.  He had been found to  represent  a
    genuine present and serious threat to one of the fundamental  interests
    of society and there were no adequate reasons as to  why  his  and  his
    children's  best  interests   outweighed   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The Tribunal found that the appellant was a  French  national  who  was
    born on 20 March 1976 in Liberia.  He spent at least 12 years prior  to
    his arrival in the United Kingdom living and working  in  France.   The
    appellant had given evidence about arriving in the  United  Kingdom  in
    2006 but he was not found credible in that regard.  He was  also  found
    to be unreliable in the light of his conviction  and  certain  lies  in
    interviews with the Probation Service.  It was found that  he  was  not
    exercising treaty rights at that stage and certain assertions  that  he
    was doing casual work were not supported by any evidence.  He  had  not
    paid any tax during the period.

7.   The Tribunal found, however,  that  his  partner  and  his  two  eldest
    children, aged 11, entered the  UK  in  the  summer  of  2007  and  had
    remained here since.  The partner gave evidence that she was exercising
    her treaty rights and she was believed in  that  regard,  her  evidence
    being supported by a number of documents.  A  child  was  born  to  the
    couple in the UK in 2008.  The judge found herself satisfied  that  the
    appellant and his partner had been living together  in  a  relationship
    akin to marriage and indeed that they had been married in  a  religious
    ceremony which had not been registered for  various  reasons.   It  was
    found that they were in a durable relationship and that as at the  date
    of the respondent's decision on 19 March 2013 both the partner and  the
    appellant had acquired rights of  permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, with the appellant acquiring such rights as a result of  being
    a family member of an EEA national and despite  the  fact  that  for  a
    period of his time in the UK he was a serving prisoner.

8.   In those circumstances, in  terms  of  Regulation  21(3)  of  the  2006
    Regulations the appellant could only be removed on serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security.   The  principles  which  had  to  be
    applied are set out in Regulations 21(5)(a) to (e) as follows:

        "(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with  the
             preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
             with the following principles -
             (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                 proportionality;
             (b)   the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)    the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                 represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                 threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                 society;
             (d)   matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;
             (e)   a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision."

9.   No issue has been taken with the findings we have narrated thus far.

10.  The judge went on to indicate that the appellant asserted that  he  had
    learned a serious lesson as a result of his decision to become involved
    in criminal activity and claimed that he was  not  a  career  criminal.
    Nonetheless it was found that he had committed a very  serious  offence
    on the facts  of  his  conviction  in  2009.   There  were  substantial
    quantities of a Class A drug and he had a significant role in  a  well-
    planned enterprise which represented a high level of harm to society at
    large.  It was found that he was less than frank during interviews with
    the Probation Service in 2010  which  reflected  his  attempts,  having
    pleaded guilty and served a year of his nine year term of imprisonment,
    to minimise his role and blame others.  However the  judge  noted  that
    when he gave evidence he backed down  somewhat  from  that  stance  and
    presented a slightly more credible account of  being  recruited  in  an
    African restaurant to undertake an overseeing role; but the  judge  was
    still not entirely satisfied about his explanation.  It was found  that
    he must have been a close confidant  of  the  main  organisers  of  the
    importation.  The appellant had still not disclosed the identity of the
    organisers,  claiming  that  he  was  under  duress  and  in  fear   of
    retribution for his family.

11.  It was found that the  appellant  had  demonstrated  that  he  had  the
    capacity to lead a responsible, law-abiding life; but his offending was
    on such a serious scale that on balance the judge decided that he still
    represented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society",  namely  public
    policy in controlling serious crime involving harmful drugs.

12.  The judge purported to take into consideration the  fact  that  he  had
    lived in the UK for some six years and had a family life  here.   There
    was no evidence of re-offending and the reports suggested a low risk of
    that.   Even  so,  it  was  found  that  the  decision  to  remove  was
    proportionate under the Regulations.

13.  The judge, however, went on to consider the  appellant's  human  rights
    claim under Article 8 and it would be as well  to  quote  in  full  his
    treatment of that at paragraph 38 of the  determination.   It  runs  as
    follows:

        "38. I must however also  consider  the  Appellant's  human  rights
             claim under Article 8 ECHR and the impact his removal will have
             on those rights and the welfare of his children in  particular.
             The Appellant has a substantial family life and private life in
             the UK.  I accept the evidence before me as to the  extent  and
             nature of such ties.  There is a close bond  between  him,  his
             partner and their children.  The youngest child was born in the
             UK and the entire family lived together prior  to  the  offence
             being committed and subsequent to his release.  The life in the
             UK of his partner and the children  is  well-documented.   They
             are settled in employment and in the education system.  I  find
             on this evidence that looking at the family  unit  as  a  whole
             there is a significant and strong family  life  established  in
             the UK which I find is protected".

14.  The judge  found  that  the  interference  caused  by  the  appellant's
    removal would have consequences of such gravity as to engage Article 8.
     At paragraph 40 he went on:

        "40. Looking at all matters  in  the  round  I  find,  despite  the
             considerable weight attached to the public interest,  that  the
             nature and extent of this  family  unit,  the  close  ties  and
             dependency   as   evidenced   and   the   children's    welfare
             overwhelmingly in favour of remaining in  the  UK  to  continue
             with their education, that the Appellant's removal from the  UK
             is not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  sought  to  be
             achieved.  The Appellant's removal in such circumstances would,
             I find, be incompatible with his and  the  family's  Article  8
             rights and thus unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
             Act 1998."

The Appeal

15.  Mr Avery for the respondent submitted  that  the  judge,  having  found
    that the appellant was still a risk to the United Kingdom and that  the
    decision was  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,  acted  oddly  in
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The reasoning in relation to
    Article 8 was brief.  It seemed to relate primarily to the family  life
    and in particular to the fact that the children were  in  education  in
    this country.  His assessment of proportionality  was  deficient.   The
    only positive factor he mentioned was the interests  of  the  children;
    but he failed to balance that against the serious nature of the offence
    and the facts that the appellant lied  to  his  Probation  Officer  and
    failed to disclose information about the conspiracy  to  import  drugs.
    In particular he failed to name anyone else involved.  None of this was
    mentioned in the balance.  Both parents were French  and  the  children
    were of French ethnicity.  It would  not  be  a  fundamental  shift  in
    culture if they left the country.  There would be some  disruption  but
    it was not a strong factor.  The judge did not seem  to  consider  that
    the appellant could leave the country and the children could stay here.
     The children's rights in order to prevail over the public interest  in
    deportation would have to be of substantial importance.  The case of SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 dealt with  automatic  deportation
    cases but paragraph 46 of that was clearly relevant.   It  was  to  the
    effect that the  more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
    deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if  it  was
    to prevail.  The main difficulty however was the  fundamental  lack  of
    reasoning.  There was also an apparent contradiction because the  judge
    found deportation to  be  proportionate  in  terms  of  Article  8  but
    disproportionate in terms of the Regulations.

16.  Mr Mak for the appellant submitted that there  was  no  error  of  law.
    Paragraph 38 of the determination had considered the close bond between
    the parties and the effect of the  family  life.   Their  life  in  the
    United Kingdom was well documented.  The evidence  of  the  appellant's
    partner had been set out at paragraphs 22 and 23 of  the  determination
    and she had been assessed as a credible witness.  She  had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2007 to join her partner in the exercise  of  her
    rights to free movement within the European Union.  She was the  mother
    of the three children, the youngest of whom  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 30 June 2008.  She had  previously  worked  as  a  teacher's
    assistant and then received a one year bursary from  the  Training  and
    Development Agency for a one-year course in teacher training which  she
    had now completed.  She was looking for a full-time post as a  teacher.
    She had been totally unaware of her partner's criminal involvement  and
    only became aware of it after his arrest.  Although she was  angry  and
    disappointed she remained supportive of the appellant  because  of  the
    three children.  She was very close to the children and the  fact  that
    he was serving a term of imprisonment had been kept from them.  He  had
    spent a considerable period of his  prison  term  on  day  and  weekend
    releases at the home and since his release from prison on 24 April 2013
    he had been the children's carer, taking them to school, collecting and
    looking after them at home by doing cooking and household chores  while
    she was on her training course.  She was confident he would  never  re-
    offend again.  She accepted that if he was returned to France she would
    probably follow him there in order to maintain the family  unit.   That
    would present difficulties for her personally and for the family.   She
    had an English teacher qualification and hoped to  secure  a  full-time
    post in September with offers of  work  as  a  supply  teacher  in  the
    alternative.  Her English qualification was not recognised as  such  in
    France and she would have to seek exemptions and then apply for a  post
    through a competitive public  examination.   All  three  children  were
    already immersed in the  English  educational  system  which  is  quite
    different from that in France.  In fact the elder children  would  have
    been in secondary school had they been educated in France  and  removal
    of the family as a whole would result in a  huge  disruption  in  their
    educational paths particularly as their main language was now  English.
    She had had previous experience herself of the  educational  system  in
    France holding various jobs as a play-worker, teacher's assistant and a
    project manager in education but she had  no  family  or  relatives  in
    France.  She knew that the appellant had relatives in  Africa  but  did
    not know of any relatives of  his  in  France,  although  he  had  some
    friends with whom he maintained contact primarily through Facebook.

17.  Mr Mak drew our  attention  to  paragraph  40,  which  I  have  already
    quoted.  The important part of it was that the judge indicated that  he
    had looked at all matters in the round.  He had considered all  of  the
    evidence and must have carried out the balancing  exercise  desiderated
    by the respondent.  The case of SS related to a foreign criminal within
    the meaning of Section 32 but the appellant's case  was  being  decided
    under the EEA Regulations.

18.  We asked Mr Mak about the contradiction between the findings  that  the
    decision was proportionate in terms of the Regulations but not in terms
    of Article 8.  It seemed to us that Mr Mak was in  some  difficulty  in
    answering this question, although he sought to derive some  support  by
    way of analogy from the case of MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  He suggested that Article  8
    was perhaps wider than the Regulations but had no authority  to  assist
    him.  One of the difficulties with that submission is Regulation 21(6),
    which is in the following terms:

        "(6) Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the  age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic  situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's  social
             and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent
             of the person's links with his country of origin."

19.  It seemed to us, with due deference to Mr  Mak's  careful  submissions,
    that the considerations set out in  Regulation  21(6)  mostly,  if  not
    completely, reflected the sorts of considerations which would  have  to
    be taken into account in an Article 8 assessment.  Although  we  cannot
    think of any for ourselves, it may be that there is some  nuance  which
    would entitle a  decision  maker  to  reach  different  conclusions  on
    proportionality vis-�-vis the Regulations and Article 8 but nothing  in
    the determination helps us in that regard.  In our opinion the ex facie
    ambiguity is such that it discloses an error or law.

20.  We indicated that that was our decision and that  it  fell  to  be  re-
    made.  We invited comment from parties as to how matters might  proceed
    and after some discussion it  was  agreed  that  a  further  evidential
    hearing was unnecessary.  Nonetheless we were invited to  take  account
    of a further statement from the appellant.

21.  That statement indicated that since the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 19 August 2013 he had continued his rehabilitation to  lead
    a law-abiding life.  Through his voluntary work with probation  he  was
    offered full-time employment as an  engagement  worker  by  the  London
    Probation Trust on 30 September 2013.  His  work  was  to  engage  with
    prisoners, providing support and helping them to re-integrate back into
    society.  The prisoners are on licence and attend the Probation Service
    where he provides induction, assists them with their community work and
    guides them towards their release.  He continued to live with his  wife
    and three children at the family home.  His  voluntary  work  with  the
    Probation Service had provided sufficient evidence for the  Service  to
    employ him as an engagement worker to assist them.  That statement  was
    supported by a letter from the London Probation Trust  confirming  that
    he commenced employment with them on 30 September 2013.  He  was  based
    at their office in Bethnal Green and although he had only been in  post
    for five weeks he had made good progress and positive feedback had been
    received from his line manager.  A copy of his terms and conditions  of
    employment was also provided.

22.  Mr Mak submitted that the appellant did not present a  genuine  threat.
    The deportation decision had to be based on his  personal  conduct  and
    there  was  no  question  of  dealing  with  general  deterrence.   His
    convictions did  not  themselves  justify  the  decision  in  terms  of
    Regulation 21(5)(e).  He had been punished for his crimes but had  been
    assessed as a low risk.  He now helped other  prisoners.   Having  been
    released from prison he had found employment in a supermarket  and  had
    then been found worthy of employment with an arm of government.  He did
    not present any kind of threat at all.

23.  Mr Avery referred to the refusal letter.  So far as any  assessment  of
    risk was concerned he had not been forthcoming about who  was  involved
    in the criminal enterprise with him.  Failing  to  provide  information
    about that was a serious matter and led to a continuing threat  against
    society which weighed in the balance.  He was prepared to lie  when  it
    suited him as could be  seen  from  his  dealings  with  the  Probation
    Service.

24.  In reply Mr Mak pointed out that any lies he told were three years  ago
    before he undertook the  work  with  probation  when  he  realised  the
    significance  of  the  crime.   The  Probation  Service  knew  of   his
    conviction and his dealings with them.  He fulfilled the  criteria  for
    the job and would help serving prisoners to lead  a  law-abiding  life.
    His failure to disclose the names of his associates was  through  fear.
    He re-iterated that he did not present any form of danger.

Findings

25.  We do not interfere with the  basic  facts  found  established  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal except as  otherwise  indicated.   We  are  however
    concerned  with  the  application  of  Regulation  21(5)(c).    As   we
    understand it, the respondent relies not only on the serious conviction
    but on the appellant's lack of frankness  during  interviews  with  the
    Probation Service in 2010 in an effort to minimise his role  and  blame
    others, as well as his failure to reveal details of his associates.  In
    considering this issue we take account of the fact that  the  Probation
    Service itself has offered him employment.  It  is  one  thing  for  an
    OASys assessment to find  that  an  offender  is  a  low  risk  of  re-
    offending, as happened in this case.   It  is  quite  another  for  the
    Probation  Service  to  go  further  and,  in  the  knowledge  of   the
    appellant's previous lack of candour,  to  offer  him  employment  with
    them, which implies that they pose a great deal of trust  in  him.   We
    cannot envisage that they did this without anxious consideration of all
    the circumstances.  It seems to us that any lies told by the  appellant
    to the Probation Service at an early stage  of  his  incarceration  and
    indeed his failure to name his associates have to be seen  in  context.
    It is in our experience  not  uncommon  for  offenders  to  attempt  to
    minimise their involvement in offences but this has to be seen  against
    the background of a plea of guilty.  One has also to take into  account
    the developments since then not least the offer of employment to  which
    we have already referred.

26.  It is equally  not  uncommon  to  find  that  offenders  fail  to  name
    associates.  There seems no reason to dispute the appellant's assertion
    that this is out of  fear.   That  of  course  is  no  excuse  but  the
    suggestion that because of that failure the appellant represents a risk
    to society is, it seems to  us,  somewhat  contentious.   The  thinking
    seems to be that since he has failed to  name  these  people  they  are
    still at large and therefore they represent a danger to society so  the
    danger represented by the  appellant  is  somewhat  derivative,  if  it
    exists at all.  All this assumes that any information  which  he  could
    give would still be useful now, nearly five years after the appellant's
    conviction.  We are not persuaded that the two factors relied on by the
    respondent over and above the convictions really entitle  her  to  take
    the view that the appellant represents a genuine  present  and  serious
    threat as is required in terms of the Regulations.

27.  Accordingly we depart from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  set
    out in paragraphs 35 and 36 of  the  determination  which  are  to  the
    opposite effect.

28.  Lest we are wrong in that we think that we should say  something  about
    proportionality.  We think there is some force is Mr  Mak's  contention
    that, although all of the various features which figure in the  balance
    are not mentioned in paragraph 38 of the determination, when it is read
    as a whole the First-tier Tribunal took their role  into  account.   SS
    (Nigeria) is of less relevance than it would be in a  Section  32  case
    but we think that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  in  relation
    to Article 8  when  taken  as  a  whole  and  when  combined  with  the
    appellant's new-found employment are sufficient to tip the  balance  in
    favour of the appellant, whether proportionality is assessed  in  terms
    of the Regulations or under Article 8.  We do not consider it necessary
    to say any more about this in view of the decision we have  reached  as
    to the applicability of the Regulations.

Decision

29.  We find that the decision to deport is unlawful.





                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                      Date: 20 November 2013
