
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00549/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     gs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC"),
    born on 30 May 1994.  He came before the First-tier Tribunal on 9 March
    2015 in consequence of his appeal against the respondent's decision  to
    make a deportation order against  him  under  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 2. That decision  was  made  following  the  appellant's  convictions  for
    offences of robbery and possession of a firearm with intent to commit a
    relevant offence.  The total sentence he received was one of six years'
    imprisonment.  The offences were committed on 20  July  2010  when  the
    appellant was 16 years of age.

 3. First-tier Tribunal judge K. W. Brown allowed the appeal under  Article
    3 of the ECHR on the basis that the appellant, as a  foreign  criminal,
    would be at real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment on return to the  DRC.
    In the circumstances, he decided  not  to  give  consideration  to  the
    Article 8 ground of appeal.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal against the judge's decision
    on two grounds. The first related to the judge's refusal to adjourn the
    appeal, an adjournment application having been made on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to await the outcome of the Upper  Tribunal's  consideration
    of a country guidance case on the DRC in  relation  to  the  return  of
    criminal deportees.  The second ground of appeal was in  terms  of  the
    judge's conclusion to the effect that the appellant would be at risk on
    return as a criminal deportee.

 5. The appellant also sought permission to appeal in terms of the  judge's
    failure to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6.  Permission  was  granted  to  both  parties.   In  relation   to   the
    respondent's application, the judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    granted permission did not consider that the ground in relation to  the
    adjournment application had any merit but  expressly  stated  that  the
    grounds on which permission was granted were not limited.

 7. On behalf of the appellant before  me,  Ms  Easty  indicated  that  her
    appeal in relation to the Article 8 point would not be  pursued  if  it
    was decided that there was no error of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
    under Article 3.  In other words, with an Article  3  decision  in  the
    appellant's favour, it would not be necessary to pursue the  Article  8
    appeal.

    Submissions

 8. I summarise the submissions of the  parties  before  me,  although  the
    summary does not necessarily reflect the order in which the submissions
    were made.

 9. Mr Avery at first indicated that he did not rely on the first ground on
    which permission was sought, namely the refusal to adjourn pending  the
    forthcoming country guidance decision, although revived the point later
    in submissions.

10. However, in relation to the Article 3 point, it was submitted that  the
    judge's reliance on the decision in R (P and R - DRC)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 3879 (Admin) failed  to  take
    into account the restricted nature of the hearing  before  Phillips  J,
    and the fact that Phillips  J's  comments  were  obiter.   That  was  a
    judicial review case challenging a clearly unfounded  certificate.   It
    was not a case about the return of criminal offenders to the DRC.   The
    judge should not have treated that decision  as  determinative  of  the
    Article 3 issue. I was referred to BM and Others (returnees -  criminal
    and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT  00293  (IAC)  at  [61]  in  which
    observations were made about the decision in P. In  P  the  judge  said
    that he thought the issue of the risk  to  criminal  deportees  was  an
    issue that needed to be considered in a country guidance case.

11. Furthermore, it was submitted that the First-tier judge made no mention
    of the Fact-Finding Mission Report referred to in the  decision  letter
    dated 12 March 2014.

12. The First-tier judge did not sufficiently engage  with  the  issues  in
    terms of risk on return in Article 3 terms.

13. It was contended that the judge's  citation  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in BK (Democratic Republic of Congo) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1322 at [23] of  the  determination
    was in fact not the country guidance case then in existence, that being
    BK (Failed asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT  00098.   The  Court  of
    Appeal case in fact was not dealing with any factual issues.

14. So far as the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds is concerned,  it
    was accepted on behalf of the respondent that the  judge  did  need  to
    consider Article 8 and that on that basis there was an error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Ms Easty, in relation to  the  judge's  decision  not  to  adjourn  the
    appeal, pointed out that there had previously  been  a  refusal  of  an
    adjournment before the First-tier Tribunal. There was no principle that
    indicated that a hearing needed to be adjourned pending the outcome  of
    a country guidance case.  The respondent  could,  if  she  had  wanted,
    withdrawn the decision under appeal.

16. In relation to Article 3, I was referred to the appellant's  'rule  24'
    response to the  grant  of  permission.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    principles to be derived from P are set out in the DRC Policy  Bulletin
    of 22 October 2014. Ms Easty suggested that that  document  was  before
    the First-tier judge, either having been provided to him at the hearing
    or provided to the Tribunal at an earlier hearing.

17. The restricted way in which P is relied on before me was  not  the  way
    that the respondent's case was put before the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In relation to the BK point, the respondent's case is simply  that  the
    judge used the wrong citation.  In any  event,  that  decision  was  of
    "limited value" because this appellant had not applied for asylum.

19. Furthermore, it is to be remembered that the judge had before  him  the
    expert report of Dr Kodi,  which  informed  his  decision.   Dr  Kodi's
    opinion was that the appellant would be at risk on return.

20. Mr Avery in reply suggested that there was nothing to indicate that the
    October 2014 Bulletin was put before the judge.  Certainly, nothing  in
    the determination shows this to be the case.  In any  event,  it  would
    seem that the Bulletin only contains a summary of the  decision  in  P,
    and not expressing any policy view.

21. Dr Kodi's report proceeds on the footing  that  any  criminal  returnee
    would be at risk of detention and ill-treatment but there  was  nothing
    in the way of any evidence to support that conclusion.

    My assessment

22. It appeared at first that Mr Avery effectively abandoned the ground  of
    appeal in relation to the refusal to adjourn although revived it  later
    in submissions. In any event, I do not consider that there is any merit
    in the ground relating to the First-tier judge's refusal to adjourn the
    appeal.

23. It appears that an application for  an  adjournment  had  already  been
    refused prior to the hearing before the First-tier judge and  there  is
    nothing to indicate that there was further information before the judge
    such  as  would  have  persuaded  him  to  take   a   different   view.
    Furthermore, there is no reason in principle why a  hearing  should  be
    adjourned pending  consideration  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  of  country
    guidance.   Indeed  sometimes,  if  not  often,  it  would  be   wholly
    inappropriate to do so given that it is usually unknown when a  country
    guidance decision will be promulgated.

24. The judge referred to the interests  of  justice  and  the  "overriding
    objective"   (in   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

25. If it did form part of the judge's reasons to  refuse  the  adjournment
    the fact that it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the  law
    as it then existed was strongly in favour of the appellant, this  would
    have been an erroneous basis  upon  which  to  refuse  an  adjournment.
    Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to refuse  the
    application for an adjournment in the exercise of  his  discretion  and
    for the reasons he gave.

26. I cannot see anything to support the suggestion  that  the  DRC  Policy
    Bulletin dated 22 October 2014 was put before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as suggested on behalf of the appellant.  Although an extract from that
    document is set out in the appellant's rule 24 response, no copy of the
    whole document was provided to me, despite my request  at  the  hearing
    for one to be provided.  It is not apparent from the  determination  or
    from the judge's manuscript record of proceedings  that  that  document
    was before him, or was referred to by either party.

27. In any event, it is clear from the decision  letter  that  it  was  not
    accepted on behalf of the respondent that the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk of Article  3  ill-treatment  as  a  returned  criminal  offender,
    regardless of what is stated  in  the  Policy  Bulletin.   Indeed,  the
    decision letter cites various reports which the  respondent  argued  in
    the decision letter suggested that the appellant would not be at risk.

28. I do not consider that there is any merit in the  complaint  about  the
    judge's incorrect citation of the decision in BK.  The country guidance
    decision is of course that reported by the Upper Tribunal, and not  the
    Court of Appeal's decision.  In any event, the decision of the Court of
    Appeal  contains  a  summary  or  synthesis  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision.

29. That said, I cannot see how the judge's conclusions in relation to  the
    risk to the appellant in Article 3 terms could have been  supported  or
    fortified with reference to the country guidance decision of the  Upper
    Tribunal in BK.  That case only concerned failed asylum seekers and not
    criminal returnees.  Indeed, as was said by Ms  Easty  in  submissions,
    that decision would have had limited value anyway, even  if  the  judge
    did refer to the decision of the Court of Appeal rather  than  that  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  Its limited value is a reason to conclude that  it
    could not justifiably have informed the judge's assessment.

30. So far as the decision in P is concerned, I consider that there is some
    merit in the submissions made before me on behalf of the  appellant  to
    the effect that the argument in relation to that  decision  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not in terms of the extent to which  it  should
    be given a restrictive interpretation, for example  because  it  was  a
    judicial review case concerned with a  clearly  unfounded  certificate.
    Nothing in the determination reveals that there was any argument  about
    its utility being limited for that reason.  Furthermore,  the  decision
    letter does not argue for such a restrictive approach to P.

31. There are nevertheless good reasons to conclude that that  decision  in
    fact had only limited utility, when one considers the commentary on  it
    in BM and Others, in particular at [61].  Nevertheless, it does seem to
    me that the respondent  now  relies  on  an  argument  that  was  never
    advanced before the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the decision  in
    P.

32. At [26] the judge referred  to  the  respondent's  submissions  to  the
    effect that the appellant could be deported safely to the  DRC,  noting
    that there was no intention on behalf of the respondent to publicise or
    highlight the reasons why the appellant has been deported.  He referred
    to the November 2012 Bulletin relied on on behalf of the respondent  in
    terms of the extent to which a crime attracting media  publicity  might
    put a person at risk.  That seems to have been the  way  the  case  was
    argued on behalf of the respondent, at least in part, including in  the
    decision letter.

33. Importantly however, it is to be remembered that the judge  had  before
    him an expert report from Dr Muzong Kodi.  The grounds before me do not
    in fact make any complaint about the judge's assessment of that  expert
    report.  Although Mr Avery sought to challenge the judge's reliance  on
    it, I am satisfied  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  with
    reference to that report that the case had been made out as to risk  on
    return as a criminal deportee, in the particular circumstances  of  his
    case.

34. It is true that Dr Kodi's report does proceed on the footing  that  all
    offender returnees would be at risk, but there is  also  an  individual
    assessment of the appellant's particular circumstances.   Although  the
    respondent's decision letter refers to the clarification of  the  DRC's
    ambassador to the UK's comments, Dr Kodi's  report  also  engages  with
    that clarification.  The ambassador's  comments  suggested  that  there
    would be a risk of detention of criminal offender returnees.  It  could
    not be said therefore,  that  the  First-tier  judge  blindly  accepted
    everything said on behalf of the appellant but rejected everything said
    on behalf of the respondent.

35. It seems to me to be important not to approach the question of  whether
    the First-tier judge erred in law in terms of  his  assessment  of  the
    risk in Article 3 terms, with the benefit of the hindsight provided  by
    the country guidance decision of BM and  Others,  promulgated  in  June
    2015, and therefore after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    could not be said to have been an error of law for the  judge  to  have
    failed to take into account country guidance which was not in existence
    at the date of the decision before him.

36. The judge's decision was made on the basis of  the  information  before
    him.  It is true that  a  different  approach  to  P  could  have  been
    adopted, and the decision in BK could not in  fact  have  informed  his
    assessment of the risk for the reasons  I  have  given.   Nevertheless,
    there was sufficient background material, and an expert  report,  which
    justified him in coming to the view that he did.

37. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  its  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds is to stand.

38. Ms Easty did indicate that she would not  be  pursuing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds in the event that  no  error  of  law  was  found  in
    relation to Article 3.  In those  circumstances,  unless  within  seven
    days of the date of the sending of  this  determination  the  appellant
    through his representatives makes any submissions to  the  contrary,  I
    propose to decide pursuant to rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, that the appellant  has  withdrawn  his  case  in
    relation to Article 8, and to which the Tribunal would consent.

39. No further order from the Upper Tribunal  will  be  necessary  in  this
    respect because the withdrawal of the appellant's case  in  respect  of
    Article 8 will take effect by default in response to that direction.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.   Its  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 3 grounds therefore stands.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  22/12/15
