
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00671/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Given orally at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2014                           |On 12 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |




                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                     ms

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, Counsel instructed by DV Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against the dismissal by the  First-
    tier Tribunal following a hearing at Richmond on 12 June  2004  of  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent taken on 31 March 2014 to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order made in respect of  the  appellant
    in 2006.  Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 24  July
    2014.

2.   The essential immigration history of the appellant is as  follows.   He
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 26 April 2000  and  claimed
    asylum.  His application was refused on 15 May 2001.  He did not appeal
    against  that  decision.   On  27  May  2001  he  submitted  a  further
    application on human rights grounds which was refused in June 2001.  On
    8 April 2005 he was convicted at Warwick Crown Court of using  a  false
    instrument and attempting to obtain  services  by  deception.   He  was
    sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  Following conviction he  was
    served with a deportation letter dated 8 November 2005.  He was given a
    right of appeal against the decision.  He chose not to  appeal.   On  4
    May 2006 he submitted an application for an EEA residence  card.   This
    was refused on 28 June 2010.  On 5 June  2006  he  was  served  with  a
    deportation order.  There was then a series of further submissions sent
    on behalf of the appellant on 12 March 2009,  15  June  2010,  28  June
    2010, 15 November 2010 and 26 March 2012.  These  representations  were
    considered and rejected, leading to the decision to  refuse  to  revoke
    the deportation order.

3.   The appellant's account of his experiences in Sri Lanka is  essentially
    as follows.  He says that  he  is  of  Tamil  ethnicity.   In  1997  he
    witnessed his mother's death during a bombing attack  on  his  village.
    His home was destroyed.  He was then forced to assist the  LTTE  for  a
    period of time.  He fled  from  the  LTTE  to  Vavuniya  where  he  was
    detained by the army and ill-treated.  A bribe  was  paid  and  he  was
    released after twelve days.  Thereafter  he  lived  in  hiding  with  a
    maternal uncle before the decision was taken that he should  leave  Sri
    Lanka with the assistance of an agent.  He entered the  United  Kingdom
    which he did as I have said in April 2000.

4.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal runs  to  163  paragraphs.
    The Tribunal heard oral evidence.  It began its analysis  of  the  oral
    and documentary evidence at paragraph 104 where the Tribunal said:  "We
    have read and considered all of  the  documentary  evidence  before  us
    before arriving at our decision.  We have also fully taken into account
    the submissions made by both representatives".  There then  follows  an
    analysis of the evidence under various  headings.   The  first  heading
    relates to the appellant's asylum claim.  At paragraph  111  the  panel
    stated that it was prepared to accept that as a  young  Tamil  man  the
    appellant "may well have been caught up in the civil war  and  that  he
    may well have been forcibly recruited by the LTTE and asked to  undergo
    training.  He may also have  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
    authorities and been detained briefly.  If he was  detained  we  accept
    that he was most probably ill-treated.  Some of  the  symptoms/injuries
    highlighted in the medical and psychiatric reports may, in  part,  have
    their roots causes in the ill-treatment he received some 15 years ago".
     At paragraph 112 we find this: "The only  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    account we do not accept is the fact that he had  to  pay  a  bribe  in
    order to secure his release from detention and that a warrant has  been
    issued for his arrest (see findings below).  We find that the appellant
    has exaggerated this aspect of his testimony in order  to  bolster  his
    claim".

5.   As regards what the panel described as the  first  asylum  application,
    the panel noted at paragraph 114 that  the  appellant  did  not  appeal
    against the refusal of that claim made  on  15  May  2001.   The  panel
    stated that "it is the appellant's case that  he  never  received  this
    letter.  This is disputed by the respondent who argued that  copies  of
    the refusal letter were sent both to him and his legal  representatives
    by recorded delivery".

6.   At paragraphs 115 and 116 the panel noted correspondence  sent  by  the
    appellant's then legal representatives, Sri Kanth & Co  Solicitors,  in
    the days following the refusal of the claim of 15 May 2001.  Given this
    and the proximity of the dates between the refusal of the claim  on  15
    May and that correspondence, the panel found  that  the  correspondence
    was sent raising  human  rights  grounds  because  the  solicitors  had
    received a copy of the  asylum  refusal  and  were  raising  additional
    grounds to prevent the appellant's removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.
    The panel therefore found at paragraph 117 that it was the  appellant's
    awareness his asylum claim had been refused that triggered a series  of
    correspondence from his legal representatives to the respondent in late
    May and early June 2001.   The  panel  therefore  concluded  that  "the
    appellant has not been truthful with the Tribunal  on  this  issue  and
    this undermines his credibility as a witness of truth".

7.   There then followed findings regarding the appellant's attempt to  flee
    to Canada, which led to his criminal conviction for attempting to use a
    false  instrument.   At  paragraph  120  the  panel  found   that   the
    appellant's actions "were motivated by the fact that he was aware  that
    his asylum claim had been refused in the United  Kingdom  and  that  at
    some point the respondent would take action to remove him to Sri Lanka.
     We find that it is against this backdrop that the appellant sought  to
    flee to Canada".

8.   There then follows an analysis of the EEA application.  Suffice  it  to
    say for this purpose  that  the  appellant,  having  been  refused  the
    relevant EEA permit, chose not to appeal against  that  decision.   The
    panel concluded at paragraph 122  that  in  assessing  the  appellant's
    current asylum claim "we  therefore  take  into  account  all  of  this
    immigration history and in particular his previous failed  applications
    and the fact that he chose not to appeal some of those decisions".

9.   They then turned to the issue of the arrest warrant, said to have  been
    issued in Sri Lanka on 20 July 2000.  There  was  evidence  before  the
    panel of enquiries allegedly made by an attorney in Sri Lanka who on  9
    June 2004 was said to have discovered that an arrest warrant  had  been
    issued in respect of the appellant in  July  2000  and  that  this  was
    "still active and that if the appellant was returned to Sri  Lanka  the
    warrant would be executed".  The panel was asked  by  the  respondent's
    representative to place little weight on these documents.

10.  At paragraph 127 the panel noted that  as  part  of  the  first  asylum
    claim the appellant had submitted an SEF form dated 27 March 2001 after
    the alleged warrant would have  been  issued.   There  was  however  no
    mention in the form that the appellant had been  the  recipient  of  an
    arrest warrant.  The same point was made in respect  of  the  SEF  form
    dated 27 March 2001.  During cross-examination the appellant sought  to
    explain the delay in his finding out about the existence of the warrant
    by stating that he began making enquiries "a couple of months ago" with
    people that he was still in contact with in Sri Lanka to see  if  there
    was any outstanding charge against him.  It was as a  result  of  those
    enquiries he discovered that a warrant was issued to him in 2000 and it
    was still "live".  At paragraph 129 the  panel  said  this:  "In  other
    words the appellant appears to be arguing that he only found out  about
    the existence of a warrant a few weeks ago and therefore could not have
    mentioned it in his first asylum application made well  over  a  decade
    ago.  I am afraid  that  we  simply  do  not  believe  the  appellant's
    testimony on this issue and echo the concerns raised by Mr Grennan.  It
    is simply not credible that if there was a warrant out for  his  arrest
    since 2000 the appellant would only make enquiries about its  existence
    several weeks before the hearing, especially  having  made  asylum  and
    human rights claims in previous years".  They therefore  placed  little
    weight upon the arrest warrant documentation and the  letter  from  the
    Sri Lankan attorney.  Indeed the panel were not  persuaded  that  there
    was any warrant for the appellant's arrest.

11.  The panel then turned at paragraph 131 to  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities.  He states that since 2009 he  has  been  engaged  in  such
    activities and a number of witnesses gave evidence in support  of  that
    contention.  However there were, as the  panel  noted,  inconsistencies
    within the evidence of the appellant and his witnesses as to the nature
    and extent of  the  sur  place  activities.   This  led  the  panel  at
    paragraph 142  to  find  that  the  "evidence  of  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's sur place activities has been inconsistent and  unreliable.
    We do not therefore make any findings in the appellant's favour on this
    issue".  The panel therefore came to the conclusion that the  appellant
    was not of any ongoing interest to the Sri Lankan authorities prior  to
    his arrival in the United Kingdom  with  the  passage  of  fourteen  to
    fifteen years: "We find that he is of even less  interest  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities.  We do not accept that he  was  released  from  his
    detention in Sri Lanka on payment of a bribe or that there is a warrant
    out for his arrest.  We do not accept that he has been engaged  in  sur
    place activities in the United Kingdom".

12.  The panel then looked at issues concerning Articles  3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  They found no breach would be occasioned of  Article  3  by  the
    appellant's removal to Sri Lanka.  So far as Article 8  was  concerned,
    the panel noted at paragraph 156 that the appellant was not married and
    not in a  relationship.   He  did  not  have  a  dependent  child.   At
    paragraph 157 it was noted that he did have some family members in  the
    country and he lived with an aunt and  her  family.   Nevertheless  the
    panel took the view that such family relationships were not covered  by
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.  The panel found  at  paragraph
    158 that the appellant had not established a family life in the  United
    Kingdom for the purposes of paragraph 399 and they concluded thereafter
    that he had  not  lost  ties  with  Sri  Lanka  such  as  to  make  his
    deportation in  breach  of  the  Rules  or  any  other  relevant  legal
    provision.  For those  reasons  the  panel  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

13.  The grounds upon which permission was  granted  are  three  in  number.
    The first relates to sur place activities.  It  was  contended  in  the
    grounds that the inconsistencies noted by the  panel  did  not  entitle
    them to  reject  the  sur  place  claim  in  its  entirety.   This  was
    particularly the case, since the panel had evidence before  it  in  the
    form of photographs showing the appellant at  what  were  described  as
    Tamil events in London set out at pages 190 to 198 of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  It was said that these do not appear to have been  taken  into
    account by the panel when rejecting the sur place claim.

14.  The second ground relates to the findings regarding release on  payment
    of a bribe.  Here it was contended that the panel had failed to provide
    any reason why they did not accept that a bribe had been paid to secure
    the appellant's release.

15.  The third and final ground related to  Article  8.   It  was  contended
    given the fact that a sole conviction was relied upon by the respondent
    in order to ground the deportation decision and that the offence was of
    some considerable age, that this, coupled  with  the  delay  in  taking
    action  against  the  respondent,  meant  in  effect  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances such as to  make  it  incompatible  with  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR to attempt  in
    2014 to give effect to the deportation order.  In this regard  reliance
    was placed upon the judgment of the European Court of Human  Rights  in
    the case of AA v United Kingdom (Application 8000/08).  In  particular,
    the grounds noted that no steps had been taken in the  case  of  AA  to
    deport him following exhaustion of his appeal rights and  that  in  the
    intervening  time  AA  had  completed  his  university  education   and
    commenced stable employment.

16.  Before me Ms Peterson, who did not draft those grounds, has in  essence
    relied upon them  and  expanded  upon  them  in  her  submissions.   Mr
    Whitwell, by contrast, essentially  relies  upon  the  rule  24  notice
    submitted on 31 July 2014, which contends that there is  in  effect  no
    material error of law in the panel's determination.

17.  I turn first to the issue of sur place activities.  I do  not  consider
    that there is any merit in the  ground  which  raises  this  particular
    issue.  It is accepted that there were material inconsistencies in  the
    evidence of the appellant and  his  witnesses  as  to  what  sur  place
    activities had been engaged in.  It is true to say  that  there  is  no
    express reference in the determination  to  the  photographic  evidence
    which we find beginning at page 192 of the appellant's  bundle.   There
    is, however, as I have already quoted the statement at paragraph 104 of
    the determination  that  the  panel,  in  reaching  its  findings,  had
    considered all of the documentary evidence as well as  the  submissions
    made to it.  It is plain in my view that in so stating the panel is  to
    be taken as referring to the bundle of  the  appellant's  materials  in
    which we find some photocopy photographs beginning at page 190.   These
    photographs, I am informed,  relate  to  a  site  which  certain  Tamil
    individuals erected opposite the  gates  to  No.10  Downing  Street  in
    Whitehall.  A gentleman, who I am prepared to accept is  the  appellant
    is photographed standing outside this site with a  clipboard.   It  is,
    however, plain that there are few other  people  standing  around  him.
    This is plainly not a mass demonstration of any kind.  The appellant in
    some photographs appears to  be  attempting  to  engage  passers-by  in
    conversation.   I  accept  what  the  respondent   says   about   these
    photographs without making any findings of  fact  as  to  whether  they
    relate to a single occasion  as  Mr  Whitwell  submitted,  or  multiple
    occasions.  They are, frankly, in any  event  of  an  exiguous  nature.
    Their lack of materiality is underscored, I find,  when  one  considers
    the country guidance case of GJ  &  Others  [2013]  UKUT  00319.   That
    country guidance determination makes  it  plain  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities are interested in  and,  as  a  general  class,  reasonably
    likely to ill-treat individuals who are or are perceived to be a threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are or are
    perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism within the Diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka.  I was referred  to  nothing  specific  within  the  country
    guidance determination to show that standing around at the  Tamil  site
    engaging in the  activities  that  appear  to  be  illustrated  in  the
    photographs coupled with the other findings of the Tribunal,  would  be
    likely to bring the appellant even remotely  within  that  category  of
    person.   Ms  Peterson  said  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have
    surveillance technology available to them.  That,  however,  of  course
    serves further to undermine  the  appellant's  case  because  there  is
    nothing to show that even if the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  knew  about
    these photographs they would be likely to regard them as anything other
    than a self-serving attempt by someone with  a  weak  asylum  claim  to
    bolster that claim.  We say that, fully bearing in mind what is said by
    the Court of Appeal in the well-known case of Danian, namely  that  sur
    place claims by those whose credibility is otherwise problematic,  fall
    to be considered with rigour.

18.  The second of the grounds relates  to  the  findings  relating  to  the
    release on payment of a bribe.   I  shall  not  reiterate  the  panel's
    findings to which I have already made reference. Suffice it to say that
    it is manifest from the determination that the panel  took  account  of
    the various adverse credibility findings  which  it  had  made  in  the
    course of its overall findings in concluding that the appellant had not
    been released upon payment of a bribe.  There was no reason  whatsoever
    for the panel to have to engage discretely with the issue  of  a  bribe
    independently from those of adverse credibility findings.  Furthermore,
    as Mr Whitwell submitted, the issue of release is closely tied up  with
    whether the appellant was ever the subject  of  an  arrest  warrant  in
    respect of his detention.  No challenge has been made to  the  findings
    of  the  panel  as  regards  the  arrest  warrant  and  it  is  frankly
    unrealistic in those circumstances to make anything of the issue as  to
    whether the appellant,  if  not  subject  of  an  arrest  warrant,  was
    released on payment of a bribe after what is  on  any  account  only  a
    short period of detention.

19.  During the course of her submissions, Ms Peterson sought  to  raise  an
    issue regarding the findings of the panel beginning  at  paragraph  114
    that the appellant had  never  received  the  letter  of  15  May  2001
    informing him of the rejection of his asylum claim.  This does not form
    part of the grounds upon which permission to appeal  was   granted  nor
    has there been any application to amend those grounds.  It is therefore
    not appropriate to raise this issue.  I was referred to page 51 of  the
    appellant's bundle, where at paragraphs 20 to 22 the appellant asserts,
    not that he did not receive the letter, but that he did not  appreciate
    that he could appeal against the rejection contained  in  that  letter.
    It is, however, plain from paragraph 114 that the panel considered  the
    evidence on behalf of the appellant asserted more than this.  Were that
    not the case, it is difficult to see why they would  have  referred  to
    the respondent disputing non-receipt  of  the  letter  by  saying  that
    copies were sent to him and to his legal representative.   Accordingly,
    standing back it is plain  that  the  entire  process  leading  to  the
    appellant attempting to flee  the  country  was  in  credibility  terms
    severely flawed, on  any  basis.   If  the  appellant  knew  about  the
    rejection and was in touch with his  solicitors  and  those  solicitors
    were making submissions of the kind  described  by  the  panel  to  the
    respondent, the assertion that the appellant  would  not  know  of  his
    appeal rights and therefore had to flee  to  Canada  is  on  any  basis
    intensely problematic.  For these reasons (particularly the failure  to
    raise the issue in the grounds) I do not consider that it  can  now  be
    advanced to attack  the  panel's  findings  regarding  release  without
    payment of a bribe.

20.   The  third  and  final  matter  concerns  the  issue  of  "exceptional
    circumstances" and the Strasbourg case of AA.  I  have  had  regard  to
    what the grounds say and to Ms Peterson's submissions on  this  matter.
    The case of AA is in no sense authority for the  proposition  that  the
    Secretary of State always faces a higher hurdle to surmount in  seeking
    to deport  someone  in  respect  of  an  offence  which  occurred  some
    considerable time ago.  Each case must be looked at on its  own  facts.
    In the present case we are concerned, as I have already indicated,  not
    with the making of a deportation order but with the refusal to revoke a
    deportation order made in 2006, a relatively short period of time after
    the criminal conviction of the appellant.  There  is  also  as  I  have
    stated a significant history that follows  the  making  of  that  order
    including, in particular, applications made by  reference  to  asserted
    EEA rights as well as multiple representations stretching over  several
    years from the appellant and his legal advisors.  In the case of AA  we
    note from the grounds that AA had made significant strides  as  regards
    Article 8 rights in the intervening period.  He had used  that  period,
    amongst other things, to complete  his  university  education  and  had
    commenced  stable  employment.   By  contrast,  the  Article  8  rights
    asserted by this appellant are slender to say the least.  He  does  not
    assert any family life in a protected sense.   He  lives  with  certain
    adult relatives and no particular features  of  his  private  life  are
    relied on.  For those reasons I do not find that there is merit in  the
    third of the grounds.

21.  I conclude that in all the circumstances the panel was  fully  entitled
    for the reasons it gave to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds and,
    indeed, on all other grounds.  For these reasons I find that  there  is
    no error of law in the panel's determination such as to necessitate  it
    being set aside.  This appeal is accordingly dismissed.







                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
