
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00955/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              OPEYEMI OLAWAIYE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M. Vidal, counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Respondent, who was born on 7 August 1985, is a citizen of Nigeria.
    He first arrived in the United Kingdom in 1986 with his mother and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain as her dependent on 26 January 1998.



 2. On 8 July 2003 he was convicted of possessing an offensive weapon in  a
    public place and given a 24 month conditional discharge. On 19  January
    2004 he was convicted of four counts of supplying cocaine and one count
    of supplying heroin and sentenced to five years  in  a  young  offender
    institution which was reduced to three years on appeal.

 3. On 19 July 2007 he was convicted of dangerous driving and of possessing
    an offensive weapon in a public place and  sentenced  to  three  months
    imprisonment on each offence. On 18  June  2013  he  was  convicted  of
    facilitating  the  acquisition  or  acquiring  or  possessing  criminal
    property and sentenced to 30 months in prison.

 4. On 7 May 2014 the Appellant decided to make a deportation order against
    him.  The Appellant appealed on 27 May  2014  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Canavan allowed his appeal on 5 February 2015.

 5. The Appellant appealed against her decision on  19  February  2015  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted her permission  to  appeal  on  3
    March 2015. The Respondent subsequently filed a Rule 24 Response, dated
    18 March 2015.

 6. The appeal came before me on 9 November 2015 but the Respondent was not
    legally represented, as those previously representing him had been  the
    subject of an intervention by the Law  Society.  As  a  consequence,  I
    found that it was not in the interests of justice to  proceed  on  that
    date and adjourned the hearing so  that  he  could  be  represented  by
    Duncan Lewis, who were willing to represent him but did  not  yet  have
    all of his papers.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. Paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules states that  the  deportation
    of a person from the United Kingdom is conducive to the public good and
    in the public interest where a person has been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months and less than  four  years  but  the
    Appellant also has to consider whether paragraphs 399 or  399A  of  the
    Rules applies and, if they do not, the public interest  in  deportation
    will  only  be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A..

 8. The Appellant accepted that the Respondent had son, who was  a  British
    citizen and in paragraph 33 of her decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan  found  that  the  Respondent  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with him. Therefore, sub-paragraph 399(a) of the Rules was
    met. However, it was also necessary for  her  to  consider  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for him to live in Nigeria if the Respondent were
    to be deported there.

 9. In paragraph 37 of her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan
    noted that it was unclear how the  "unduly  harsh"  test  contained  in
    paragraph 399(a) or section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 would be applied.  She did not then go on to  formulate
    any test for circumstances which could be said to be "unduly harsh".

10. Instead, she partly relied on the fact that the  Respondent  had  found
    that it would be unreasonable for him  to  have  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. I find as submitted by the Appellant that this is a lower test
    and does not assist when considering  whether  circumstances  would  be
    "unduly harsh". The  other  factors  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan took into account were  that  the  Respondent's  son  would  be
    separated from his father with who he now had daily  contact  (as  they
    were living together) and that when the Respondent had been  in  prison
    he had been sad and had misbehaved more  often.  She  also  noted  that
    occasional visits to Nigeria and contact by Skype would not be adequate
    contact given his young age.

11. Paragraph 2.5.2 of the IDI Chapter 13: Criminality Guidance in  Article
    8 ECHR Cases (version 5.0, 28 July 2014) notes that  "when  considering
    the public interest statements, words  must  be  given  their  ordinary
    meanings.  The  Oxford   English   Dictionary   defines   "unduly"   as
    "excessively" and "harsh"  as  "severe,  cruel"."  Furthermore,  in  MK
    (Section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC)  the
    President noted that "by way of self-direction,  we  are  mindful  that
    "unduly  harsh"  does  not  equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
    undesirable or merely difficult. Rather, it poses a  considerably  more
    elevated threshold. "Harsh" in this context, denotes  something  severe
    or bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore,
    the addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated standard
    still higher". At paragraph 72 of MAB (para 399;  "unduly  harsh")  USA
    [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) the Tribunal also stated  that  in  its  judgment
    "albeit to add a gloss of our own, the word "unduly" requires that  the
    impact upon the individual concerned must be 'inordinately'  harsh.  By
    that we mean that the impact would be "unusually large" or "excessive".
     I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan did not  carry  out  any
    similar and necessary interrogation of the term "unduly harsh" and  did
    not apply a sufficiently rigorous test. Therefore, she made a  material
    misdirection in law when assessing paragraph 399(a) of the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. I find that her approach also undermined her findings in  paragraph  42
    of her decision as to whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to
    remain in the United Kingdom with his mother.  I note that,  as  argued
    by the Appellant in ground three of the grounds of appeal, there was no
    evidence that his mother would not be able to adequately care  for  him
    or would neglect him in the Respondent's absence or any  evidence  that
    his health would suffer if the Respondent were to be deported

13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan also allowed the Respondent's  appeal
    under  paragraph  399A  and  section  117C(4)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but  when  doing  so  she  appeared  to
    conflate the present and previous rules. In  particular,  in  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 44 of her decision she found that he  had nothing
    more than remote and abstract links to Nigeria and therefore also meets
    the requirement of  paragraph  399A  (c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules".
    Earlier in the paragraph she relied on Ogundimu (Article  8-new  rules)
    Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060, which was no longer applicable.  She did not
    give  sufficient  reasons  for  finding  that  there  would   be   very
    significant obstacles to the Respondent's integration  in  Nigeria  for
    the purposes of paragraph 399A(c) of the Rules.

14. The Judge  also  found  in  paragraph  54  of  her  decision  that  the
    Respondent's deportation would amount to a disproportionate  breach  of
    Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  However,
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules makes it clear that  the  public
    interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

15. The material errors of law made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  when
    considering paragraphs 399 and 399A meant  that  there  were  no  clear
    factors pertaining to the content of these paragraphs on which to gauge
    whether there were very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the
    factors already considered in the Rules.

16. For all  of  these  reasons  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan's decision did include material errors of law.

Decision

17. I allow the Appellant's appeal and set aside First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan's decision.

18. I remit the Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Canavan.


Date:  15 January 2016


    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
