
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00120/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 July 2020                            |On 11 May 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          WILIAN DE COSTA FERNANDEZ
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 12
    February 2018 to make a deportation order against him.  His  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against that decision  was  dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 7 November 2019.  For  the
    reasons set out a decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek issued  on
    24 April 2020 (a copy of  which  is  annexed  to  this  decision)  that
    decision was set aside to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Kopieczek took the provisional view that the  remaking  could  be
    undertaken without a hearing, subject to  the  views  of  the  parties.
    Neither of them has  expressed  an  objection  and  both  parties  have
    provided skeleton arguments; and, in  the  case  of  the  appellant,  a
    bundle of additional evidence.

    Background to this appeal

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, born in 1997.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2011 aged 14 to join his mother, stepfather and other
    relatives who were living and working  here.   The  appellant  was,  he
    says, born  in  Guinea-Bissau  and  was  left  there  when  his  mother
    travelled to live in Portugal. He joined her some years later, in 2009,
    but she then moved to the United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant attended school and then college for 1�  years  but  left
    with no qualifications. Other than work as a window cleaner for 2 to  3
    months when he was 17 has  not  been  in  employment  except  for  work
    placements while at school.

 5. The appellant currently lives with his  mother  and  stepfather,  along
    with 4 of his 5 stepbrothers and sisters.  He is not in a relationship.



 6. The appellant states that he suffers from PTSD  as  a  result  of  ill-
    treatment he received as a child in Portugal, self-harmed in  detention
    and is in need of treatment.

 7. As a consequence of the appellant's offending, the  respondent  decided
    to make a deportation order against him on  12  February  2018  on  the
    basis that, even had he  acquired  permanent  residence  ant  thus  the
    protection of reg. 27 (3) of the EEA regulations (which the  respondent
    now accepts) his deportation was justified as he presented  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society,  the  respondent  noting  the  repeat
    offending, a disregard for deterrence and a lack of remorse; and,  that
    there had been repeated attempts by the courts to  offer  opportunities
    for rehabilitation.

 8. The appellant was not removed until 2 April 2019.  He  then  re-entered
    the United Kingdom unlawfully shortly thereafter and was  arrested  the
    pleaded guilty to entering in a breach of a deportation order.

    Remaking the appeal

 9. As a result of a transfer order made on 25 August 2020, this appeal has
    been transferred to me to determine.

10. I have the following before me:

          i) The respondent's bundle

         ii) The appellant's bundle

        iii) The appellant's "short" bundle  containing  a  recent  witness
             statement from him

         iv) Appellant's bundle of authorities

          v) Skeleton argument from Mr Tufan for the respondent

         vi) Skeleton argument from Mr Shattock for the appellant

    Scope of the remaking

11. As noted above, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside,
    but the Upper Tribunal did not set aside all the findings of  fact.  At
    paragraph 38 of his decision, Judge Kopieczek stated:

         "38. Given that the FtJ made very detailed findings of  fact,  many
         of which  are  not  infected  by  the  errors  of  law,  it  is  my
         provisional view, subject to submissions from the parties, that the
         following findings of fact, non-exhaustively, can be preserved:

               a) The appellant has acquired a permanent right of residence.


               b) The appellant is a serial and persistent offender who  has
                  not integrated into UK society.


               c) He has treated with contempt all the opportunities  placed
                  before him by the criminal justice system, since the  very
                  outset of his offending, to learn his lessons and mend his
                  ways.


               d) His asylum claim was a fabrication.


               e) From 2011 the appellant's immediate family have played  no
                  significant  role  in  his  life,  whether  in  terms   of
                  integration into UK society  or  in  any  other  important
                  respect suggesting a supportive role.


               f) It is highly unlikely that the appellant would be  without
                  family support in Portugal, and it is highly  likely  that
                  he has other family  there  to  whom  he  could  turn  for
                  support if he felt the need for it.


               g) He has sufficient links to Portugal as would enable him to
                  make his way in life there."


12. In his skeleton argument Mr Shattock for  the  appellant  submits  that
    other than the  finding  that  the  appellant  has  acquired  permanent
    residence, none of the other findings can be preserved.   Mr  Tufan  in
    his skeleton for the respondent submits that the other findings  should
    be preserved.

13. On that basis, I consider it is necessary for findings to  be  made  on
    these issues.

    The Law

14. It is for the respondent to demonstrate that deportation is justified.

15. The EEA Regs provide as follows, so far as they are relevant.

         27.  (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
                  security or public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security

         (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                      decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned, as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of the United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989(17).

         (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred
             by these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
                      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
                      affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                      society, taking into account past conduct of the
                      person and that the threat does not need to be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                      which relate to considerations of general prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                      even in the absence of a previous criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of P, P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social and
                  cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7)  ...

             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements
                  of this regulation are met must (in particular) have
                  regard to the considerations contained in Schedule 1
                  (considerations of public policy, public security and the
                  fundamental interests of society etc.).

16. I must also take into account Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations  which
    provides as follows, so far as is relevant:

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or  public  security  values:  member  States  enjoy   considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by  the  EU  Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to  define  their  own
         standards of  public  policy  and  public  security,  for  purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links  with  persons  of  the  same
         nationality or language does  not  amount  to  integration  in  the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a  person  may  be  regarded  as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the  United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at  or  around
         the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
             society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
             in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for  example,  through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.

         ...

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
             immigration  laws,   and   maintaining   the   integrity   and
             effectiveness of the  immigration  control  system  (including
             under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,
             public offence)  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
             an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but
             where there is wider societal harm (such as  offences  related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border  dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
             of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
             (particularly in relation  to  offences,  which  if  taken  in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the  requirements
             of regulation 27);

             ...

             (j)  protecting the public;

17. It is accepted that the appellant is  entitled  to  the  protection  of
    paragraph 27 (3). With regard to what are "serious reasons" I take into
    account SSHD v Straszewski [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1245  that  Moor-Bick  LJ
    observed at [13]:

         "13. Given the fundamental difference between the  position  of  an
         alien  and  that  of  an  EEA  national,  one  would  expect   that
         interference with the permanent right of residence would be subject
         to  more  stringent  restrictions  than  those  which  govern   the
         deportation of nationals of other states. Moreover, since the right
         of free movement  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  aspect  of  the
         European Union, it is not surprising that the Court of  Justice  of
         the European Union ("CJEU") has held that exceptions to that  right
         based on public policy are to be construed restrictively: see,  for
         example Van Duyn v Home Office (Case C-41/71)  [1975]  Ch  358  and
         Bonsignore v Oberstadirektor der Stadt Koln (Case  C-67/74)  [1975]
         ECR 297 ."

18. Commenting on that, the Inner  House  Court  of  Session  in  Goralczyk
    [2018] CSIH 60 at [22]:

         "22. Moore-Bick LJ's expectation that  there  should  be  stringent
         restrictions on a Member State's ability to remove an EEA national,
         including a "foreign criminal",  who  has  acquired  the  right  to
         reside in the United Kingdom is borne out by the terms of the  2006
         Regulations. In particular, a decision to deport  an  EEA  national
         with a permanent right of residence may  not  be  taken  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security:  regulation
         21(3) . Regard has to be had to the word "serious", a point made by
         Mr Caskie when explaining the effect of  the  2006  Regulations  as
         being to establish three levels of rights and consequent degrees of
         protection against removal. A decision to remove a person  who  has
         resided in the United Kingdom for less than five years may be taken
         "on grounds of public policy" but a decision to remove a person who
         has resided in the United Kingdom for more than five  years  cannot
         be taken "except on serious grounds of public policy".  It  follows
         that  "serious  grounds"  of  public  policy  must  mean  something
         different from "grounds" of public policy, and it follows from that
         that the  decision-maker  must  identify  just  what  the  relevant
         grounds are and then evaluate them as to their seriousness[emphasis
         added]. Moreover, a relevant decision must be taken  in  accordance
         with the principles set out in regulation 21(5) . Finally, in terms
         of regulation 21(6) , before taking such a decision  the  decision-
         maker must take into account considerations such as the age,  state
         of health, family and economic situation of the person, his  length
         of residence in the United Kingdom and the extent of his links with
         his country of origin"

19. At [26] the Court of Session stated:

         "[26]    As we have already indicated, what is under  consideration
         is a decision by the state to abrogate the  appellant's  EU  treaty
         rights in relation to free movement of workers on  the  grounds  of
         public policy. That is only lawful if the state  demonstrates  that
         the requirements of the 2006  Regulations  are  met.  The  starting
         point  is  the  requirement  of  regulation21(3)  that  a  relevant
         decision may not be taken  except  on  serious  grounds  of  public
         policy, allied with the principle set out  in  regulation  21(5)(a)
         that   the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
         proportionality. Thus, a decision to remove must have  not  just  a
         policy objective but a serious policy objective. Moreover, it  must
         comply with the principle of proportionality...

         [27] ... Thus, in order to take a decision which complies with  the
         principle of proportionality the decision-maker must have  in  mind
         the objective which the outcome of  the  decision  is  intended  to
         achieve"

20. Turning first to what findings are to be preserved, I start with the
    appellant's convictions which are not in doubt. The appellant has been
    convicted on 8 occasions of 18 offences:

          i)  On  20.05.15  before  Huntingdonshire  Juvenile   12   months
             conditional discharge for use of threatening/ abusive words or
             behaviour.

         ii) On 03.09.15 before Cambridgeshire Magistrates by means of  the
             variation of a previous order imposed on 26.08.15 a  community
             order of 12 months for a battery and no order on a  breach  of
             the conditional discharge.

        iii) On 04.01.16 before Cambridgeshire Magistrates for  failing  to
             comply with the community order of 03.09.15 it was extended.

         iv) On 01.04.16 & 06.01.17 before Cambridgeshire  Magistrates  for
             possession of  controlled  drug  Class  B  cannabis/  cannabis
             resin, a  community  order  maintained  on  01.04.16  for  the
             original conviction on the drug offence revoked for breach  of
             the community order and resentenced to 6 weeks Youth Offenders
             Institution suspended 12 months.

          v) On 27.06.17 before Northampton Magistrates for driving without
             due care and attention; failing to  stop  after  an  accident;
             failing to report an  accident;  driving  without  a  licence;
             driving  without  insurance;  disqualified   6   months;   and
             additional fine of El 20 for failing to surrender to custody.

         vi) On 24.08.17 before South London Magistrates for possession  of
             a knife 8 weeks imprisonment suspended 12 months and  fine  of
             E625.

        vii) On 29.11.17 before the Cambridge Crown Court,  upon  committal
             on 06.11.17 from the magistrates, for burglary with intent  to
             steal of a non-dwelling 8 months Young  Offenders  Institution
             and suspended imprisonment of  August  2017  to  take  effect,
             amounting in total to 10 months imprisonment.

       viii) On 15.05.19 for entering the United Kingdom  in  breach  of  a
             deportation order, sentenced to 2 months' imprisonment.

21. I consider that, on any reasonable view, the appellant is a serial
    offender and that he is a persistent offender. That does not, however,
    mean that he will reoffend; there is also some merit in the submission
    that he has ties to the United Kingdom as submitted by Mr Shattock at
    [17] but those are with his immediate family.  There is little evidence
    of ties to the wider community. The appellant did attend school here
    and then college, but there is little evidence that he derived much
    benefit from it. I accept that school implies some degree of
    participation in wider society as does the time he spent working as a
    window cleaner, but it is limited.

22. As regards the appellant's attitude to the opportunities to learn his
    lessons, I consider that finding of Judge Raymond was, certainly up to
    the last of the conviction on 29 November 2017, correct. The appellant
    had not complied with community orders or the other youth punishments;
    that, and his failure to engage properly with the deportation process,
    is indicative of an attitude which is at best immature and militates
    against the idea that the appellant may no longer represent a threat of
    reoffending. The submission that the appellant has been compliant with
    the licence conditions bears little weight in the light of the
    conviction for entry in breach of a deportation order. The appellant
    simply ignored the deportation order and sought to re-enter in breach.
    He pleaded guilty to that offence.

23. I agree with the cogent reasoning of Judge Raymond that the asylum
    claim was fabricated in that it was not true. How much weight should be
    attached to that is another matter but it is, however, an indicator of
    the appellant's immaturity that he could have thought this would assist
    him resisting removal, as indeed is his failure to engage with the
    deportation process. I note also that it appears he was not well
    advised by his previous representatives

24. I accept the appellant's unchallenged evidence that he is now living
    again with his family. There is, however, little in the way of evidence
    of active support and encouragement from them, or of what help they
    could offer to prevent him turning again to the acquaintances, habits
    and lifestyle which led him in the past to criminality of increasing
    severity. Although there some support for the view that his mother and
    her partner would help him, it is limited; a belief to that effect from
    a probation officer in the absence of relevant evidence is not
    something capable of bearing much, if any weight. The letters of
    support from the family add little in that they do not explain what
    they would do to help him reform.

25. There is, however, limited support for the finding that the appellant
    would not be without family support in Portugal.  There is nothing in
    the material to suggest that, other than his stepfather's family, he
    has anyone there, having been born in Guinea-Bissau and having lived
    there for most of his childhood. He speaks Portuguese, but he has
    little experience of life there except as an adolescent. Given his
    limited education, there appears to be little to enable him to make a
    life for himself there.

26. Accordingly, I accept that the facts identified as f) and g) cannot be
    sustained. The remainder of the findings I accept, albeit with
    significant caveats as set out above.

27. Deporting the appellant is an infringement of his EU Treaty Rights.
    That can, in these circumstances, only be done on serious grounds of
    public policy and when the appellant represents a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat.

28. In line with Goralczyk, it is for the respondent or decision-maker to
    identify just what the relevant grounds are and then evaluate them as
    to their seriousness. The skeleton argument provided does not do so and
    the refusal letter of 13 March 2018 restated in the letter of 16
    January 2019 states simply:

 "Given the nature of the offences you committed and the threat that your
pose to society, even if you had permanent residence in the United Kingdom,
the requirement for the serious ground of public policy would be satisfied"

29. Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations provides that it is for a member
    state to decide what public policies are but does not identify any
    hierarchy of seriousness

30. The guidance issued by the respondent provides:

         'Serious grounds is not defined in the EEA Regulations 2016 or the
         directive. To justify a decision on serious grounds, there must be
         stronger grounds than would be applicable for a person who does not
         have a permanent right of residence'

31. I note the submission from Mr Shattock that in December 2017 the
    respondent had assessed the appellant as not meeting the serious
    grounds threshold. But that is not binding on the respondent and there
    has now been further offending, nor can it be said that the sole
    objective is preventing further offending.

32. It is, however, wholly wrong for Mr Shattock to seek to rely at [48] on
    unreported cases which are not even produced. He has not even attempted
    to comply with the relevant rules for citing unreported decisions and I
    do not take them into account. Further, the most serious offence is not
    as is characterised in the skeleton argument at [49] an attempt to
    leave without paying. The conviction was for burglary.

33. The respondent's case is properly understood, that protecting the
    fundamental interests of society is a serious ground of public policy.
    I accept that may be so, but while involvement with drugs receives
    support from Tsakouridis [2010] EUECJ C-145/09 the nature of offending
    in that case is of a wholly different order from mere possession. There
    is also, I consider, a serious public policy interest in the law being
    followed and upheld. That is of relevance here to the entry in breach
    of a deportation order which undermines the rule of law as indeed does
    his persistent failure to comply with court orders. Accordingly, I am
    satisfied that on the facts of this case, serious grounds of public
    policy have been identified.

34. I turn next to whether there is a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat to a fundamental interest of society.

35. Unlike in many cases there is here no OASys report, pre-sentence
    report. There is a psychiatric report but that is focussed on PTSD
    rather than criminal behaviour. The sentencing remarks from Cambridge
    Crown Court are relatively brief, providing:

         "Having failed to comply with court orders before, in breach  of  a
         suspended sentence imposed for carrying a knife, you take part in a
         commercial burglary when you enter a shop with two  other  men  and
         load up with alcohol and cigarettes. Happily, you are observed by a
         member of the public, the police arrive, and  you  are  effectively
         caught red-handed.

         So far as the burglary is concerned, I take the view that it is the
         lower end of category 1, upper end of category 2. I will  give  you
         full credit for your pleas of guilt which will reduce the  sentence
         that would otherwise have been imposed, to one of  eight  months  i
         imprisonment ... so far as the  suspended  sentence  is  concerned,
         that should be activated in full which is eight weeks, so the total
         sentence will be eight months plus eight weeks, making, in  effect,
         a sentence of 10 month imprisonment. You will  serve  ...  half  of
         that sentence, and upon release there will be an additional  period
         of post licence supervision, when you will  be  in  a  position  to
         obtain support and  assistance  from  others.  You  would  be  well
         advised to do so, because at your age, you are on a downward  path,
         when you are obviously an intelligent young  man,  and  could  work
         hard and lead an honest and industrious life."

36. Despite that, the appellant went on not to engage properly with the
    deportation appeal process and unlawfully returned.

37. There is, I find, a thread of poor decision making running through the
    appellant's behaviour be it in associating with the wrong people first
    at school, then in becoming involved with drugs, carrying a knife,
    failing to comply with community orders, and then participating in a
    commercial burglary. It was that which resulted in him receiving an
    immediate custodial sentence.  It appears that he then complied with
    the terms of his licence, yet failed to engage with the threat of
    deportation. Reading the correspondence on file, however, I am
    concerned that the appellant who has limited education was not properly
    advised by his former lawyers. That does not excuse him, but it is
    consistent with his immaturity and poor decision making skills, as does
    his remaining in Portugal for only a week before returning irregularly.



38. The appellant says that he is sorry for his criminal offending, but in
    his most recent statement says nothing about what insight he has
    developed into that, or why he would not be tempted again into crime
    and poor decision making.

39. That said, his crimes are at a relatively low level. There is no
    indication of him dealing in drugs; rather, his offending is indicative
    of anti-social and disruptive behaviour until the more serious offence
    of burglary. That, again, is at a relatively low category as shown by
    the length of sentence and I bear in mind the judge's sentencing
    remarks set out above and the admonition that he should comply with his
    licence which he did.

40. While the appellant did enter in breach of his deportation order, there
    is little indication of him returning to the pattern of behaviour which
    resulted in his other convictions.

41. Taking all of these factors into account, and bearing mind the finding
    above, I conclude that there is a risk that the appellant will commit
    crimes in future and it is, on the particular facts of this case,
    necessary to consider whether that risk is sufficiently serious.

42. In approaching this issue, I bear in mind the observations of Simon
    Brown LJ in B v SSHD [2000] 2 C.M.L.R. 1086 at [45]. Here, the
    appellant's clear and consistent failure to comply with court orders is
    tends to show that that there is no other means by which the
    containment of the threat the appellant presents can be achieved.

43. I bear in mind that the appellant has lawfully spent a significant part
    of his life in the United Kingdom from the age of 14 until his
    deportation in 2019, some 8 years.  I accept also that he has PTSD, and
    has little or no support from family or other connections in Portugal.
    He is, to a degree, integrated into the United Kingdom and it is,
    effectively the only "home" he has known since he was 14. His
    connection with Portugal is limited.

44. Taking into account all these factors, the relatively low level but
    persistent offending, the lack of reoffending and the needs for there
    to be serious grounds of public policy to be established, I am not
    satisfied that as at now, this appellant presents a sufficiently
    serious risk such that deportation is justified as, for these reasons,
    it has not been shown that it would on the facts be proportionate.

45. Accordingly, I allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

Addendum

46. I am asked to consider the respondent's conduct of this appeal.  It is
    not for the Upper Tribunal to make an assessment of whether there has
    been maladministration; that is for any complaints or ombudsman
    process. I therefore decline to consider this issue or make findings
    thereon.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and 1set it aside.




 2. 1 remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on EU grounds.


Signed                                  Date 12 November 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

