
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00630/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2018                            |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Aivaras Malisavskas
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent did not appear and was not
represented
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    deport him. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought on divers
    grounds  including  that  removal  would  be  "incompatible  with   the
    [claimant's] rights under the European Convention on Human Rights"  and
    the "decision breaches rights which the [claimant] has as a  member  of
    an EEA National's family under Community Treaties".

 2. The claimant is a  national  of  Lithuania  and  is  therefore  an  EEA
    national. The sole permitted ground of appeal was  that  the  "decision
    breached the [claimant]'s rights under the EU treaties  in  respect  of
    entry to or residence in the United Kingdom" (see  Schedule  2  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016).  Additionally
    the  claimant  had  been  sent  a  notice  under  section  120  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and so a  ground  alleging
    that the removal of the claimant would be unlawful under section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998 was a matter to be considered  (see  Schedule
    2).

 3. In short the First-tier Tribunal was  required  to  decide  the  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds.

 4. At the end of the Decision and Reasons under  the  heading  "Notice  of
    Decision" the judge allowed the appeal "under Article 8 of the ECHR".

 5. At paragraph 45 the judge found the decision to deport the Applicant to
    be  "not  proportionate  or  in  accordance  with  the  principles   of
    Regulations 27(5) and (6)". I take this to be a decision to  allow  the
    appeal on "EEA grounds". The Secretary of State's grounds  seem  to  be
    drawn on that assumption so I have decided the appeal on the assumption
    that is what was done.

 6. The claimant had been represented by  786  Law  Associates  but  on  24
    October they sent by facsimile a letter to the  Tribunal  stating  they
    were "writing to inform you that, we are no longer  the  representative
    of the abovenamed  client  (Aivaras  Malisavskas)".   The  letter  then
    identified the hearing on 25 October 2018 at Field House.

 7. It  is  therefore  plain  beyond  argument  that  the  claimant's  then
    representatives had received notice of the hearing and that meant  that
    the claimant at least had constructive knowledge of  the  hearing.  The
    papers show that notice had been sent to his address for service. There
    was no application for  an  adjournment  and  in  the  circumstances  I
    decided to continue in the claimant's absence.

 8. The decisions to allow the appeals with reference to Article 8  of  the
    ECHR and under the 2016 Regulations must be looked at separately.  They
    provoke different criticisms and different observations.

 9. I have concluded that although I find the decision to allow the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds unsatisfactory for reasons  that  I  will  explain
    later, the decision to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Regulations  is
    lawful.

10. The Secretary of State's  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  is
    explained in a letter dated 16 October 2017.

11. The letter  noted  that  the  claimant  was  cautioned  for  possessing
    cannabis resin in June 2015.  The letter  then  says  that  "between  8
    February 2017 and 30 August 2017 you received three convictions in  the
    UK for twelve offences". This is not accurate English.  I  deduce  from
    context that the Secretary of State meant that the  claimant  had  been
    convicted of offences on three occasions in that period.  I  also  note
    with surprise the reference to the claimant having been  convicted  "of
    two counts of handling stolen goods" when it is quite plain that  there
    was no indictment here because the offences  were  dealt  with  in  the
    Magistrates' Court. Without in any way seeking to excuse or  trivialise
    the conduct complained of the claimant's misbehaviour is at  the  lower
    end of criminal offending.

12. Nevertheless the record shows that on 8 February 2017 he was  convicted
    of driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol for which offence he was
    fined and disqualified from driving.  On 25 April 2017 he was convicted
    of two offences of handling stolen goods for which he was sentenced  to
    sixteen weeks' imprisonment suspended for two years and  subject  to  a
    curfew requirement for three months and ordered to pay  surcharges  and
    costs.  On 30 August 2017  he  was  convicted  of  failing  to  stop  a
    mechanically propelled vehicle when required, using a  vehicle  with  a
    defective tyre and without a required test certificate, driving  whilst
    disqualified, driving a vehicle with a  defective  registration  plate,
    driving whilst uninsured and possessing a controlled drug of  class  B.
    He had cannabis or cannabis resin.  He was also  convicted  of  driving
    without due care and attention and committing  an  offence  during  the
    operational period of his suspended sentence.

13. According to the Secretary of State the claimant  "received  26  weeks'
    imprisonment". The claimant was subject  to  a  suspended  sentence  of
    imprisonment of sixteen weeks. I assume that it was  activated  and  he
    was ordered to serve a further  ten  weeks  for  the  instant  offences
    making 26 weeks in all.

14. Additionally in March  2017  he  was  cautioned  for  "two  counts"  of
    possessing an offensive weapon in a public place.

15. The claimant had not established a permanent right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom and so had a low level of protection as an EEA national.
     Nevertheless the judge reminded herself, correctly, that the  claimant
    could  not  be  deported  unless  he  posed  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    United Kingdom society".

16. The Secretary of State regarded him as a "persistent offender  who  has
    lack of respect for UK laws" (paragraph 21 of the Decision  to  make  a
    Deportation Order) that "there remains a risk of you  re-offending  and
    continuing to pose a risk of harm to the public" (paragraph 27).

17. The judge was aware that it was the Secretary of State's view that  the
    claimant had not given adequate attention to addressing  his  offending
    behaviour.  The judge heard evidence that the claimant  had  learnt  to
    abstain from alcohol and drugs and  that  he  had  undergone  offending
    behaviour courses in prison.  She also saw a certificate  showing  that
    the claimant has undergone a "blocking procedure". The translation  was
    provided  after  the  hearing  but  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    criticised the judge for admitting it. It appears to be  from  a  well-
    qualified translator and says:

         "It is prohibited to use any substances (including medicinal) which
         contain alcohol/tobacco during the prescribed period.

         Ignoring the regime may harm the health."

18. Clearly the treatment was expected (and may be intended)  to  give  the
    claimant an additional reason to abstain from alcohol and the judge was
    entitled to give it  some  weight  when  reaching  conclusions  on  the
    evidence of the claimant and of his wife that he had learned his lesson
    and had changed his ways.

19. At paragraph 38 of her Decision and Reasons the judge said:

         "The [claimant] stated in oral evidence that he  has  overcome  his
         drug addiction and/or issues with alcohol.  He is of the view  that
         he is not likely to revert to  using  drugs  and/alcohol  upon  his
         release from prison and he now realises how much he has to lose  by
         reverting to  his  previous  ways.   He  is  adamant  that  he  has
         successfully addressed the issues that prompted him to  offend  and
         he presents no risk of reoffending or harm  to  the  public,  or  a
         section of the public."

20. The judge also reminded herself of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal
    in the case known as Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 about the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation but I agree with the Secretary of State that that is not
    relevant in the case of someone who has  not  established  a  permanent
    right to remain in the United Kingdom.  I do not accept that the  judge
    has materially misdirected herself by considering MC  (Essa  principles
    recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520.   I  am  not  sure  why  the  judge
    referred to Essa at all except that  it  did  feature  in  the  refusal
    letter.  It was not part  of  her  reasoning  in  concluding  that  the
    claimant did not present a "genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat".

21. At paragraph 45 the judge said:

         "The [claimant] has  committed  criminal  offences  in  the  United
         Kingdom but there [is] no evidence to prove that it is a real  risk
         and that he may reoffend in the future.  The  [claimant]  has  made
         representations and I have taken account of these.  I find that the
         [claimant] does  not  pose  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of  society.   I
         find that the [claimant's] deportation  is  not  justified  on  the
         grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
         accordance with Regulation 23(6)(b).  I have  carefully  considered
         the [claimant's] personal circumstances and find that the  decision
         to deport him is  not  proportionate  or  in  accordance  with  the
         principles of Regulations 27(5) and (6)."

22. I remind myself that I am not deciding the appeal of the  claimant.   I
    am deciding if the First-tier Tribunal misdirected itself or  otherwise
    reached an  irrational  or  unlawful  conclusion  as  asserted  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds.  The direction is adequate and I have  to
    say after reflection that the conclusion  is  permissible.   The  judge
    believed the evidence.  She  believed  the  claimant's  own  assurances
    about his future behaviour which were supported by the evidence of  his
    wife and, she found, supported to some extent by the medical  evidence.
    She accepted that the claimant had attended a course  that  had  caused
    him to rethink his conduct.

23. The grounds complain that the Judge did not attempt to "scrutinise" the
    claimant's evidence but that is the  point  of  an  oral  hearing.  The
    Secretary of State was represented and, presumably,  the  claimant  was
    cross-examined.  The  grounds  do  not  aver  that  the  judge  ignored
    evidence.

24. I have reflected very carefully on this and on the grounds  and  on  Mr
    Duffy's measured and realistic submissions.

25. He echoed the Secretary of State's grounds and argued that the  finding
    that the claimant was not a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat to one of the fundamental interests of society" was perverse. It
    is not. It is reasoned and is based primarily but  not  exclusively  on
    oral evidence that the respondent tested. At the distant vantage  point
    of the Upper Tribunal the decision might seem generous but that may not
    have been my view if I had heard the evidence. That  does  not  matter.
    The decision was open to the judge.

26. I cannot say that this decision is unlawful.  It follows therefore that
    the appeal was allowed for a proper reason and the Secretary of State's
    appeal against that should be dismissed.

27. That said, I make it plain that the judge's approach to Article  8  was
    entirely wrong.  Human rights were in issue because they were raised in
    response to a Section 120 notice. The judge was required to apply  Part
    5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 because  that  is
    what section 117A requires but the judge's reason for finding  that  it
    helped the claimant are wrong.

28. The Secretary of State clearly decided that the claimant was a  foreign
    criminal.  He has not been sentenced to at least 12 months imprisonment
    and his offences have not caused "serious harm"  so  that  status  must
    depend on his being a "persistent offender". This phrase is not defined
    precisely but, following Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT
    00187 (IAC) it could include a person with the three  court  appearance
    in one year that this claimant achieved, even  if  he  has  not  turned
    around his life.

29. Certainly the First-tier Tribunal did not  decide  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the claimant is not a foreign offender but on the basis that
    he is a foreign criminal with a subsisting parental relationship.

30. However the claimant's child is clearly not a "qualifying child" within
    s117C(5) as she is not a British citizen or a child with at least seven
    years continuous residence. It is not  appropriate  to  ask  if  it  is
    "unduly harsh" for her to remove or live without him. The judge  should
    have been asking  if  the  consequences  of  removal  would  have  been
    proportionate. In fairness, this might be what the judge did.  Such  an
    approach can be read into paragraph 58 of the Decision and Reasons.

31. Clearly the judge found it in the best interests of child to remain  in
    the United Kingdom where she will now have started school in  the  care
    of her mother and her step father the claimant.  Given  the  relatively
    low level of the claimant's offending and the clear finding that he has
    given up his criminal ways it may be that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find that deportation would be a disproportionate interference with the
    private and family lives of the claimant's close family but that is not
    what the judge did.

32. However, given that I have concluded that the  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under the regulation is lawful any  error  of  approach  in  the
    decision to all the appeal on human rights grounds is immaterial.

    Decision

33. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 November 2018                |



