
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00445/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Julian Fabian Maylor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U R Sood, instructed by Trent Centre for Human
Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Julian Fabian Maylor, was born on 18 June 1990 and is  a
    male citizen of  Jamaica.   He  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 28  February  2014  to  deport  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly; Mrs S A Hussain JP)  in
    a determination promulgated on 20 October 2014, dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Attempts were made on the morning of 26 October  2015  to  produce  the
    appellant at court in Bradford.  However, the prison  authorities  (HMP
    Armley) notified the Tribunal by telephone that the appellant's violent
    conduct that morning was such that the officers were  not  prepared  to
    convey him to court.  Ms Sood, for the appellant, agreed that the error
    of law hearing should proceed in the appellant's absence.

 3. First, the appellant asserts that the First-tier Tribunal perpetrated a
    procedural irregularity.  Ms Sood submitted that, at the outset of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Presenting Officer (Mr Archibald)  had
    attempted to address the court in order to amend (more particularly, to
    delete) certain passages in the decision letter of the respondent which
    is dated 28 February 2014.  At [43], the author of the  refusal  letter
    noted that the appellant had "no known medical conditions and  you  are
    not on medication."  It is accepted by the parties that  the  appellant
    suffers from mild autism.  More seriously, although the decision letter
    noted that the appellant had been charged with a further  crime  whilst
    in prison (murder) and was awaiting trial for that offence at the  date
    of writing of the decision letter, at [132] the respondent wrote,

         "As noted above you were  charged  with  a  murder  offence  on  25
         February 2014 for which you are currently awaiting trial.  The fact
         you  have  reoffended  without  being  deterred  by  your  previous
         conviction or sentence indicates you have a lack of regard for  the
         law, a lack of remorse for your offending behaviour and a  lack  of
         understanding of the negative impact your offending  behaviour  has
         on others.  The fact that this offence was committed in the highly-
         controlled prison environment indicates a disregard  for  authority
         and failure to engage with the rehabilitation process."

    That statement is outrageous by any standard.  The author of the letter
    has conflated the fact that the appellant had  been  charged  with  the
    offence of murder with  his  conviction  for  that  offence  which  was
    entirely uncertain (as  the  letter  acknowledges)  in  February  2014;
    indeed, by the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing,  the  appellant
    had been acquitted of murder, a  fact  known  to  all  present  at  the
    Tribunal hearing.

 4. However, notwithstanding  that  egregious  statement  in  the  decision
    letter, the question remains whether the First-tier Tribunal has  erred
    in  law.   First,  the  Tribunal  has  not  repeated  in  any  way  the
    misunderstanding of the criminal  judicial  process  indicated  in  the
    decision letter.  Secondly, the appellant had  committed  an  extremely
    serious sexual offence for which he had received a sentence  in  excess
    of six years' imprisonment.  Obviously, what the decision letter states
    in the passage which I have quoted above must be disregarded whilst the
    question of the appellant's mild autism (although omitted from  mention
    in the decision letter) was considered by the First-tier Tribunal.   Ms
    Sood complained that, because the judge did not  allow  the  Presenting
    Officer to finish making his submissions regarding the decision letter,
    her client did not know the true nature of the case  against  which  he
    had to argue.  I do not agree.  As I  have  said,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been acquitted of murder was known  to  everyone  at  the
    Tribunal hearing and the Tribunal itself properly  considered  all  the
    relevant evidence and reached a conclusion which was plainly  available
    to it on that evidence.  To that extent, the  errors  of  approach  and
    reasoning in the decision  letter  have  not  infected  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in any way.  I cannot see  that,  for  the  reasons
    asserted, the appellant or Ms Sood were  at  any  disadvantage  in  the
    presentation of the appellant's case. In particular, I reject Ms Sood's
    submission that justice was denied  because  she  was  unable  to  take
    instructions from her client after the Presenting Officer had attempted
    to withdraw the offending passages of the decision  letter.   I  cannot
    accept that the appellant's case would have been in any  way  different
    from that presented by  Ms  Sood  had  such  instructions  been  taken.
    Notwithstanding the obvious error in the decision  letter,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, by contrast, reached  a  decision  on  the  basis  of  a
    consideration of the relevant evidence before it.

 5. The grounds also assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  wrong  to
    conclude that the fact of the appellant's  conviction  for  the  sexual
    offence  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  not  cause  him   significant
    difficulties upon return to Jamaica.  The grounds  [10]  refer  to  the
    ability of the Ministry of National  Security  in  Jamaica  (under  the
    provisions of  the  Criminal  Justice  (Administration)  Act  1960)  to
    declare deported migrants  returning  to  the  country  as  "restricted
    persons" if he/she reasonably believes that  such  individuals  may  be
    considered a threat to the nation.  The designation of an individual as
    a "restricted person" appears to involve registration with a government
    office in order to track the whereabouts of the individual.  It is  not
    clear to me that this background material was ever put before the First-
    tier Tribunal or, indeed, that the grounds show that the  Tribunal  had
    made any error. It is not clear at all that  a requirement to  register
    with the Jamaican authorities on return would expose the  appellant  to
    risk or otherwise render his return not in accordance with the law. The
    Tribunal was not satisfied [33] that there would be  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Jamaican  society.   The
    Tribunal was also right to note that, even if such obstacles did exist,
    the appeal should still be dismissed.  The Tribunal noted that the,

         "... sentence of imprisonment exceeded the four year  threshold  by
         some considerable margin, and there would thus  need  to  be  'very
         compelling circumstances' that are 'over and above' those  that  we
         have just considered if the public interest in deportation is to be
         outweighed by other factors ..."

    I am satisfied that (i) the material regarding registration was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal which reached a legally sound decision  in  the
    light of the material (ii) alternatively, the material was  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. In consequence, the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not err by failing to consider it  or  (iii)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to have regard to the material in which case and for the reasons
    I have given the Tribunal did not perpetrate an error of law such  that
    its decision falls to be set aside.

    I am also satisfied that it was entirely open to the Tribunal to reject
    the personal circumstances of the appellant submitted by  Ms  Sood  (in
    particular, the appellant's relationship with his father in the  United
    Kingdom)  as  not  constituting  "a   very   compelling   circumstance"
    justifying a grant of leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 6.  The  Tribunal  also  dealt  at  length  with  the  argument  that  the
    appellant's deportation was  voided  by  reason  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's failure to ensure the presence of an "appropriate adult" at the
    appellant's asylum interview.  The Tribunal noted [36] that  no  issues
    as to the credibility of  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  at  that
    interview had been engaged in  the  deportation  appeal  (the  Tribunal
    records that the interview was not even referred to  at  the  hearing).
    Likewise,  I  consider  that  the  Tribunal  has  dealt  correctly  and
    adequately at [37] with the alleged failure of the  public  authorities
    to abide by Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010.  It appears that  the
    appellant's argument was that this  duty  required  the  respondent  to
    obtain  an  up-to-date  report  concerning  the  appellant's   autistic
    condition.  As the Tribunal noted, there was nothing to  indicate  that
    that condition is progressive [37].  I entirely agree with the Tribunal
    that  the  Equality  Act  (or,  indeed,  any  other  provision)  should
    necessarily compel the respondent in an appeal of this sort  to  obtain
    evidence as to the appellant's medical condition  which  the  appellant
    himself might adduce, especially when  any  medical  condition  is  not
    progressive.

 7. Further, the appellant asserts that the Tribunal failed to have  proper
    regard to the evidence of the expert (Mr Sobers) who  considered  there
    was a significant risk that  the  appellant  would  be  destitute  upon
    return to Jamaica.  This ground is nothing  more  than  a  disagreement
    with the findings of  the  Tribunal.   The  appellant  asserts  in  the
    grounds of appeal that there was "credible evidence" that he would  not
    obtain family or other support upon return to  Jamaica.   The  Tribunal
    dealt with the question of  destitution  at  [32].   The  Tribunal  was
    entitled to find that the appellant would  have  continued  to  receive
    financial support from his father in the United  Kingdom  whilst  other
    family members could also offer support.  The Jamaican Government would
    also assist in helping the appellant to find family and friends as well
    as in providing training and advice to the  appellant  as  a  returning
    deportee.

 8. Finally, there was a general allegation regarding the  conduct  of  the
    Tribunal at the hearing.  There was a witness  statement  from  Mr  Ali
    Zaki a solicitor who attended the First-tier Tribunal hearing  with  Ms
    Sood.  Mr Zaki states that Judge Kelly was "just as abrasive [as]  some
    of the more difficult criminal judges" before  whom  he  had  appeared.
    However, nothing in the statement indicates that the Tribunal  (and  in
    particular Judge Kelly who chaired it) prevented Ms Sood  from  putting
    the appellant's case nor did the Tribunal prevent evidence being  given
    on the appellant's behalf.  To suggest that the judge was "abrasive" or
    "difficult" does not provide any basis for this  Tribunal  to  conclude
    that the proceedings were vitiated  by  misconduct  on  the  Tribunal's
    part.  The proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal are a matter  for
    the Tribunal itself and, in this instance, I cannot find that, even  if
    I were to accept  that  Judge  Kelly  interrupted  the  representatives
    during their submissions, that the Tribunal was acting other than in  a
    robust but entirely fair manner.  I was also concerned  that  there  is
    attached  to  Mr  Zaki's  statement  a  letter  apparently   from   the
    appellant's father which is addressed "Dear sirs" but which contains no
    address to which it may have been sent nor is it dated or signed by the
    author.  The letter (which is headed "Complaint about the judge of  the
    Immigration Tribunal") gives every indication of having been written to
    an  authority  (for  example,  the  Office  for  Judicial  Complaints).
    However, Ms Sood told me that no such complaint had ever been made  and
    that the letter was, in effect, a form of statement by the  appellant's
    father.  I have to say that anyone reading the letter would  reasonably
    conclude that a complaint had been made and I find the presentation  of
    evidence in this manner to be highly misleading.

 9. In conclusion, I find that the appellant was given an entirely fair and
    even-handed hearing before the Tribunal in Bradford on 1  October  2014
    and that that Tribunal has produced a decision, supported by clear  and
    cogent reasons, which was plainly available  to  it  on  the  evidence.
    There was no suggestion at all that the Tribunal has accepted erroneous
    statements made in the decision letter or that the appellant was in any
    way disadvantaged if, as may have been the case, the Presenting Officer
    did not withdraw passages from the letter.  Accordingly, the appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
