
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00102/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Via Skype)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2021                      |On 20 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AYOB TAREY
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain instructed by Cartwright King Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Athwall ('the Judge') promulgated on 8 December
        2020, in which the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal against the
        order of his deportation from the United Kingdom.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands, and therefore an EEA
        national, born on 28 February 2000 who  entered  the  UK  aged  two
        months with his mother.
     3. The Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny setting out findings of  fact  from  [36]  of  the
        decision  under  challenge.  The  Judge   found   the   appellant's
        integration into the United Kingdom had  been  broken  but  it  was
        accepted by the Presenting Officer that the appellant had  obtained
        a permanent right of residence.
     4. The core finding of the Judge is  at  [53],  forming  part  of  the
        assessment of threat posed by the  appellant  in  which  the  Judge
        writes:

             "I have balanced all the factors and whilst I find that whilst
             the offending behaviour, because of the nature  of  the  index
             offence and the offences taken into  consideration,  is  of  a
             greater seriousness. I do not find  based  on  the  sentencing
             judge's remarks and OASys reports that the Appellant  poses  a
             genuine and present threat.  The  Appellant  has  demonstrated
             that he started  to  engage  with  the  probation  and  prison
             services in June 2019 and  has  continued  since.  He  has  an
             extremely supportive family who have provided him with stable,
             accommodation,  financial  and  emotional  support  since   he
             committed the index offence. It  is  extremely  unlikely  that
             they will remove that support now and that means  the  changes
             in  circumstances  that  would  cause  him  to  reoffend   are
             unlikely."

     5. The findings that the appellant poses no  risk  of  reoffending  is
        fatal to the Secretary of State's case in EU law. Accordingly,  the
        Judge finds that whilst the  respondent  must  establish  that  the
        expulsion decision  complies  with  the  requirements  set  out  in
        regulation 27(5) the respondent had failed to do so, leading to the
        appeal being allowed.
     6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  the  grounds  were  simply  a
        disagreement with the findings the Judge was entitled to  make  but
        granted by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a  renewed  application.  The
        operative part of that grant been in the following terms:

             "Whilst the grounds of  appeal  come  fairly  close  to  being
             disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of risk
             and the weight to be attributed to the evidence before it,  it
             is just arguable  that  there  has  been  a  failure  to  give
             adequate reasons for  the  conclusions  reached,  particularly
             given the risk factors and assessment in the OASys report  and
             the same family and  financial circumstances at  the  time  of
             offending."

     7. The Court of Appeal have recently reminded  us  that  an  appellate
        judge should not grant permission to appeal or find  error  of  law
        because they or a party disagree with the decision made or  because
        another judge may have arrived at a different outcome. There  is  a
        need to identify a genuine legal error  material  to  the  decision
        under challenge. The Judge in this appeal  clearly  considered  the
        evidence relied upon by both parties with the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny. It is not made out the weight the Judge  gave  to
        any aspect of the evidence is irrational. It is not  made  out  the
        Judge did not understand  the  law  or  failed  to  apply  the  law
        correctly. The Judge's  assessment  that  the  appellant  poses  no
        ongoing  risk  is  a   factual   assessment   based   upon   proper
        consideration of  the  evidence.  Whilst  the  Secretary  of  State
        disagrees with that conclusion it is not made out it is  a  finding
        outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the
        evidence.
     8. If the appellant commits further offences the Judge will  be  shown
        to be wrong, but that is not the situation that exists at the  date
        of the hearing. If the appellant does, he  is  more  likely  to  be
        deported following the changes  to  the  deportation  regime  as  a
        result of the UK leaving the European Union.
     9. I am not satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State  has  established
        arguable legal error material to the decision to allow the  appeal,
        such as to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering  any  further  in
        this matter.


Decision

    10. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 9 April 2021












