


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00667/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Nottingham Magistrates    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Court                                |                                     |
|On : 13 May 2015                     |On 20 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                george dennis
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Lane, instructed by Rodman Pearce Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Dennis's appeal  against
the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Dennis  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 27 November  1965.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom together with his sister in November  1979,  aged  11,
with a settlement visa to join his father. On 7 June 2011 he  was  convicted
of committing gross indecency with a child and indecent assault on a  female
and was sentenced to 40 months (three years and four  months)  imprisonment.
His custodial sentence ended on 4  February  2012  and  from  that  time  he
remained detained under Immigration Service powers. On 21 September 2011  he
was notified of  his  liability  to  deportation.  That  was  re-sent  on  7
December 2012 as he claimed not to have received  the  notification.   On  4
October 2013 the appellant claimed that his  deportation  would  breach  his
Article 8 human rights.

On 1 April 2014 a deportation order was made against the appellant and on  8
April 2014 he was served with a  decision  that  section  32(5)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007 applied.

The respondent, in making  that  decision,  noted  that  the  appellant  had
amassed 10 convictions for 31 offences from October 1987  until  June  2011,
including 5 offences against the  person  (2004-2009);  17  sexual  offences
(2011); 6 theft and kindred offences (1987-1999); 1 public disorder  offence
(2009); 1 offence relating to  police/courts/prisons  (1990);  and  1  drugs
offence (1987). Consideration was given to the appellant's Article 8  claim.
The respondent considered that, since the appellant did not have  a  partner
or children, he did not meet the requirements of paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)
of the immigration rules. The respondent  considered  further  that,  whilst
the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for more  than  20  years,  he
could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A since he retained ties  to
Ghana. It was not accepted that there  were  very  compelling  circumstances
which outweighed the public interest  in  his  deportation.  The  respondent
accordingly concluded that the  appellant's  deportation  would  not  breach
Article 8. The respondent also considered Article 3  on  the  basis  of  the
appellant's  medical   condition   and   his   diagnosis   as   a   paranoid
schizophrenic, but concluded that treatment was available to him in Ghana.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 14 July 2014 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa.  The
judge noted that the appellant claimed to have no family ties in  Ghana  and
to have returned there on only one occasion in 1988  and  further  that  his
whole family including his father and siblings  were  British  citizens  and
lived in  the  United  Kingdom.  She  took  note  of  the  medical  evidence
confirming that he was suffering from paranoid  schizophrenia  and  that  he
had been receiving care for his mental illness in the United  Kingdom  since
1996, but concluded that his deportation would not  breach  his  Articles  2
and 3 human rights. However she allowed the  appeal  under  the  immigration
rules on the basis that the requirements of paragraph 399A had been met.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that  the  judge  had  materially  misdirected  herself  in  law  by
allowing the appeal under paragraph 399A, in  light  of  her  findings  that
there were extended family members living in Ghana, albeit  that  there  was
no contact with them.

Permission to appeal was granted on 18 August 2014.

The appeal came before me on 13 May 2015.  I heard submissions on the  error
of law and advised the parties that in my view the judge had  erred  in  law
in her consideration of paragraph 399A.

It was not a matter of dispute before  the  judge  that  the  appellant  had
resided in the United Kingdom for more  than  20  years  and  therefore  the
relevant question, in considering paragraph 399A,  was  whether  or  not  he
retained any ties to Ghana.

At  paragraph  47  of  her  decision,  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  found  that  the
appellant had extended family members living in  Ghana.  She  accepted  that
there was no continuing contact with those family  members,  but  considered
that that did not mean that contact could not be  established  in  order  to
derive support from them in addition to  the  financial  assistance  of  the
family members in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  the  event  of  the  appellant
returning to Ghana. Although that finding was made in  the  context  of  the
appellant's Articles 2 and 3 human rights claim, it was plainly relevant  to
her findings on Article 8 when considering the  appellant's  ties  to  Ghana
for the purposes of paragraph 399A of the immigration rules.

However,  when  considering  paragraph  399A,  the   judge,   applying   the
principles in Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60,
concluded that the appellant had  no  "continuing  connection"  to  life  in
Ghana, having been there only once since entering  the  United  Kingdom,  in
1988, and having no contact with his extended family. It seems  to  me  that
that was not a sustainable conclusion, given her finding at paragraph 47  of
her decision. That is particularly so  when  considering  the  clarification
and guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE;
suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT  00042  in  circumstances  similar  to  those
arising in this appellant's case. At paragraphs 15 and 16 of that case,  the
Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was  at  odds
with Strasbourg jurisprudence which required that an assessment of ties  had
an objective as well as a subjective dimension and that that assessment  had
to consider what lay within the choice of a claimant to achieve and  whether
dormant ties could be revived.  It  seems  to  me  that,  in  light  of  her
findings at paragraph 47 of her decision, Judge Gurung-Thapa made  the  same
error  as  that  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Bossadi  in  making  her
assessment of ties in relation to the appellant and  that  her  findings  on
paragraph 399A therefore cannot stand and must be set aside.

Having found that the requirements of paragraph 399A were met, Judge Gurung-
Thapa did not go on to make  any  findings  on  "exceptional  circumstances"
pursuant to paragraph 398 and, as such, relevant findings need to  be  made.
It is also the case, however, that since the  judge's  decision  there  have
been significant changes  to  the  immigration  rules,  including  paragraph
399A, and the principles relating to deportation, which must now be  applied
in the appellant's case in re-making the decision. Accordingly there has  to
be a fresh consideration of the appellant's Article 8  claim,  applying  the
new rules and the new statutory provisions in Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. For those reasons Mr  Mills  accepted  that
the decision could not simply be re-made in the Upper Tribunal but that  the
case ought properly to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Accordingly the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
appellant's Article 8 claim to  be  considered  afresh.  As  agreed  by  the
parties, the  findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  are  to  be
preserved. That is, of course, subject to findings made on any new  evidence
produced for  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge's
decision in relation to Articles  2  and  3  has  not  been  challenged  and
therefore stands. It is for the First-tier Tribunal to make  fresh  findings
in regard to paragraphs 399A and 398 of the rules.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  respect  to
Article 8 and the Immigration Rules involved the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law. The decision is set aside.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal, pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2,  to  be  dealt
with afresh, before any judge aside from Judge Gurung-Thapa.






                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
