
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-v4

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2015                   |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           Anthony Peter Phillips
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adams, instructed by D H Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He appealed to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  7
    April 2014 to make a deportation order against  him.   The  appeal  was
    allowed, but subsequently  a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    concluded that the matter was to  be  remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Hence the hearing before me today.

2.   The appellant last entered the United Kingdom on 18 August 1999 with  a
    six month visit visa.  He did not regularise his  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom until 5th April 2002 when his wife applied for leave to  remain
    as a work permit holder and included him in her application.  They  had
    married in 1985 and have four children who were  born  respectively  in
    1981, 1988, 1993 and 2000.  All  the  family  were  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 21 October 2009.

3.   On 25 February 2013 the appellant  was  convicted  at  Southwark  Crown
    Court of conspiracy to acquire/use/possess criminal  property  and  was
    sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.

4.   The panel noted the judge's sentencing remarks at which time the  judge
    said among other things that this was a very serious offence  of  money
    laundering.  In evidence the appellant did not  accept  his  guilt  and
    said he had been  wrongly  advised  not  to  appeal  the  sentence  and
    conviction and had instructed solicitors to consider whether an out  of
    time appeal against his conviction could be lodged.  He was regarded as
    being of low risk by the Probation Service.

5.   It was common ground that the appellant's youngest  son,  P,  is  cared
    for by both the appellant and his wife.  In the refusal letter  it  was
    accepted that it would not be reasonable to  expect  P  who  had  never
    lived anywhere other than the United Kingdom to accompany his father to
    live in Nigeria.  It was found that it was in  P's  best  interests  to
    live with both of his parents.  It was accepted that  he  had  a  close
    relationship with his father who took him to  sporting  activities  and
    provided him with emotional support and advice.  During the period when
    the appellant was in prison, P continued to be cared for by his  mother
    and was supported by his siblings, who are  all  adults,  although  the
    Tribunal accepted that this support was not at the same  level  as  the
    support provided by his father.

6.    The  appellant's  wife  has  significant  health  problems.   She  was
    diagnosed with thyroid cancer in 2003.  In 2010 she was diagnosed  with
    spinal tuberculosis of the lower back, and she  developed  lymphoma  of
    the right eye in 2013.  The appellant became a registered carer of  his
    wife.  Since he came out of  prison  he  had  resumed  caring  for  her
    although he was no longer a registered carer.  While he was  in  prison
    his wife was cared for by her children with help from other  relatives.
    There are a number of close relatives in the United  Kingdom  including
    the appellant's nieces and nephews who  live  close  by  and  also  the
    children of his sister who died in 2010, and also his wife's sister who
    lives close by and with whom she has a good relationship.

7.   In medical evidence from the appellant's GP, dated 9 May 2014,  it  was
    said among other  things  that  the  appellant's  wife  would  find  it
    difficult to look after her son P on her own and that if she  does  not
    get help from her husband  she  will  deteriorate  quite  rapidly  both
    mentally and physically.  There was also a letter from a consultant  in
    palliative medicine, dated 16 May 2013, in which it was said  that  Mrs
    Phillips is mobile,  independent  and  can  manage  independently  even
    though there is still some  pain  and  she  takes  medication  for  her
    various conditions.  The panel found that  although  in  2013  she  was
    mobile and could manage to some extent independently,  nonetheless  she
    continued to take medication including medication for pain  relief  and
    presently remained reasonably mobile although there were some days when
    her pain was worse than  on  other  days  and  she  had  developed  eye
    problems for which she attended Moorfields Hospital.

8.   The panel went on to accept that the appellant provides good  care  for
    his wife both physically  and  emotionally.   It  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's claim that he did not know where other siblings than two he
    had referred to lived and considered that he had attempted to  distance
    himself from all his relatives in Nigeria.  It was also  accepted  that
    the appellant has a close relationship with his nephew S and is  viewed
    as a father figure by all the children of  his  deceased  sister.   The
    panel also accepted Mrs Phillips' evidence and the appellant's evidence
    that whilst she was able to cope well on some  days  there  were  other
    days when she was not able to cope well without help, and  that  spinal
    tuberculosis could be a debilitating illness.

9.   Those are the essential findings of fact  which  require  to  be  taken
    into account as the factual basis to which the legal tests have  to  be
    applied.

10.  In his submissions Mr Adams argued that in light  of  the  findings  of
    fact by the panel it would be unduly harsh for P or Mrs Williams to  be
    expected to join the appellant in Nigeria or for them to manage without
    him if he were removed without them.  The test imposed a high threshold
    and it was a question of the severity on them  if  the  appellant  were
    removed.  It would be worse than cruel.  P had only  known  his  father
    and the mother's medical condition meant that the appellant  had  taken
    care of his son and still did so and it would  be  severe  if  he  were
    removed and P had to  depend  on  his  mother  who  was  to  an  extent
    wheelchair bound.  He had to have a father  figure  in  his  life.   He
    needed both parents.  Also bearing in mind his mother's health problems
    it would be unduly harsh for her  if  the  appellant  were  removed  to
    Nigeria.  They had been married for over  30  years  and  had  built  a
    family in the United Kingdom and that would be broken up by them having
    to live separately.

11.  In his submissions Mr Melvin argued that the  evidence  concerning  Mrs
    Phillips' mobility had been considered.  P had  been  adequately  cared
    for while his father was in prison, having been  looked  after  by  his
    mother  and  adult  siblings.   The  Immigration  Rules  represented  a
    complete code for a proportionality assessment in  a  deportation  case
    such as this.  Mr Melvin referred to the Home Office IDIs  of  28  July
    2014 concerning criminality guidance with regard  to  such  matters  as
    undue harshness and the need for there to be  compelling  circumstances
    for a spouse not to be expected to move abroad with her husband  should
    she wish to do so.  The child could visit his father in school holidays
    and keep in touch by means such as Skype or  FaceTime.   The  statutory
    context and the context of the Immigration Rules was important.  Public
    interest required there to be serious  circumstances  for  this  to  be
    outweighed and they did not exist in this case.  The  appellant's  wife
    had spent nearly 40 years in Nigeria so there  was  little  by  way  of
    insurmountable obstacles to her returning there.   The  fact  that  the
    quality of treatment might be less and that she would not obtain  state
    benefits was of little weight in the undue harshness  assessment.   The
    offence was a very serious one.  There was a powerful  public  interest
    and it would be harsh but not unduly harsh for the child if his  father
    were removed to Nigeria.

12.  By way of reply Mr Adams argued that  the  adverse  credibility  points
    made by the judge were irrelevant to the central issues  in  the  case.
    Lee, which had been referred to in Mr Melvin's  skeleton,  was  a  more
    serious case and it was a matter of looking at the case on  the  facts.
    There were no meaningful contacts in Nigeria for the family and it  was
    clear that the wife could not go to Nigeria with  her  husband,  having
    said so.  They did not even have a house to go to  there  and  she  had
    serious health problems.  The fact that  people  travelled  voluntarily
    around the world was not the same as being required  to  go  without  a
    choice.  The fact of parental integration did not mean that it would be
    the same for their son, and the section 55 issues were important.

13.  I reserved my determination.

14.  The background  to  this  appeal  is  to  be  found  in  the  automatic
    deportation provisions in the UK  Borders  Act  2007  which  states  at
    section 32 that where an individual is a foreign criminal  i.e.  not  a
    British citizen, and has been convicted of an offence and sentenced  to
    a term of imprisonment of at least twelve months, they are  subject  to
    automatic deportation unless one of the exceptions in section 33 of the
    Act applies.  For the  purposes  of  the  instant  case  the  important
    exception is exception 1 in section 33(2) i.e. where the removal of the
    foreign criminal pursuant to the  deportation  order  would  breach  an
    individual's Convention rights protected by the Human Rights Act  1998.
    The relevant Convention right in this  case  is  of  course  Article  8
    involving the right to respect for an individual's private  and  family
    life.

15.  From 9 July 2012 paragraphs 396 to 400 of HC 395 seek to  set  out  the
    weight to be given to the public interest in deportation cases where an
    individual relies on his private or family life  under  Article  8  and
    these provisions were further amended by HC 532  with  effect  from  28
    July 2014.  These apply to this case.

16.  There is a presumption set out in paragraph 396,  that  it  is  in  the
    public interest to deport where a person is liable to deportation.   Of
    further relevance is paragraph 398(b).   This  states  that  where  the
    deportation of a person from the United Kingdom  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest because they have been convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of less than four years but at least  twelve  months,  the
    Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does not the public interest in
    deportation will only be outweighed by other factors  where  there  are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and  399A.   Paragraph  399(a)  is  concerned  with  the
    situation  where  a  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child under the age of  18  years  who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom, and paragraph 399(b) applies where  the  person  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United
    Kingdom.  In both these cases, and this provision is applicable to  the
    facts of the case before me, the relevant test, cutting to the  detail,
    is whether it would be unduly harsh for P to live in Nigeria and unduly
    harsh for him to remain in the United Kingdom without his  father,  and
    in respect of Mrs Phillips, whether it would be unduly harsh for her to
    live in Nigeria because of  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM and it would be unduly
    harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom  without  the  Appellant.
    It was because of the failure of the First-tier  panel  to  apply  this
    test correctly that the matter comes before me.  I  have  set  out  the
    findings of fact of the  First-tier  Tribunal  above,  and  no  further
    evidence has been adduced to take matters any further.   The  issue  of
    what is meant by "unduly harsh" has been considered by the Tribunal  in
    a number of cases recently, in particular in MK [2015] UKUT 223  (IAC),
    BM and Others [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC), MAB [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC) and  KMO
    [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).  In general there is agreement that the  words
    do not, as was said in MK,  equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
    undesirable, unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging but  pose  a
    considerably more elevated threshold in that "harsh"  in  this  context
    denotes something severe or  bleak  and  the  addition  of  the  adverb
    "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still higher.  As was said
    in MAB, endorsed in KMO, consequences for an individual will be "harsh"
    if they are "severe" or "bleak" and they will be "unduly"  so  if  they
    are "inordinately" or "excessively" harsh taking into  account  all  of
    the circumstances of the individual.

17.  There is however a disagreement between those  two  authorities  as  to
    whether, as was said in MAB, the phrase "unduly harsh" does not  import
    a balancing exercise  requiring  the  public  interest  to  be  weighed
    against the circumstances of the individual but  the  focus  is  solely
    upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact upon  the  individual
    concerned.  However in KMO it was concluded that  it  is  necessary  to
    have regard in making that assessment  to  the  matters  to  which  the
    Tribunal must have regard as a consequence of the provisions of section
    117C of the 2002 Act, in particular including  that  the  more  serious
    offence committed the greater is the public interest in deportation  of
    a foreign criminal.

18.  No doubt this disagreement will have to be resolved  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in due course.  In the instant case I  do  not  think  that  the
    difference is one of materiality on the facts  of  the  case.   If  one
    takes what may be regarded as the more lenient test, that  set  out  in
    MAB,  leaving  aside  therefore  matters  such   as   the   appellant's
    criminality and concentrating purely on the impact  on  P  and  on  Mrs
    Phillips, I do not consider that it has been shown  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh  for  them  if  the  appellant  were  removed  as  is  the
    Government's intention.  As I have set out above, it  was  accepted  in
    the refusal letter that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  P  to
    accompany his father  to  live  in  Nigeria  and  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness therefore arises in respect of his father being  removed.   P
    is 15 and has the support of his mother albeit with her health problems
    that I have set out above, but also the support of his  older  brothers
    and the other family members including  his  mother's  sister  and  his
    cousins.  He would be able to keep in touch with his father by means of
    visits, telephone calls, letters, Skype and similar means.  This is,  I
    readily accept, very far from being the same  thing  as  being  in  the
    presence on a day-to-day basis of his father, but the test, as  I  have
    set out above, is a high one.  It would  as  Mr  Melvin  suggested,  be
    harsh, but not, in my judgment, unduly harsh.  As  Sedley  LJ  said  in
    Lee, that is what deportation does.

19.  With regard to Mrs Phillips, bearing in mind her  health  problems  and
    the fact that it would lead her to be removed  from  the  rest  of  her
    family, I consider on balance that it would be unduly harsh for her  to
    be expected to go to Nigeria with the appellant.  However as with P,  I
    consider it would not be unduly harsh to expect her to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the appellant.  She has the support of her  sons
    and their families and her sister who provided  her  with  support  and
    assistance when the appellant was in prison, and like P would  be  able
    to keep in touch with the appellant by the means that I  have  set  out
    above.  Again the consequences  for  her  would  be  harsh  but  in  my
    judgment they would not be unduly harsh.

20.  I conclude therefore that the criteria in paragraph 399  and  399A  are
    not made out in this case.

21.  Thereafter I have  to  turn  to  the  five  stage  test  in  Razgar  in
    considering Article 8 where the issue  of  proportionality  has  to  be
    considered under the test of "very compelling circumstances" as set out
    in paragraph 398.  I accept that the appellant has family life with his
    wife and certainly P, although there is an absence of evidence to  show
    family life with his grown up children.  It may be sensible however  to
    conclude in light of the panel's findings that he  enjoys  family  life
    with his nephew S.  No doubt given the amount of time he  has  been  in
    the United Kingdom he has built up a private life here.  Article 8.1 of
    the ECHR is therefore engaged.

22.  The crucial issue is whether the interference with  that  private  life
    is justified in the public interest given his offending, under  Article
    8.2.  There is no doubt that the decision is in accordance with the law
    and for a legitimate aim, namely the prevention of disorder  or  crime,
    and for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others as well  as
    the economic well-being of the country.  It is  necessary,  as  I  have
    noted above, for him to  show  "very  compelling  circumstances"  above
    those described in paragraph 399 and paragraph 399A  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of his removal.  That makes it clear  that  the  public
    interest is entitled to be given great weight where the deportation  of
    a foreign criminal falling within the automatic deportation  provisions
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 is proposed.  It was said  in  SS  (Nigeria)
    that those very compelling circumstances require a  very  strong  claim
    indeed to outweigh the public interest.  It is necessary in this regard
    to consider the best interests of P as a primary consideration  but  to
    note that those  best  interests  may  be  outweighed  by  sufficiently
    weighty matters of the public  interest.   I  acknowledge  the  panel's
    finding that it is in P's  best  interests  to  be  with  both  of  his
    parents.  The impact on P and on Mrs Phillips has to be borne in  mind.
    As set out above, I consider that all contact would  not  be  precluded
    but  that  visits,  telephone  calls,  letters   and   more   immediate
    communication by way of Skype would be available to them.  No doubt the
    appellant would find difficulties in adjusting back to life in  Nigeria
    where he has not been for some sixteen years and where it  is  said  he
    does not have a home.  I must also bear in mind the factors set out  in
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act and in particular section  117C.   First  under
    section 117C(1),  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  as  a  "foreign
    criminal" is in the public interest.  Secondly  the  more  serious  the
    offence committed by  him  the  greater  the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation and the public interest is reflected in the seriousness  of
    the offence, the expression of society's revulsion at  serial  criminal
    offending and deterring those from committing  serious  offences.   The
    offence here is clearly a serious  one,  though  he  is  not  a  serial
    offender but the deterrence element  is  a  relevant  factor.   Section
    117C(3) states that in the case of  a  foreign  criminal  such  as  the
    appellant who has not been sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of
    four years or more  the  public  interest  requires  their  deportation
    unless exception 1 or exception 2 applies.  Exception 1 does not  apply
    since the appellant has not lived lawfully in the  United  Kingdom  for
    most of his life.  Nor does exception 2  apply  since  I  have  already
    found that the effect of his deportation on his children and wife would
    not be unduly harsh.  As regards relevant factors under section 117B, I
    note that the maintenance of effective immigration control  is  in  the
    public interest.  It is in  the  public  interest  that  an  individual
    speaks English, as the appellant does.  It is in  the  public  interest
    that an individual is financially independent.  The situation  on  this
    is not clear.  In effect the  circumstances  relied  on  this  case  to
    demonstrate "very compelling circumstances" are essentially  those  set
    out at paragraph 399(a) i.e. the undue harshness upon his infant  child
    and wife of his deportation.  Bringing all these  matters  together,  I
    consider that it has not been shown  that  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those in paragraph  399(a)  and  paragraph
    399A such as to outweigh the significant and considerable weight  which
    must be given to the public interest in this appeal and  therefore  any
    interference  with  the  appellant's  private  and   family   life   is
    proportionate.  Accordingly he has failed  to  establish  a  breach  of
    Article 8, and his appeal falls to be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

