
[pic]
+
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 December 2013                              |On 16 December 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE MITTING
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              EARL DAREN RODNEY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alhadi, legal representative of Stevjeme & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Earl Daren Rodney, who we shall refer to as the  respondent,  is  a  25
    year old citizen of Jamaica.  He arrived in the United Kingdom with his
    mother and grandmother on 9 July 2001 aged 13.  He had leave to  remain
    until 31 December 2007 in the last instance as a student.

 2. On 31 October 2007 his mother applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    and included the respondent on her application, but because he  was  18
    he was told to apply in his own name.  He did not do so.   On  23  July
    2009 he did apply in his own name  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules.  On 3 May 2011 his application  was  refused  for  two  reasons,
    first stating the obvious that he was  not  a  person  covered  by  the
    Immigration Rules, and secondly he had convictions  which  he  did  not
    disclose including one for possession of cannabis on  12  October  2009
    which was not spent.  Although he was refused  leave,  no  decision  to
    remove him was made.

 3. On 8 August 2011 he participated in the ransacking of  a  hairdresser's
    in Lavender Hill during the London riots and committed as two  separate
    and distinct offences, the acquisition of criminal property on the same
    day.  He pleaded guilty to burglary and the two offences  of  acquiring
    criminal property at the earliest opportunity.  On 23 November 2011  he
    was sentenced by His Honour Judge Grobel at Inner London Crown Court to
    twenty months' imprisonment, sixteen months for the burglary  and  four
    months concurrent with each other but consecutive to that sentence  for
    the criminal property offences.  105 days spent on remand was to  count
    towards  his  sentence.   Judge  Grobel  did  not  treat  his  previous
    convictions  as  "significantly  aggravating"  factors  and  took  into
    account in his favour a clear CARAT report from the prison and his  own
    letter to the court  and  testimonials  from  those  who  knew  him  as
    "aspects of good character".

 4. Because the respondent was sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of
    less than four years but more than twelve months,  he  was  subject  to
    automatic deportation under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
    unless Exception 1 in Section 33(2) applied to  him.   On  19  December
    2011 the Secretary of State served notice of liability to  deportation.



 5. On 3 January 2012 the respondent's representatives submitted a detailed
    response  claiming  that  the  Exception  did  apply  to  him   because
    deportation would infringe his right to respect for private and  family
    life under Article 8 ECHR.  The  principal  grounds  relied  upon  were
    three: (i) that he had lived in the United Kingdom since the age of  13
    and had no subsisting ties to Jamaica, which he  described  as  "a  war
    zone"; (ii) he had two children by  different  mothers  in  the  United
    Kingdom, one aged 6 and  one  aged  7  months  who  were  both  British
    citizens; (iii) his deportation would be immensely  disturbing  to  his
    partner, the mother of the younger child, to his  brother  and  sister,
    all of whom were lawfully resident in the United Kingdom.

 6. On 15 March 2013 in a conspicuously well-reasoned decision letter, UKBA
    notified him of the decision to make a deportation order.   The  letter
    focused inevitably and  understandably  on  the  circumstances  of  his
    partner and two children.

 7. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  who  allowed  his  appeal.   In
    summary, the Tribunal found that his partner and, by the  time  of  the
    hearing, two youngest children, who were British citizens, would not be
    able to travel to Jamaica, nor would it be reasonable to expect them to
    relocate there.  The Tribunal accepted that he had cut  his  ties  with
    Jamaica having  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  it  put  modestly
    inaccurately, "for more than half his life since the age  of  13".   It
    considered that the interference with his family life and his effect on
    his partner and two young children weighed heavily against deportation.
     It took into account the sentencing judge's remarks,  including  those
    which were favourable to the respondent which we have already  referred
    to.  In paragraphs 24 and 25 it set out its conclusions:

         "24.     The appellant pleaded guilty to the matters for  which  he
             was sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment.  We find that whilst
             the appellant pleaded guilty to a serious matter he is  not  a
             hardened criminal with a long record displaying a  history  of
             serious offending.  We assessed the appellant as a  young  man
             whose offending history was very minor and then committed  one
             serious offence in the context of a period  of  serious  civil
             disorder.  We accept as did the sentencing  judge  that  there
             are undoubtedly aspects of good character, in  particular  the
             appellant's commitment to his partner and children.  We accept
             that the appellant has stopped taking drugs and is not  likely
             to reoffend.

         25.  We have carefully weighed up the competing interests  in  this
             case.  Whilst we find that the public interest in  deportation
             is strong, we conclude that in the particular circumstances of
             this case  and  giving  special  weight  to  the  judgment  of
             Parliament, there is no  pressing  need  for  the  appellant's
             deportation.  Further,  we  find  that  the  effect  of  being
             separated from his children and family in the  United  Kingdom
             constitutes a very strong Article 8 case.  For  these  reasons
             we come to the conclusion that the appellant's deportation  is
             disproportionate to the legitimate aim of the  maintenance  of
             law and order."

 8. The Secretary of State appeals against that finding  on  four  grounds.
    All four grounds are in principle directed to the fact-finding  of  the
    panel but are stated to be of such significance  as  to  amount  to  an
    error of law.  The first ground begins with the Tribunal's finding that
    the appellant is not likely to reoffend.  The submission is made in the
    grounds, although not by Ms Everett today who realistically  recognises
    the weakness in some of  the  grounds,  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for the findings.  The Tribunal did  not  need
    to.  There was an OASys report in the papers before the Tribunal  which
    assessed the respondent's risk of reoffending as low.

 9. Ground 1 went on to assert that the appellant's offences have escalated
    in seriousness.  That is true.  It goes on further to assert  that  the
    appellant in his evidence minimised his actions by claiming he  entered
    the properties to dress a wound that he claims was inflicted by falling
    on a broken bottle, evidence which in the view of  the  author  of  the
    grounds of appeal suggested that he had not reformed and had  continued
    to deny responsibility for his actions.  The Presenting Officer's  note
    of the evidence given at the hearing prepared after the event  suggests
    that there might be something in that ground, but  the  contemporaneous
    note which is the best record of what the appellant said  made  by  the
    Tribunal is that he accepted that he broke into the hairdresser's shop,
    and the findings of the sentencing judge leave no ground to doubt  that
    he did that.  Accordingly, although if the  evidence  had  been  as  is
    asserted in ground 1 that might have given rise to  concern  about  the
    fact finding of the Tribunal, given that its own record of evidence was
    not to that effect, there is no such concern and ground 1 of the notice
    of appeal therefore fails.

10. Ground 2 notes that the Tribunal found that it would not be  reasonable
    for the appellant's partner and children to  relocate  to  Jamaica  but
    asserts that the Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons as  to
    why his partner and children cannot relocate.  This is a  ground  which
    overlooks the terms of the well-reasoned decision letter  which  notes,
    when considering the  circumstances  of  the  then-younger  child,  the
    following: "It is considered that it would be unreasonable to expect CR
    to leave the United Kingdom", and:

         "It is considered  that  CR's  mother  is  her  primary  carer  and
         provides the day-to-day care for her, and that they have  both  had
         to cope without you whilst you were incarcerated.  The decision  of
         where CR lies with her mother who is her primary carer and it would
         be in her best interests to continue living in the  United  Kingdom
         with her mother where she has lived since birth."

11. In other words, the decision  maker  accepted  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the respondent's partner and his then-younger  child  to
    relocate to Jamaica.  In those circumstances the Tribunal was under  no
    obligation to set out an extended passage of reasoning  why  it  agreed
    with that conclusion.  Paragraph 2 also goes  on  to  assert  that  the
    partner was aware of his precarious immigration status when they  began
    their relationship in 2009.  That conflicts with the evidence that  she
    gave which was noted by the Tribunal in its determination  and  reasons
    that she did not become aware of his lack of immigration  status  until
    she received a letter in March 2011.

12. There may have been a minor error in that  in  that  the  letter  which
    refused a variation of the appellant's leave, as it was  put,  was  not
    dated until 3 May 2011.  In any event the date on which  she  said  she
    first became aware of his precarious immigration status was  two  years
    or so after their relationship began.  In  those  circumstances,  given
    that  the  Tribunal  did  not  make  any  adverse  finding  about   the
    credibility of that witness, there is no foundation for that aspect  of
    ground 2 and it therefore fails.

13. Ground 3 notes the error in the Tribunal's reasoning in its  conclusion
    that he had spent more than half his life in the United Kingdom  rather
    than slightly less than half his life.  The error  is,  as  Ms  Everett
    realistically acknowledges, immaterial.

14. Ground 3 goes on to complain that the Tribunal did  not  make  adequate
    findings about the connections, if any, which the respondent may  still
    have in Jamaica.  It is true that its finding on that  issue  is  spare
    but it can reasonably be understood to have accepted  the  respondent's
    evidence about that issue as it was entitled to do.  There is therefore
    nothing in Ground 3.

15. Ground 4 on its  face  is  of  potentially  greater  significance.   It
    concerns the  alleged  instability  of  the  respondent's  then-current
    family life.  It asserts correctly, as far as  we  can  tell  from  the
    notes of evidence of the Tribunal, that he had said  that  he  saw  his
    oldest child regularly whereas his partner, whose evidence the Tribunal
    appears to have accepted, was that he had not seen his oldest child for
    over five years.  On any view, the connection  between  the  respondent
    and his eldest child was a weak one.

16. That however does not undermine the Tribunal's finding that family life
    enjoyed between the  respondent,  his  partner  and  his  two  youngest
    children was a strong, significant and weighty factor.  Ground  4  goes
    on to assert that documentary evidence from March 2013 showed  that  he
    and his partner were living separately.  The basis for  this  assertion
    was not clear to us from the notes and documents which we have  of  the
    proceedings before the Tribunal.  Ms Everett has helpfully  pointed  us
    to the birth certificate of the youngest child.   It  is  difficult  to
    interpret but like her we are unable to read into it a clear  statement
    that the two parents of the youngest  child,  the  respondent  and  his
    partner, did not live at the same address.  It is true  that  they  did
    not live together until he was  released  from  imprisonment,  but  the
    Tribunal were clearly well aware  of  that  and  did  not  found  their
    decision on the somewhat haphazard and precarious  private  and  family
    life enjoyed by the respondent before he was sentenced to a significant
    term of imprisonment and released from it.

17. Ground 4 therefore on proper analysis is no stronger than grounds 1,  2
    and 3.  This is a decision which not every Tribunal would have reached.
     Our own view about what the decision should have been if we  were  the
    primary decision makers is not however one which  we  are  entitled  to
    substitute for that of the First-tier Tribunal unless we  are  able  to
    identify an error of  law  which  undermines  the  conclusions  of  the
    Tribunal.  We are not able to identify any such error of law,  and  for
    that reason this appeal must be dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Mr Justice Mitting

