
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                      |                                    |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    |Appeal Number: DA/00395/2019        |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Teams)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On the 25th May 2021                |On the 21st June 2021               |
|                                    |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SADIK HUSAN hALANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mian, instructed by Mondair Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt, against First-tier Tribunal Judge
    J W H Law's decision to  allow  Mr  Halani's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as they were
    before the FtT: Mr Halani as the appellant, the Secretary of  State  as
    the respondent.

Background

 2. The appellant is a French national who was born  on  3  May  1966.   He
    seemingly arrived in the United Kingdom in the late 1980's.   He  first
    came to the attention of the British authorities on 14 April 1994,  due
    to a series of offences involving his ex-wife.

 3. On 14 April 1994, the appellant threatened to kill his ex-wife.   Later
    that day, he reversed his car into a car driven by his ex-wife, causing
    injuries to her and her daughter.  He was arrested  and  granted  bail.
    Five days later, he made further threats to kill  and  was  re-arrested
    and remanded in custody.  On 25 July 1994, he was released on bail to a
    hostel in Lincoln.  Eleven days later, he took a knife  from  the  bail
    hostel and travelled from Lincoln to Peterborough where he attempted to
    murder his ex-wife by stabbing her repeatedly in what was  subsequently
    described by the  sentencing  judge  as  a  planned  and  pre-meditated
    attempt to kill her.  She only survived the attack due to the fact that
    she received prompt and expert medical attention.  She was in intensive
    care for two days, during which she lost her spleen and  her  pancreas.
    She suffered lasting physical and mental consequences.

 4. The appellant fled the country shortly after he had  attacked  his  ex-
    wife.  He lived in Madagascar, where he remarried.  He and his  current
    wife have four children, two born in France and two born in the UK.

 5. The appellant attempted to return to the UK in 2007 but he was detected
    at the juxtaposed control  in  Coquelles.   He  was  arrested  for  the
    offences described above and he  denied  involvement,  maintaining  his
    innocence until the  day  of  his  trial  before  the  Crown  Court  at
    Cambridge.  On 18 January 2008, he was sentenced by HHJ  Haworth  to  a
    total of nine years' imprisonment.  In sentencing  the  appellant,  HHJ
    Haworth noted that he had a limited appreciation of the impact  of  his
    offence and he endorsed the conclusions of a  psychiatrist,  Dr  Smith,
    that he presented a continuing risk, at that time, of similar offending
    in  the  future,  in  the  context  of  the  failure  of  an   intimate
    relationship.  The judge made these remarks as he was  'quite  certain'
    that the Parole Board would wish to see his remarks in due course.

 6. The appellant completed his custodial sentence in August 2012.   On  10
    August 2012, the Parole Board noted that the  extant  OASys  assessment
    was that the appellant posed 'a medium risk of harm to the  public  and
    to children with a high risk of harm to a known adult and low  risk  of
    violent re-offending'.

 7. The appellant was released from immigration detention later that month.
     He had been served with  a  notice  of  intention  to  deport  and  he
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against that decision.  His  appeal
    was dismissed by a panel of the FtT comprising Judge A W Khan and Mrs R
    M Bray JP on 9 January 2013. The FtT found, notwithstanding the passage
    of time since the offence, that it was 'undoubtedly true  to  say  that
    the appellant remains at moderate to high risk of  reconviction  for  a
    violent offence within an intimate relationship': [26].  Permission  to
    appeal against that decision  was  refused  and  the  appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 6 February 2013.

 8. On 1 April 2013, the appellant was deported to France.

 9. Six months later, on 16 October 2013, the appellant arrived in  the  UK
    in breach of the deportation order, having travelled  to  this  country
    via ferry from Ireland.  He  was  returned  to  Ireland  by  ferry  the
    following day.

10. Two years later, on 17 June 2015, the appellant attempted  to  re-enter
    the UK for a second time. He was encountered by Immigration Officers on
    a ferry from  Belfast.   After  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    representations were made on the appellant's behalf for him  to  remain
    in the UK.  Those submissions were refused without a  right  of  appeal
    and the appellant was returned to France on 28 September 2015.

11. On 12 December 2017, an application was made to revoke the  appellant's
    deportation order.  The letter in which that application was made spans
    eleven pages of single-spaced type but it was  submitted,  in  summary,
    that the appellant no longer presented a risk and  that  his  continued
    exclusion was unjustifiably to the detriment of his  relationship  with
    his family, all of whom were settled in the UK and could  not  relocate
    to either France or Madagascar.

The Respondent's Decision

12. On 8 July 2019, the respondent refused to revoke the deportation order.
     She directed herself  in  accordance  with  regulation  34(5)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 and considered whether the  criteria
    for making the order were no longer satisfied.  She  did  not  consider
    regulation 34(5) to be satisfied.  In  reaching  that  conclusion,  the
    respondent noted the assessments made by the various professionals  and
    by HHJ Haworth about the risk posed by the appellant and the absence of
    evidence  from  a  suitably  qualified  individual  to  show  that  the
    appellant  had  addressed  the  underlying  issues:   [42]-[54].    The
    respondent also took account of the FtT's conclusions  in  2013:  [56]-
    [57].  At [61]-[62], the respondent considered submissions made by  the
    appellant's representatives about his conduct post-deportation:

         [61] In addition to the above you have stated that "Our client  had
         no further convictions and abides by the law".  It is accepted that
         your client had received no further criminal convictions since  his
         deportation.  However it is not accepted that he had abided by  the
         law completely in that time as he has on two separate occasions  on
         16 October 2013 and 17 June 2015  attempted  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom unlawfully despite him being fully aware of the  fact  that
         he is the subject of a  signed  Deportation  Order.   This  clearly
         demonstrates  that  your  client  is  willing  to  circumvent   the
         immigration rules of the United Kingdom and the law of the  country
         by attempting to enter with no right to do so.

         [62]  In  addition  to  this,  the  Secretary  of  State  takes   a
         particularly serious view of serious criminals such as your  client
         attempting to evade the authorities by entering the United  Kingdom
         with  no  right  to  do  so  and  without  the  knowledge  of   the
         authorities.  This is because had he  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         with no right to do so without the authorities being aware  of  his
         presence in the United Kingdom, then no measures  would  have  been
         put into place to minimise the risk that he poses to the public and
         in particular his ex-partner.

13. The respondent concluded that there had not been a material  change  of
    circumstances and, at [65]-[76] of her decision, she concluded that the
    appellant's continued exclusion from the UK was a proportionate  course
    under the EEA Regulations.

14. At [77]-[141], the respondent considered Article 8 ECHR.  She  reasoned
    that there was a significant public interest in the maintenance of  the
    deportation order: [87].    Whilst it was accepted that  the  appellant
    was maintaining a limited form of family life with his  family  in  the
    United Kingdom, via visits to third countries and using  the  telephone
    and internet, she did not consider it to  be  established  that  Social
    Services would permit the appellant to return to the family home in the
    event that he was permitted to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom:  [102]-
    [109].  The respondent noted that the FtT had previously concluded that
    the  appellant's  wife  and  children  could  relocate  to  France   or
    Madagascar and did not consider there  to  be  any  reason  to  take  a
    different view: [110]-[124].  There was no evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant's mother suffered from any medical conditions and no evidence
    to show that his absence was causing any  emotional  suffering:  [125]-
    [130].  The entire family could relocate to either Madagascar or France
    and there were no exceptional circumstances which outweighed the public
    interest in the appellant's deportation: [131]-[140].

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appellant appealed to  the  FtT  on  2  August  2019.   There  were
    detailed grounds of appeal in which it  was  averred  that  the  family
    could not reasonably be  expected  to  relocate  to  either  France  or
    Madagascar given  their  length  of  residence  in  the  UK  and  their
    significant ties to this country.  The appellant's separation from  his
    family was having an adverse effect on the family and the  children  in
    particular.  Modern means  of  communication  were  no  substitute  for
    family life  together.   There  had  been  a  material  change  in  the
    appellant's circumstances and in the level of  threat  he  posed.   The
    OASys report  had  been  prepared  a  decade  previously  and  did  not
    accurately reflect the level of risk.  There was  no  evidence  of  any
    further criminality and the appellant intended to abide by the  law  in
    the  future.   There  was  no  evidence  of  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental  interests  of  the  UK.
    The appellant's continued exclusion was contrary to the Regulations and
    to Article 8 ECHR.

16. So it was that the appeal came before Judge Law ("the judge"),  sitting
    at Nottingham Justice Centre on 5  February  2020.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Mian of counsel, as he was before me.  The respondent
    was represented by a Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence
    from the appellant's family (wife, sister, mother  and  the  two  older
    children) and submissions  from  the  advocates  before  reserving  his
    decision.

17. The judge's reserved decision is carefully  and  logically  structured.
    He   summarised   the   background   at   [1]-[2];   the    appellant's
    representations at [3] and the respondent's decision at [4]-[6].  There
    was reference to the grounds of appeal at [7] and to the  evidence  and
    submissions at [8]-[9].  The judge made reference to the applicable law
    at [11]-[15].

18.  Under  the  sub-heading  'The  revocation   issue   under   the   2106
    Regulations', the judge directed himself that what  the  appellant  was
    required to  show  was  material  change  of  circumstances  since  the
    deportation order was made: [16].  He took account of  the  conclusions
    of the FtT in 2013 at [17].  The judge noted at [18] that Mr  Mian  had
    placed particular  reliance  in  his  submissions  on  a  report  by  a
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Waquas Waheed, on 26 January 2020.

19. At [20], the judge observed that Dr Waheed's report  was  significantly
    more recent than the assessments relied upon  by  the  respondent.   He
    noted that the appellant's current wife had lived with  him  for  seven
    years and 'does not say that he had ever  threatened  violence  towards
    her.', although he was conscious of the  fact  that  the  previous  FtT
    panel had taken that into account.

20. At [21], the judge noted that  Dr  Smith's  report  and  the  Probation
    Officer's report (as taken into account by HHJ  Haworth)  both  related
    expressly to the specific point in time at  which  they  were  written.
    The judge then  took  into  account  the  passage  of  time  since  the
    appellant was sentenced: [22].  There had been no  further  convictions
    or offences and  it  had  been  open  to  the  respondent  to  ask  the
    Madagascan authorities for details of the same.  The judge proceeded on
    the basis that there were no further convictions.  Then,  at  [23]-24],
    the judge expressed his conclusions under the EEA  Regulations  in  the
    following terms:

         [23] The passage of time since deportation is itself recognised  in
         the immigration  rules  as  a  potential  change  in  circumstances
         sufficient to warrant revocation of the order:  paragraph  391A  of
         HC395, as amended.  While this provision is  not  repeated  in  the
         2016 Regulations, the fact that it  would  be  taken  into  account
         under  the  stricter  deportation  regime  relating   to   'foreign
         criminals' strongly indicates that  EEA  nationals  should  benefit
         from the same consideration.

         [24] Having considered the evidence and  the  submissions  by  both
         representatives, I am satisfied on balance that both the passage of
         time since deportation and the genuine remorse  and  rehabilitation
         of the appellant together  amount  to  a  material  change  in  the
         circumstances which justified deportation in 2013.  He is therefore
         entitled to succeed under the 2016 Regulations.

21. The appeal under the EEA Regulations was therefore allowed.   At  [25]-
    [27], the judge set out his reasons for concluding that the appeal  was
    to be dismissed on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant's family would not live with him in Madagascar or France  and
    that the deportation order would result in their continued  separation.
    He  was  not  satisfied  that   the   respondent's   decision   was   a
    disproportionate interference  with  the  family  life  which  existed,
    however: [27].

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

22. There is said to be a single ground of appeal, which  is  described  by
    the  author  as  'making  a  material  misdirection/lack  of   adequate
    reasoning'.  The seven paragraphs which follow that sub-heading in fact
    contain the following grounds:

      i) The judge failed to have regard to relevant matters, in particular:
         the appellant's attempts to enter the UK in breach  of  the  order;
         the seriousness of the index offence; and the deterrent  effect  of
         deportation.

     ii) The judge misdirected himself in law in  failing  to  consider  the
         consequences of re-offending in line with Kamki v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
         Civ 1715 and the application of the principle  in  R  v  Bouchereau
         (Case 30/77) [1978] ECR 732 to the facts of the appellant's case.

23. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Pitt, who  noted  that  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  had  left  out  of  account  the  appellant's
    attempts to re-enter the UK and that 'the report of Dr Waquas ...  does
    not show that he was  qualified  to  give  a  professional  opinion  on
    forensic matters, in particular the risk of re-offending and remorse.'

24. In a detailed response to the grounds of appeal under rule  24  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Rules, Mr Mian submitted that the  judge  did  not  fall
    into legal error.

25. The appeal came before UTJ Plimmer on 3 November 2020.  Mr Diwnycz, who
    represented the respondent, indicated  that  he  wished  to  amend  the
    grounds to take  the  point  about  Dr  Waquas  which  had  first  been
    mentioned by UTJ Pitt in granting permission.  Mr Mian  indicated  that
    he was prejudiced because 'he could have sought  further  clarification
    regarding Dr Waquas' expertise'.  The hearing was therefore  adjourned,
    for the respondent to amend her grounds and for the appellant to secure
    further evidence from Dr Waquas.

26. The respondent's amended grounds, settled by Mr Diwnycz on 16  November
    2020, advance  the  further  complaint  that  the  expert's  'otherwise
    impressive qualifications' did  not  disclose  'the  relevant  forensic
    psychological expertise required to assist this tribunal'.

27. On 17 December 2020, the appellant filed and served an  amended  bundle
    of  231  pages,  containing  further  evidence  about  Dr   Waheed's[1]
    qualifications.  Mr Mian amended his response to the grounds of  appeal
    on 8 December 2020.

28. Before me, Ms Petterson represented the Secretary of State.  She relied
    upon the original and amended grounds.  She submitted that the  passage
    of time was insufficient to justify the judge's conclusion  that  there
    had been a material change of  circumstances.   Under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  the  general  presumption  (in  paragraph  391)  was   that   a
    deportation order made against a person with a sentence of  four  years
    or more would not be revoked at any time, unless continuation would  be
    contrary to the Refugee Convention or  the  ECHR  or  continuation  was
    outweighed by other compelling factors.  In any  event,  the  appellant
    had been deported in 2013 and had tried to re-enter the  UK  unlawfully
    on two occasions.  The judge had failed to consider  that  in  deciding
    that there had been a material change of circumstances.  The passage of
    time since the offence had been significant but not the period of  time
    since conviction.  The  judge  had  mentioned  paragraph  391A  of  the
    Immigration Rules but had not really engaged with it.

29. As for Dr Waheed, Ms Petterson submitted that the judge's treatment  of
    his report was to be considered on the basis of the material before the
    FtT, and not  the  additional  material  which  had  subsequently  been
    adduced  in  this  appeal.   The  report  was  factually  incorrect  in
    asserting that no other person had been targeted during the attacks, as
    it was clear that the appellant's daughter had been in the car which he
    had rammed with another vehicle.  It was not clear that Dr  Waheed  was
    suitably qualified to assess risk of  reoffending  but  the  method  by
    which he had assessed that risk was, in any event, wholly unclear  from
    his report.  It seemed that he had simply accepted what  the  appellant
    had said about being remorseful.  Even if Dr Waheed had  been  involved
    in Parole Board proceedings (as he stated  in  his  further  evidence),
    there was insufficient analysis of the  risk  of  re-offending  in  the
    report.

30. Mr Mian relied on his amended rule 24 response and submitted  that  the
    decision was safe.  The judge had noted the re-entry attempts at [2] of
    his decision and there was no reason to believe that he had lost  sight
    of the point in his subsequent analysis.  Mr Mian accepted  that  entry
    (or attempted entry) in breach of a deportation order  was  a  criminal
    offence but submitted that the judge  was  not  required  in  terms  to
    engage with  the  point  in  deciding  that  the  appellant  no  longer
    presented a risk.

31. Ms Petterson had drawn my attention to the  Immigration  Rules  but  Mr
    Mian reminded me that the appellant was an EEA national  and  that  the
    test which applied was in the EEA Regulations.  The  case  law  of  the
    CJEU showed that the judge's focus on the passage  of  time  since  the
    commission of the offence (and not since the conviction) was correct: K
    v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie  [2018]  EUECJ  C-331/16;
    [2018] 3 CMLR 26, at [58].  The appellant's offences had been committed
    as long ago as  1994.   The  judge  was  demonstrably  aware  that  the
    appellant had been assessed as presenting a medium risk in  2008:  [20]
    of the FtT's decision  referred.   The  judge  had  been  concerned  to
    consider whether there had been  any  subsequent  convictions  and  his
    reasoning process at [22] could not be faulted.

32. Mr Mian submitted that the Presenting Officer before the FtT had  taken
    no issue with Dr Waheed's  ability  to  give  expert  evidence  on  the
    appellant's risk of re-offending.  The evidence which  was  now  before
    the Upper Tribunal showed quite clearly that he was able to give expert
    evidence on the point.  He was an eminent psychiatrist  with  extensive
    experience in the field.  Mr Mian accepted that Dr Waheed had  made  no
    reference to the appellant's attempts to re-enter the UK in  breach  of
    the deportation order but he noted that he would have been aware of the
    point as he had the respondent's bundle., which had been provided  with
    his instructions.  Mr Mian also accepted that Dr Waheed had not engaged
    with the previous assessments of the risk presented by  the  appellant,
    whether by the FtT, HHJ Haworth or the other experts, but he noted that
    these had also been supplied to him with his instructions.

33. Ms Petterson did not seek to respond.

The Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016

34. The appellant was deported from the United Kingdom because it was found
    by the FtT that  he  presented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the fundamental interests of the UK  and  because  it
    was proportionate to do  so.   That  decision  was  reached  under  the
    earlier regulations (the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006)  but  the
    test in the 2016 Regulations is essentially the same.

35. As the judge in the FtT noted, the principles governing the  revocation
    of such an order  are  to  be  found  in  regulation  34  of  the  2016
    Regulations, which provided[2] as follows:

    34.- Revocation of deportation and exclusion orders

    (1)  An exclusion order remains in force unless it is  revoked  by  the
         Secretary of State under this regulation.

    (2)  A deportation order remains in force-

         (a)  until the order is revoked under this regulation; or

         (b)  for the period specified in the order.

    (3)  A person who is subject to a deportation or  exclusion  order  may
         only apply to the Secretary of State to  have  it  revoked  on  the
         basis that there has been a material change  in  the  circumstances
         that justified the making of the order.

    (4)  An application under paragraph  (3)  must  set  out  the  material
         change in circumstances relied upon by the applicant and  may  only
         be made whilst the applicant is outside the United Kingdom.

    (5)  On receipt of an application under paragraph (3), the Secretary of
         State must revoke the order if the  Secretary  of  State  considers
         that the criteria for making such an order are no longer satisfied.

    (6)  The Secretary of State must take  a  decision  on  an  application
         under paragraph (2) no later than six  months  after  the  date  on
         which the application is received.

Analysis

36. Despite Mr Mian's determined submissions to the contrary, there can  be
    no doubt that the judge erred in law in his  decision.   In  concluding
    that the appellant had not re-offended since his deportation, the judge
    overlooked the uncontested fact that he had twice re-entered the United
    Kingdom in breach of a deportation order.

37. The re-entry point - and the significance of it - was expressly  relied
    upon by the respondent at [61] and [62] of her decision (as  reproduced
    above) and it was clearly a material matter for the judge to take  into
    account in assessing whether the appellant was, as he  claimed  in  his
    witness statement of 28 January 2020, a man who had learned his lesson,
    repented, and would not make any other 'mistakes'  in  his  life.   The
    fact that the appellant had re-entered the UK (by a  circuitous  route)
    in breach of the deportation order in 2014 and  2015  was  prima  facie
    evidence that he had not decided to abide by the  laws  of  the  United
    Kingdom and should have been taken into account by the judge.

38. There is no mention of the appellant's entry to the UK in breach of the
    deportation order in the judge's analysis  of  the  question  posed  by
    regulation 34.   Mr  Mian  submits  that  the  point  was  nevertheless
    identified by the judge at [2] of his decision and  that  there  is  no
    reason to think that he lost sight of it when he came  to  conduct  his
    analysis.  I do not accept  that  submission.   There  is  a  world  of
    difference between the recitation of a  fact as part of  the  narrative
    and the engagement with the significance of  that  fact  in  a  judge's
    analysis.  I accept, of course, that the decision is to be  read  as  a
    whole and that the  FtT  is  a  specialist  tribunal  which  should  be
    presumed to understand its task unless the contrary is  shown.   As  Mr
    Mian was constrained to accept, however, the litmus test in deciding on
    appeal whether a  judge  had  given  legally  adequate  reasons  is  to
    consider whether the decision enables the Upper Tribunal to  understand
    why the judge reached his decision: English v Emery Reimbold  &  Strick
    [2002] EWCA Civ 605; [2002] 1 WLR 2409, at [19],  as  applied  in  this
    field by R (Iran) & Ors v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982; [2005] Imm AR 535.

39. The judge's decision gives no indication of  what  he  thought  of  the
    appellant's decisions to re-enter the United Kingdom in breach  of  the
    deportation order.  In my judgment, that was not the kind of peripheral
    matter about which Brooke LJ spoke (giving the judgment of the Court of
    Appeal) at [15]-[16] of R(Iran).  It  was  accepted  in  terms  in  the
    letter of refusal that the  appellant  had  not  received  any  further
    convictions since his deportation but the  respondent  did  not  accept
    that he was a reformed character.  One of the  main  reasons  that  she
    reached that conclusion was his conduct in 2014 and  2015.   The  judge
    was accordingly required to engage with  that  conduct  -  which  might
    properly have resulted  in  a  prosecution  under  section  24  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 - and to explain why he took a different view from
    the Secretary of State.  His failure to do so demonstrates a failure to
    take a material  consideration  into  account  or  a  failure  to  give
    adequate reasons for his decision.

40. The judge's consideration of Dr Waheed's evidence was also  flawed  for
    failing  to  take  account  of  material  matters  and  giving  legally
    insufficient reasons, for the following reasons.  Whether  or  not  the
    point was taken by the Presenting Officer (and I think it was not),  it
    is for a court or tribunal presented with expert evidence to police the
    performance of an expert's duties:  Kennedy  v  Cordia  (Services)  LLP
    [2016] UKSC 6; [2016] 1 WLR 597, at [58]-[59].

41. At [59] of Kennedy v Cordia, Lords Reed and Hodge (with whom the  other
    Justices agreed) stated that even in the absence  of  objection  to  an
    expert witness's evidence "the judge should, when assessing whether and
    to what extent to give weight to the evidence,  test  the  evidence  to
    ascertain that it complies with the four considerations which  we  have
    set out in para 38 above and is otherwise sound."  The matters to which
    reference had been made at [38] were "(i)  the  admissibility  of  such
    evidence, (ii) the responsibility of a party's legal team to make  sure
    that the expert keeps to his or her role of  giving  the  court  useful
    information, (iii) the court's  policing  of  the  performance  of  the
    expert's duties, and (iv) economy in litigation."

42. The Supreme Court also endorsed what had been said by Lord Nimmo  Smith
    in McTear v Imperial Tobacco 2005 2 SC 1:

         [I]t is necessary to consider with care, in respect of each of  the
         expert witnesses, to what extent he was aware of and  observed  his
         function. I must decide what did or did not lie within his field of
         expertise, and not have regard to any expression of  opinion  on  a
         matter which lay outwith that field. Where published literature was
         put to a witness, I can only have regard  to  such  of  it  as  lay
         within his field of expertise, and then only to  such  passages  as
         were expressly referred to. Above all, the purpose of  leading  the
         evidence of any of the expert witnesses should have been to  impart
         to me special  knowledge  of  subject-matter,  including  published
         material, lying within the witness's field of expertise, so  as  to
         enable me to form my own judgment about that subject-matter and the
         conclusions to be drawn from it.

43. With respect to the judge, there is no consideration in his decision of
    the extent to which Dr Waheed, a Consultant Psychiatrist, was qualified
    to express an opinion on  the  critical  point  at  issue  between  the
    parties in this case: whether the  risk  of  re-offending  had  changed
    since the FtT's assessment in 2013.  There was no analysis,  therefore,
    of whether Dr Waheed's opinion on that question fell within  the  field
    of his expertise.

44. Given the absence of a submission on the point from  the  Secretary  of
    State, the judge's conclusion might have been expressed concisely but I
    can find no engagement at all with the point within his  decision.   He
    noted that he had been referred  to  the  report  by  Mr  Mian  and  he
    summarised the conclusions "that the appellant was genuinely remorseful
    and posed no more than  a  low  risk  of  either  specific  harm  to  a
    particular person or general harm to the public'.  The  judge  attached
    significance to the fact that Dr Waheed's report was significantly more
    recent than those relied upon by the respondent.  But he  did  not,  at
    any stage, consider whether Dr Waheed was suitably qualified to express
    an opinion on the risk of the appellant re-offending.

45. The evidence before the FtT provided little or no basis for  concluding
    that Dr Waheed was suitably qualified to provide expert evidence on the
    risk posed by the appellant.  The report began with a statement that Dr
    Waheed was a registered medical practitioner approved under section  12
    of the Mental Health  Act  1983  and  registered  with  the  GMC  as  a
    specialist in general psychiatry and liaison  psychiatry  according  to
    the provisions  of  schedule  2  of  the  European  Specialist  Medical
    Qualifications Order 1995.

46. Dr Waheed appended full details of his qualifications and experience to
    his report. The  Appendix  showed  that  Dr  Waheed  had  qualified  in
    Pakistan and had arrived in the UK in 1996, after which he  had  worked
    as a Consultant Psychiatrist since 2004.  At the date of the report, he
    was working as an Honourary Consultant Psychiatrist  at  Stepping  Hill
    Hospital in  Stockport.   He  had  a  substantive  appointment  at  the
    University of Manchester as a reader in Psychiatry.  He was extensively
    published in journals with a focus on 'community psychiatry and  ethnic
    health inequalities'.   Under  the  sub-heading  'Clinical  expertise',
    there was the following statement:

         I am a clinical academic with expertise in diagnosing and  managing
         complex  psychiatric  patients.   I  also  have  an   international
         reputation  in  working  with  mental  health  issues   in   ethnic
         minorities, particularly cognitive  impairment  and  depression  in
         British Pakistanis, which was  also  the  topic  of  my  doctorate,
         awarded by the University of Manchester.

47. The Appendix continued, giving details  of  Dr  Waheed's  peer-reviewed
    publications, book chapters and postgraduate degree students.  There is
    nothing in that section of the Appendix which suggests that  Dr  Waheed
    has any experience or qualifications which meant that  his  opinion  on
    the risk of the appellant re-offending lay  within  the  filed  of  his
    expertise.

48. In the second Appendix to the report, Dr Waheed stated, oddly, that his
    report had been prepared in accordance with rule  33  of  the  Criminal
    Procedure Rules.   Amongst other matters, he  also  confirmed  in  this
    Appendix that '[a]ll of the  matters  on  which  I  have  expressed  an
    opinion lie within  my  filed  of  expertise'.   Mr  Mian  placed  some
    reliance  on  that  statement  but  it  represents  no  answer  to  the
    respondent's complaint.  Had the expert  omitted  that  statement,  the
    weight attached to his report might legitimately have been reduced, but
    the fact that he had included that statement did not remove the onus on
    the judge to decide what "did or did not lie within [Dr Waheed's] field
    of expertise", as required by the authorities to which I have  referred
    above.

49. Mr Mian's intention, as is clear from the additional  evidence  in  the
    appellant's most recent bundle and his amended rule 24 response, was to
    submit that the evidence subsequently provided  by  Dr  Waheed  was  an
    answer to the respondent's  complaint.   I  suggested  to  him  at  the
    hearing, however, that the question of whether the FtT's  decision  was
    tainted by legal error was to be resolved on the basis of the  material
    before the FtT.  Mr Mian was unable in response to provide  any  reason
    whatsoever why the later evidence might bear on that question.

50. The absence of a response is unsurprising; the position in that respect
    has been appreciably clear since at least CA (Ghana) v SSHD [2004] EWCA
    Civ 1165 and the appellate scheme now in place is materially  the  same
    as that which was analysed by Laws LJ (with whom  Mummery  LJ  and  Sir
    Martin  Nourse  agreed).   I  decline,  therefore,  to   consider   the
    subsequent evidence.  It is quite clear that the judge failed  to  turn
    his mind to the extent to which Dr Waheed was qualified to  express  an
    expert opinion on the risk  of  the  appellant  re-offending.   Had  he
    turned his mind to that question he could not,  on  the  basis  of  the
    material before him, have concluded that Dr Waheed's  opinion  in  that
    regard was within his field of expertise.

51. Unfortunately, there is a further error in the judge's consideration of
    the expert report of Dr Waheed.  In R (British American Tobacco &  Ors)
    v Secretary of State for Health [2016] EWHC 1169 (Admin);  [2016]  ETMR
    38, Green J (as he then was) was presented with a plethora of  evidence
    in a challenge to the Secretary of State's  decision  to  prohibit  the
    sale of tobacco products in anything other than plain  packaging.   One
    of the numerous grounds advanced by the tobacco industry concerned  the
    Secretary of  State's  consideration  of  expert  evidence  adduced  in
    opposition to the prohibition.  Green J described a number  of  'common
    sense rules' for the evaluation of expert evidence.

52. One of those rules was  that  which  I  have  just  touched  upon:  the
    assessment  of  the  qualifications  and  competence  of  the   expert.
    Another, however, was the importance of testing whether expert evidence
    complies with methodological best practice accepted by  the  scientific
    community:  [20]-[21]  of  Green  J's  judgment  refers.   (Green   J's
    judgment, dismissing the grounds advanced against the prohibition,  was
    upheld on appeal: [2016] EWCA Civ 1182; [2018] QB 149.

53. The methodology applied by an expert will often be clear  from  his  or
    her report.  The examples given in MH  (Iran)  [2020]  UKUT  125  (IAC)
    illustrate the point:

         [40] In many cases, it will be apparent that  the  methodology  and
         validity of a field of knowledge or science is  such  that  it  can
         validly underpin expert evidence. It is  well  established  in  the
         field of refugee status determination, for example, that a suitably
         qualified doctor can provide expert evidence on the  likely  causes
         of physical lesions on a claimant's body, in  compliance  with  the
         Istanbul Protocol: KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10;  [2019]  1
         WLR 1849. Expert evidence regarding an individual's  mental  health
         is also frequently received in  international  protection  appeals,
         documenting  diagnoses  made  by  the  application  of   diagnostic
         criteria such as the ICD-10 or the DSM-V:  TD  &  AD  (Albania)  CG
         [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC). In Kennedy v Cordia itself, it  was  accepted
         that a consulting engineer with  a  degree  in  engineering  and  a
         diploma in safety and hygiene who  was,  amongst  other  things,  a
         former member of the Health and Safety Executive, was properly able
         to provide expert evidence on a range  of  matters  concerning  the
         precautions which might properly have been  taken  to  prevent  the
         appellant's wrist injury.

54. The Immigration and Asylum Chamber is also  frequently  presented  with
    reports in which an opinion is given on the risk of an  individual  re-
    offending.  Most frequently, these are in the form of  pre-sentence  or
    Offender Assessment System ("OASys") reports complied by  the  officers
    of the National Probation  Service.   The  statistical  and  evaluative
    tools used in those reports (including, for example, the Offender Group
    Reconviction Scale ("OGRS 3") and the OASys Violence Predictor ("OVP"))
    are generally accepted by the Tribunal and other bodies, including  the
    Parole Board, to adopt a methodology  which  generates  an  informative
    conclusion as regards the risk of reoffending.

55. As contended by Ms Petterson, however,  Dr  Waheed's  report  gives  no
    indication of whether  he  employed  methodological  best  practice  in
    coming to the conclusion that the appellant presented  a  low  risk  of
    violent re-offending.  The basis upon which he apparently came to  that
    conclusion, as stated at page 8 of the report, was as follows:

         a) The fact is that the assaults took place in 2004 over  a  short
            period of time.

         b) Reportedly Mr Halani acted specifically towards  his  immediate
            family at that time.

         c) His behaviour was driven by the reports of his wife  having  an
            extramarital relationship.

         d) No other person was targeted during these acts.

         e) After that period over the previous  25  years,  there  are  no
            reports of him posing any threats to his ex-wife,  children  or
            for that matter any other person.

         f) He informed me that there has been no such instance outside the
            UK, and he has not been in contact with police  for  any  other
            similar behaviour.

         g) On mental state examination,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
            relevant major though preoccupations or delusions.

         h) He denies  using  alcohol  or  drugs,  which  if  consumed  may
            contribute towards the repetition of violent behaviours.

         i) He also denied any instances of verbal  abuse  in  his  current
            marriage.

56. The expert's reference to these matters gives scant indication of their
    relevance to his conclusion.  Does the fact  that  an  individual  acts
    violently towards his immediate family mean that he  is  more  or  less
    likely to act in a similar way in  the  future?   Does  the  fact  that
    behaviour was driven by a specific stressor mean that such behaviour is
    more or less likely  in  the  future,  particularly  if  that  stressor
    presents again?  The expert's conclusion  is  premised  on  a  list  of
    factors which might, in some respects, militate  in  one  direction  or
    another, with little or no indication  of  the  underlying  methodology
    employed to resolve this critical question in the appellant's favour.

57. It is also to  be  recalled  that  HHJ  Howarth's  particular  concern,
    premised on what he had read in the detailed reports  before  him,  was
    the risk of the appellant reoffending with violence "in the context  of
    the failure of an intimate relationship".    Dr Waheed made no  mention
    of HHJ Howarth's concern.  He made no reference to the detailed reports
    which had been before the Crown Court.  Mr Mian protests  that  all  of
    this material was provided to Dr Waheed but that submission  serves  to
    highlight the problem, not to address it.

58. Judges of the Crown Court and the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  concluded
    that the appellant was a man who  posed  a  real  risk  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Those carefully reasoned conclusions, all of which  had  been
    provided to the expert alongside the OASYs  report,  should  have  been
    considered by Dr Waheed.  Instead, he  failed  to  take  any  of  those
    assessments  into  account  in  reaching  his  conclusion   about   the
    appellant's risk of re-offending.   Nor  did  Dr  Waheed  confront  the
    question which most obviously presented itself as a result of what  had
    gone before: "Would the appellant react in a similar way in the face of
    future marital disharmony?"  Nor, finally, did Dr Waheed pay  any  heed
    to the fact that the appellant had attempted to re-enter the  UK  twice
    in breach of a deportation order when concluding that his offending  in
    1994 was 'out of keeping with his personality'.

59. In sum, therefore, I find that  two  of  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal are clearly made out.  The judge erred in failing to have any or
    any adequate regard to  the  appellant's  re-entry  in  breach  of  the
    deportation order in 2014 and  2015.   The  judge  also  erred  in  his
    consideration of the expert evidence, in that  he  failed  to  consider
    whether Dr Waheed's opinion about the risk of re-offending  lay  within
    his field of expertise and he failed, in any  event,  to  evaluate  the
    methodology employed by Dr Waheed in reaching that conclusion.

60. I can deal very briefly with  the  respondent's  remaining  grounds  of
    appeal.  No error of law on the part of the FtT is identified by  those
    grounds.  Ms Petterson made no reference to those grounds, and  rightly
    so.  The R v Bouchereau principle was not invoked by the  Secretary  of
    State before the judge and it was not for him to take  it  of  his  own
    volition.  I do not understand the point which is made in  the  grounds
    with reference to Kamki v SSHD, which was a  case  on  its  own  facts.
    And, as the judge himself stated, neither  s117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 nor the principle of deterrence was  of
    any relevance in an EEA case such as this.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is unsafe and it must be set  aside  in  full.   The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh  by  a
judge other than Judge J H Law.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                                 8 June 2021
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Since the doctor's name is Dr Waquas Waheed, I shall refer to him as  Dr
Waheed.  That follows the approach of the judge of the FtT.
[2] The Regulations were revoked upon the UK's withdrawal from the  European
Union on 31 December 2020 but remain in force for present purposes.

