
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00298/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2013                                |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             RUI EDGAR FERNANDES

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph, Counsel, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who was born on 4 April 1986, is a citizen of  Portugal,
    and thus an EEA national.  He now appeals against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which dismissed his appeal against the respondent's
    decision to make a deportation order against  him.

 2. The background to this appeal can be summarised briefly.  He arrived in
    this country in the autumn of 2002 since when he  has  worked  in  this
    country regularly and has had relationships  here.  Since August  2010,
    he has been in a relationship with a Miss Williams.

 3.  Regrettably,  he  committed  criminal  offences  which  led   to   the
    respondent's decision to deport   him.   On  25  January  2012  he  was
    convicted of affray.  The OASys Report, the relevant part of  which  is
    set out  at  paragraph  45  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, states that the appellant

         "... was one of six males who approached three males and  a  female
         in Taunton Town Centre. They  were  followed  by  the  cameras  and
         recorded  assaulting  the  victims   (unprovoked   attacks).     He
         continued to assault them  when  they  fell  to  the  floor.   [The
         appellant] said he  had  been  drinking  with  friends  before  the
         assault and cannot remember who started it or how it happened."

 4. Then on 9 May 2012 he pleaded guilty  to  four  offences  of  supplying
    Class A drugs, possession of cannabis and possession  of  an  offensive
    weapon, for which he was sent to prison for two years in respect of the
    offence of supplying drugs.  He was also  sentenced  to  three  months'
    imprisonment for the possession of an  offensive  weapon  and  for  the
    previous offence of affray (this latter sentence was imposed  following
    his breach of the community order which had previously been made).   As
    referred to at paragraph 48 of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the trial judge described  the  appellant  as  "a  commercial
    street dealer".

 5.  The respondent made a decision  to  deport  this  appellant,  and  his
    appeal against this decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (First-tier Tribunal Judge Troup and  Mr  G  H  Getlevog)  following  a
    hearing at Newport Crown Court on 13 March 2013.

 6. It is now common ground  that  as  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision, this appellant had been present in this country for a  period
    of over ten years.  It is also the case that he had been here for under
    ten years as at the date when he was sent to prison.  The  findings  of
    the panel with regard to these dates has not been challenged by  either
    party.  The panel found that the appellant arrived in this  country  in
    October 2002, and was still here ten years later, that  is  before  the
    respondent's decision had been  made on 28 January  2013,  but  he  had
    been here for less than ten years before he was sent  to  prison  on  8
    June 2012.

 7. Although the appellant's dates of employment are  not  entirely  clear,
    the panel found on the balance of probabilities that the appellant  had
    been  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country  and  that  he  had
    accordingly acquired a permanent right of residence after  five  years'
    continuous residence in the UK by virtue of Regulation 15 of  the  2006
    EEA Regulations in about 2007.  This meant  that  for  the  purpose  of
    consdering whether the deportation decision was justified, the relevant
    test was whether it was justified "on serious grounds of public  policy
    or public security" having taken into account the matters  set  out  in
    Regulation 21(5)(6). However, because the panel concluded that for  the
    purposes of these  Regulations  time  in  prison  did  not  count,  the
    appellant had not been continuously resident in the UK  for  ten  years
    for the purpose of paragraph 21(4) of the Regulation, and so it was not
    necessary for the respondent to establish that there  were  "imperative
    grounds of national security"  justifying  her  decision.   It  is  now
    common ground between the parties that the respondent would not be able
    to establish that removal  was  justified  on  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security".

 8. Having considered all the evidence  carefully,  the  panel  found  that
    deportation was indeed justified on serious grounds of public policy or
    public security.

 9. The appellant now appeals against this decision, with permission, on  a
    number of grounds.  The grounds can be summarised as follows. First, it
    is asserted that for the purpose of establishing whether the  level  of
    protection afforded  to  him  under  the  2006  Regulations  should  be
    commensurate with someone who has been here ten years,  the  period  he
    spent in prison before the decision was made should be counted,  as  he
    was continuing  to  integrate  in  this  country  during  that  period.
    Secondly, it is said  that  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  there  were
    serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security  sufficient  to
    justify the appellant's deportation, was wrong, essentially because its
    findings of fact could not be sustained. Thirdly, it is  asserted  that
    the Tribunal's consideration of the appellant's Article  8  rights  was
    insufficient.

The Hearing

10. I heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously. As these are contained in my Record of  Proceedings,
    I shall not set out these submissions verbatim, but shall  refer  below
    only to such parts of the submissions as are relevant for the  purposes
    of this determination.  I have, however,  considered  fully  everything
    which was said to me during the course of the hearing as  well  as  all
    the documents contained within the file.

11. On behalf of appellant, Mr Joseph accepted that  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was very careful in many respects, but  it  was
    asserted that nonetheless the panel had failed adequately  to  consider
    the European case law or the  European  dimension  of  this  case.   He
    referred to authorities which had been cited  in  a  detailed  skeleton
    argument  which  he  had  prepared  for  that  hearing.   His   primary
    submission was that the panel should have approached this appeal on the
    basis that the respondent needed to show that  there  were  "imperative
    grounds of  national  security"  justifying  the  decision  to  deport,
    because the period spent in prison should count towards  the  necessary
    ten year period, as the appellant would be continuing to integrate into
    British society  during  that  period.   Further,  the  panel  had  not
    considered integration in general  under  Regulation  21(6).   In  this
    case, this appellant was fully integrated  into  British  society.   Mr
    Joseph acknowledged that the panel had  said  that  it  had  considered
    whether or not the appellant was integrated into society, but there was
    no specific finding that he was not.

12. Mr Joseph queried whether the panel had been  entitled  to  reject  the
    NOMS report that found that the appellant represented a "low"  risk  of
    re-offending, but accepted that it had given reasons for  its  finding.
    It was also of note that  the  evidence  of  family  members  had  been
    inconsistent.

13. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Saunders  relied  on  the  Tribunal
    decision in Jarusevicius (EEA Reg 21 - effect of  imprisonment)  [2012]
    UKUT 00120, in particular at paragraph 49.  It was asserted that unless
    and until the ECJ tells us differently, time spent in  prison  did  not
    count towards the ten years' residence necessary before the  respondent
    was required to rely on imperative  grounds  of  national  security  in
    order to justify deportation.

14. As to the facts, both with  regard  to  the  appellant's  circumstances
    here, which went to whether  he  was  integrated,  and  to  the  likely
    circumstances which he would meet in Portugal, this was a  careful  and
    thorough determination which reached findings which were  open  to  the
    panel.  There was no material error of law in the determination.

Discussion

15. It might well be that further guidance will be given  by  the  European
    Court of Justice with regard to the primary issue in this  case,  which
    is whether or not time spent in prison should  count  towards  the  ten
    years' residence necessary before an EEA national can  be  said  to  be
    sufficiently integrated that he should only be deported  on  imperative
    grounds of  national  security.   However,  the  present  jurisprudence
    appears to be as follows.   Once  someone  has  been  present  in  this
    country, exercising treaty rights, for a continuous period of over five
    years, he or she will have acquired a  right  of  permanent  residence.
    That right will not be acquired if before the end  of  that  five  year
    period he goes to prison.  Further, for  the  purpose  of  establishing
    permanent residence, the clock will begin again  on  his  release  from
    prison.  In this  case,  this  appellant  had  undoubtedly  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.

16. The position with regard to whether or not the clock will stop in terms
    of the  period  necessary  to  establish  sufficient  integration  that
    imperative grounds of public  security  will  be  required  to  justify
    deportation is less clear.  Certainly,  the  Tribunal  in  Jarusevicius
    [EEA R 21 - effective imprisonment) [2012] UKUT 00120 (a case in  which
    the Tribunal reviewed the previous European decisions) found  that  for
    the purposes of Regulation 21(4)(a) of the 2006  Regulations  (that  is
    ten years' residence) continuity of residence would not be broken by  a
    period of imprisonment (at paragraph 9 of its determination).  This the
    Tribunal considered was the effect of  the  judgment  of  the  European
    Court of Justice in Tsakouridis.  However, the Tribunal in Jarusevicius
    at paragraph 49 stated as follows:

         "49.      We  informed  the  parties,  that  we  had   additionally
             considered LG and CC (Italy) [2009] UKAIT 00024 that held that
             time spent in prison did not  count  towards  the  ten  years'
             residence which would give an EEA national a higher  level  of
             protection against expulsion (Regulation 21(4)). ..."

    While the Tribunal considered (at paragraph 60) that the conclusion  of
    the AIT in LG and CC "that service of a sentence of imprisonment in the
    ten years before the decision to deport prevents the greater protection
    of 'imperative grounds' arising" was now in doubt,  the  Tribunal  does
    not appear to have doubted that in itself the time spent in prison  did
    not count towards the ten years' residence required.  In  other  words,
    while it might not stop  the  clock  running  with  regard  to  further
    periods in this country after release from prison, the time  in  prison
    itself would not be counted.

17. This aspect was considered further by the Court of Appeal in FV (Italy)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1199.  At paragraph 85, Pill LJ stated as follows:

         "Following the test in Tsakouridis, periods of absence  within  the
         ten years immediately preceding the decision do not  of  themselves
         disqualify and neither does the period of imprisonment. The  period
         of imprisonment is, however, relevant as a factor to be  considered
         when  deciding  upon  integration  at   the   date   of   decision.
         Integration will not normally  be  established  by  time  spent  in
         prison [my emphasis] save that it may  have  limited  relevance  by
         contributing to the severance of links with the country of  origin.
         If integration has been  established prior  to the custodial  term,
         it will not necessarily be lost by that term."

18. In my judgment, in this case, where the appellant remained  in  custody
    until the date of  decision,  there  is  no  basis  on  the  facts  for
    suggesting that the time actually spent in prison should count  towards
    the ten year period necessary for integration to  be  established.   It
    follows that for the purposes of this appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was correct to consider the appellant as someone who had established  a
    right of permanent residence, but  who  had  not  established  the  ten
    years' residence which would be necessary before his deportation had to
    be justified on imperative grounds of public security.

19. Insofar as Mr Joseph sought to argue that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not properly consider whether or not the appellant had been integrated,
    as it was required to do under Regulation 21(6), that  is  clearly  not
    correct.  At paragraph 56 of the panel's determination, it is stated in
    terms that  the  panel  had  "taken  into  account  the  considerations
    detailed  in  Regulation  21(6)".   In  other  words,  the  panel   had
    considered the level of  this  appellant's  integration.   Mr  Joseph's
    response was to say that it was one thing for the panel to say this had
    been considered, but another that it actually had.  Also, the panel had
    not specifically found that he was integrated.  In my judgment,  it  is
    clear from the findings that the panel approached   this  case  on  the
    basis that this appellant had a relatively high  level  (but  under  10
    years) of integration into British society, which was a factor weighing
    against deportation, but none the  less  considered  that  the  factors
    justifying his  deportation  outweighed  this  factor,  and  the  other
    factors which were in the appellant's favour.  Among the other  factors
    considered was what the Tribunal found were the appellant's links  with
    Portugal, which are set out within the panel's determination.

20. Essentially, having  considered,  correctly,  that  having  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in the UK, the  appellant  could  only  be
    deported on "serious grounds of public policy or public security",  and
    having taken into account all the  factors,  and  in  particular  those
    listed  at  Regulation  21(6)  of  the  2006  Regulations,  the   panel
    considered that deportation was  appropriate  and  proportionate.    At
    paragraph 56 the Tribunal found that "having  taken  into  account  the
    considerations  detailed  in  Regulation  21(6),  we  find   that   the
    appellant's personal conduct and the risk of reoffending are together a
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests of society here to justify
    his removal".

21. Then, with regard to the "European dimension", the  panel  went  on  to
    find that "if, following release, the appellant were to remain  in  the
    UK, there is a greater risk of re-offending here than there would be if
    he were to return to Portugal".  The reasons given by the panel for  so
    finding are compelling and are set out clearly and carefully within the
    determination.

22. Although the consideration of Article 8 as  a  stand  alone  ground  of
    appeal is short, in  light  of  the  findings  already  made,  this  is
    entirely adequate.

23. In short, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  careful,
    detailed and thorough, and the panel made findings  which were open  to
    it and the determination contains no material error of law.  It follows
    that this appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed:                                 Date: 12 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


