



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00290/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 26th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A JORDAN
                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  MR A R G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Vaughan

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin and  Mr  C  P  O'Brian)
    promulgated on 23rd July 2013 allowing the appeal of ARG  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to  a  deportation  order  against  him.  The
    appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 2. Mr ARG who was born on 9th March 1983 is a citizen of Jamaica. Although
    he is the Respondent in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal, for  ease
    of reference we shall refer to  him  as  "the  Appellant"  and  to  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent". The facts  with  which  we  are
    concerned in this appeal are  well-known  to  the  parties  and  as  it
    appeared to us, there was no great dispute about them, we  consider  it
    sufficient for this judgment, to set out the following summary.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th December  1999  aged
    16 years, to join his mother who was living here with  the  Appellant's
    step-father. He was granted indefinite leave to remain in July 2000. He
    lived with his mother and step-father and regarded his  step-father  as
    his "real" father. His natural father had died when he was a baby.

 4. The Appellant attended college and started full-time work in  2000.  He
    had several jobs including being promoted as a  manager  in  Cineworld,
    assistant manager at  Footlockers  and  manager  of  Sports  Direct  in
    Greenford. In 2000 he met his wife Mrs CG and they moved in together in
    2001. They married in January 2003 and in July 2004 their son was born.
    By this time the Appellant had secured employment as manager of  Sports
    Direct in Greenford which was a good  position  with  good  salary  and
    career prospects. However he resigned from that  position  because  the
    commuting time and long hours meant he could not spend  time  with  his
    son and also he wanted to support his mother in caring  for  his  step-
    father who had been diagnosed with cancer.

 5. On 13th June 2002 the Appellant received a  conviction  at  South  West
    Magistrates Court  for  possessing  a  knife  in  a  pubic  place.  His
    explanation for that offence is that he was moving  from  his  mother's
    house to set up home with Mrs CG and had taken a kitchen knife  to  his
    new house, when he was arrested in Tooting. The police  were  arresting
    people randomly as they were looking for drugs. He told the police that
    he had a kitchen knife in his pocket. He was subsequently  charged  and
    received a conditional discharge of twelve months and a fine of �150.

 6. The next significant event in the Appellant's life  occurred  in  2009.
    His brother Mr LG had come to  the  United  Kingdom  from  Jamaica  and
    failed to regularise his immigration status here so he was removed back
    to Jamaica in 2007. The Appellant supported Mr LG by sending money  but
    in May 2009 he was told on the phone by a  friend  that  his  brother's
    body had been found. He was shot in the head. Mr LG  had  been  due  to
    return to the UK to marry the  mother  of  his  two  children  who  are
    present here.

 7. In 2011 the Appellant was working for Millets as  a  manager  in  their
    branch in Orpington Kent  when  his  step-father  died.  The  Appellant
    became depressed, resigned from his job and lived off his savings.

 8. On 5th October 2011 at Kingston-Upon-Thames Crown Court, the  Appellant
    was convicted of three counts of robbery and sentenced  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment of three years four months. Whilst the  Appellant  was  in
    prison his wife gave birth to their second child Miss CG. At this  time
    he and his wife separated.

 9. On 20th March 2012 the Respondent wrote to the Appellant asking him  to
    give reasons why he should not be deported. The Appellant claimed  that
    the decision to deport him would be a breach of rights under Article  8
    ECHR. Having considered those representations  the  Respondent  made  a
    deportation order on 24th January 2013. The deportation order was  made
    by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  (Automatic
    deport)  and  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim  was  refused   under
    paragraphs 399/399A of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant  appealed
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal Panel.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and Submissions Before Us

10. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Appellant and  his
    family members - his mother and two sisters. They  took  account  of  a
    written statement from his wife Mrs CG who by this time  had  separated
    from him. In addition they had before them medical  evidence  outlining
    the Appellant's history of depression together with a  report  from  an
    Independent  Social  Worker  concerning  the  interaction  between  the
    Appellant and his children, in particular his eldest child Master AG.

11. This was a large body of evidence before the  Tribunal  which  included
    not only the evidence outlined above but also the  Respondent's  notice
    of deportation letter which set out the following  reasons  for  making
    the deportation order.

     a) The sentencing court's view of the seriousness of  the  offence  as
        reflected in the  sentence  imposed  of  three  years  four  months
        imprisonment and the effect of the type of crime of robbery on  the
        wider community.

     b) The requirements of paragraphs 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration
        Rules do not apply in this case.

     c) As regards Article 8 it is considered that the  Appellant  has  not
        been absent from Jamaica for a period considered significant enough
        as to render his familiarity with  the  country  irretrievable  nor
        that he has no ties to that country. There is  no  reason  why  the
        Appellant could not utilise his skills  learned  through  education
        and employment in the UK in Jamaica.

     d) Consideration has been given to the Appellant's submission that  he
        has strong family ties in the UK. There is no evidence that his son
        and daughter have suffered  adversely  or  experienced  significant
        hardship whilst he was in prison or that  the  children  could  not
        receive appropriate care and support from their  mother  after  his
        deportation.

     e) The Appellant will be able contact with his sisters and mother from
        Jamaica via letters telephone calls emails  and  the  Internet.  In
        addition there is nothing to prevent  them  from  visiting  him  in
        Jamaica if they wished.

12. In their findings  of  fact  the  Panel  at  paragraph  42  said,  "The
    presumption therefore is that the public interest requires  deportation
    of the Appellant and that under the Immigration Rules it will  only  be
    in exceptional circumstances that the public interest is outweighed  by
    the obligations under the Human Rights Convention".

13. They followed that up in paragraph 42 by saying "it is accepted by both
    parties in this case that the Appellant does not come  within  the  new
    Immigration Rules that reflect Article 8 ECHR considerations".

14. We then come to what we consider the central question in  this  appeal.
    In paragraph 52 the Panel states, "The question  therefore  is  whether
    there are countervailing matters that outweigh these best interests  of
    the children. Clearly the serious nature of  the  robbery  offences  in
    which  the  Appellant  was  involved  and  for  which   the   statutory
    presumption means that he  should  be  deported  in  the  wider  public
    interest are to be given significant weight. We have set out above  our
    views on this".

15. Mr Wilding's submissions, and one that we are bound to agree  with,  is
    that it is hard to see where the Panel has "set out above our views  on
    this". He accepted that they had  come  to  a  firm  finding  that  the
    Appellant is at "low risk of reoffending" but their  error  as  far  as
    that is concerned, was to disproportionately focus on that one  aspect.
    Nowhere in the determination had they  indicated that they had  engaged
    with the other limbs of the Secretary of State's public interest policy
    encompassed in;

     a) Society's revulsion against violent crime.

     b) The need to deter others.  AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634

16. Mr Wilding  submitted  that  the  Panel  had  further  erred  in  their
    assessment of  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  children  in
    particular Master AG. What the Panel had overemphasised, was the effect
    on the Appellant's children, should their  father  be  deported.  Their
    analysis on this point was somewhat one-sided. They had paid regard  to
    the opinion of the Independent Social Worker but  had  not  taken  into
    account evidence that Master AG's primary carer is his mother and  that
    she will remain so. In any event the Appellant does  not  live  in  the
    same household as Master AG, his younger sister and their mother  since
    the relationship with  Mrs  CG  has  broken  down.  Further  Master  AG
    suffered no lasting harm during the  time  his  father  was  absent  in
    prison. It is accepted  by  all  parties  that  the  bond  between  the
    Appellant and Miss CG is not developed through force of  circumstances,
    to the same extent.

17. Mr Vaughan on behalf of the Appellant relied on his  skeleton  argument
    and submitted on the first  point  the  Panel  clearly  did  take  into
    account the issue of revulsion against violent crime and  the  need  to
    deter offences of violence.  He said they mention this in paragraph  52
    and therefore is can be inferred they accorded  significant  weight  to
    it; and to the seriousness of the offences.

18. He submitted that society's disapproval of serious  offending  and  the
    prevention and deterrence of crime did not have to be  expressly  spelt
    out in a determination since it was self-evident that  the  purpose  of
    Section 32 meant that foreign criminals should ordinarily be  deported.
    He said that the Panel's determination in any event  can  be  construed
    showing that they took into account the public interest factors. One of
    his stronger points was that the Secretary of State in her reasons  for
    deportation letter, did not specifically rely on prevention, deterrence
    and revulsion. Therefore she cannot complain now if those factors  were
    not expressly taken into account by the Tribunal.

19. So far as the Panel  placed  inordinate  weight  on  the  low  risk  of
    reoffending, Mr Vaughan submitted, they applied the  correct  test  and
    took into account a whole host of  relevant  points.  The  Respondent's
    reliance on this ground is no more than a perversity  point,  which  is
    not made out, since the Panel did not place decisive importance on  the
    risk of reoffending.

20. Concerning the Panel's findings on the best interests of the  children,
    he drew our attention to the Respondent's stance  in  her  reasons  for
    deportation letter which reads;

         "Consideration has been given to your  submissions  that  you  have
         very strong family ties in the United Kingdom. There is no evidence
         that your son and daughter have suffered adversely  or  experienced
         significant hardship  whilst  you  were  in  prison  or  that  your
         children could not receive appropriate care and support from  their
         mother after your deportation".

    He submitted that given the evidence of the Independent Social  Worker,
    the  Panel's  conclusions  were  entirely  correct  and  Mr   Wilding's
    submission on this point amounted to no more than a  disagreement  with
    those findings.

21. Having provided both representatives with a copy of MF (Nigeria) [2013]
    EWCA Civ 192, Mr Vaughan further submitted that whilst he accepted that
    paragraph 43 of the Panel's determination stated, "It  is  accepted  by
    both parties in this case that the Appellant does not come  within  the
    new Immigration Rules that reflect Article 8 ECHR  considerations",  it
    is clear nevertheless that the Appellant was entitled to some  form  of
    Article 8 consideration. Whether that consideration was given under the
    new Immigration Rules (as it ought to have been) or assessed in the way
    they did under the Razgar test,  there  were  clear  findings  that  to
    remove this Appellant would be disproportionate. Therefore it could  be
    inferred that despite the apparent concession  made  in  paragraph  43,
    deportation  would  be  disproportionate   because   this   Appellant's
    circumstances amounted to exceptional ones  and  the  test  within  the
    Rules itself was met.

22.  He  expanded  this  by  saying,  to  remove  the  Appellant  would  be
    disproportionate as the following factors outweighed removal.

     a) It had been found there was a low risk of reoffending.

     b) The Appellant had been resident in the UK for a long time.  Samaroo
        [2001] INLR

     c) The best  interests  of  the  children  have  to  be  factored  in,
        especially the strong bond with Master AG. Master AG is  a  British
        citizen and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  him  and  his
        immediate family to relocate to Jamaica. There was little  prospect
        of the children visiting in the future.

Error of Law Finding

23. Having considered the representatives' submissions  we  were  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Panel  had  erred  in  its  assessment  of
    whether the Appellant's claim  amounted  to  exceptional  circumstances
    capable of outweighing the public interest in deportation.

24. This is an automatic  deportation  appeal.  The  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    mandates that in certain circumstances the  deportation  of  a  foreign
    criminal is deemed to be conducive to the public good and a deportation
    order should be made in respect of a foreign criminal. The Secretary of
    State has a duty to make a deportation order against a foreign criminal
    who does not fall into one of the exceptions in Section 33.

25. As the only issue upon which findings  were  required  related  to  the
    proportionality of the decision being appealed it was necessary for the
    Panel to consider all facts in favour of both  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State, to decide what weight they were able to  attach  to
    each element of the evidence, and thereafter to ascertain which parties
    evidence  attracted  the  greater  weight   which   would   have   been
    determinative of their decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

26. It is clear from reading the determination why the Appellant  won,  and
    it is also clear that all aspects of the evidence the Panel were  asked
    to consider on his  behalf  were  considered  with  a  degree  of  care
    required in an appeal of this nature by them. The  Panel  were  clearly
    impressed by the evidence given by the Appellant and  the  strength  of
    his relationship with his children. What is not clear  is  whether  the
    same degree of care and consideration was given to the public  interest
    arguments. It is in relation to this element that  we  find  the  Panel
    erred.

27. In RU (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 651 the Court of  Appeal  held  that
    the point about  deterrence  was  not  whether  the  deportation  of  a
    particular foreign criminal might or might not have a deterrent  effect
    on other prospective offenders. It concerned a  much  more  fundamental
    concept. The UK operated an immigration system  by  which  control  was
    exercised over non-British citizens who entered and remained in the UK.
    The operation of that system must  take  account  of  broad  issues  of
    social cohesion in the UK. Moreover, the public had to have  confidence
    in its operation. Those requirements were for the public good  or  were
    in the public interest. For both of those requirements to be fulfilled,
    the operation of the system must contain an element  of  deterrence  to
    non-British citizens who  were  either  already  in  the  UK,  even  if
    refugees, or who were thinking of coming to the UK,  so  as  to  ensure
    that they clearly understood that, whatever the circumstances,  one  of
    the consequences of serious  crime  might  well  be  deportation.  That
    element of public interest or public good was a part of the legislative
    policy, declared by Parliament in Section 32(4) of the 2007  Act,  that
    the deportation of foreign criminals was conducive to the  public  good
    (paras 41-43).

    We see no consideration of this in the Panel's determination.

28. The need for the Panel to have considered  the  deterrent  element  has
    also been reinforced by the Court of Appeal in AM v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1634 in which the  Court  confirmed  a  Tribunal  should  expressly
    mention the wider public interest which is  engaged  in  a  deportation
    appeal namely  deterrence and the prevention of crime.

29.  We  find  there  is  no  specific  mention  of  this  element  in  the
    determination and it is not clear whether the Panel properly considered
    it.  It  is  certainly  not  possible  to  infer   from   reading   the
    determination that they did. There are no specific findings  upon  this
    element despite the  Panel's  declaration  in  paragraph  52  of  their
    determination,

         "Clearly the serious nature of the robbery offences  in  which  the
         Appellant was involved and  for  which  the  statutory  presumption
         means that he should be deported in the wider public  interest  are
         to be given significant weight. We have set out above our  view  on
         this".

Remaking the Decision

30. Both representatives agreed they did not wish to call further evidence.
    The facts are not in dispute and are therefore preserved.

31. It is common ground of course, that  the  Appellant  comes  within  the
    provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK Border Act 2007. He is a  foreign
    national who was sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  of  three  years
    four months for a serious of robbery. The Appellant has claimed that to
    deport him would breach his Convention rights under Article 8 ECHR.  It
    is also  common  ground  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order was made on 24th January 2013 and thus it falls to be
    considered under the new Rules laid before parliament in July 2012.

32. The new Rules state,

         "Deportation and Article 8

        398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
             to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
             Convention, and

          a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
             at least 4 years;

          b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because they have been convicted of an offence for
             this they have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
             less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

          c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of  State,
             their  offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors".

33. It is not in dispute that the Appellant cannot bring himself within the
    exception to the Immigration Rules. Therefore the  only  avenue  before
    him is to show that  the  facts  of  his  case  amount  to  exceptional
    circumstances.

Exceptional Circumstances

34. We are assisted by MF (Nigeria), where the  Court  of  Appeal  confirms
    that any reference to "exceptional" in the Immigration  Rules  relating
    to private and family life rights must be interpreted as requiring  the
    decision-maker to undertake a proportionality exercise consistent  with
    ECHR  jurisprudence.  Insofar  as  this  requirement  is  part  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Rules are a complete code for Article 8  issues.
    The Court of Appeals use of the  phrase  "complete  code"  is  apposite
    since to break the code there needs to be an understanding of the  code
    words in particular "exceptional" and "insurmountable".

35. With regard to deportation appeals perhaps the most important words  in
    MF (Nigeria) are those to be found at the end  of  paragraph  46:  "but
    either way, it is necessary to carry out a two-stage process".

36. Paragraphs 43 to 46 of MF (Nigeria) are key.

         "43. The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule. The general rule in the  present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paras  399
             and 399A  do  not  apply,  very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These
             compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".

         44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
             code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
             in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. We accordingly respectfully do not  agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not "mandated  or  directed"
             to take all the relevant article 8 criteria into account (para
             38).

         45. Even if we were wrong about that, it  would  be  necessary  to
             apply a proportionality test outside the new rules as was done
             by the UT. Either way, the result should be the same. In these
             circumstances, it is a sterile question whether it is required
             by the new rules or it is a requirement of  the  general  law.
             What matters is that it is required to be carried out if paras
             399 or 399A do not apply.

         46. There has been debate as to whether there is a  one  stage  or
             two stage test. If the claimant succeeds on an application  of
             the new rules at the first hurdle i.e. he shows that para  399
             or 399A applies, then it can be said that he has succeeded  on
             a one stage test. But if he  does  not,  it  is  necessary  to
             consider   whether   there   are   circumstances   which   are
             sufficiently  compelling  (and   therefore   exceptional)   to
             outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation.  That  is  an
             exercise which is separate from  a  consideration  of  whether
             para 399 or 399A applies. It is the second part of a two stage
             approach which, for the reasons we have given, is required  by
             the new rules do not fully reflect  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
             But either way, it is necessary  to  carry  out  a  two  stage
             process".

37. In our view we consider it appropriate  to  remind  ourselves  that  MF
    (Nigeria) should be read in the context of developing jurisprudence  on
    the relationship between the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

Findings

38. In  our  assessment  of  whether  the  Appellant's  case  falls  within
    exceptional circumstances when assessing proportionality  we  have  had
    regard to the criteria summarised in Uner [2006] ECHR  873.  The  Court
    said that in order to assess whether an expulsion measure was necessary
    in a  democratic  society  and  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
    perused, the following criteria had to be considered:

     a) The nature and the seriousness of  the  offence  committed  by  the
        Appellant;

     b) The length of the Appellant's stay in the country from which he was
        to be expelled;

     c) The time that had elapsed since the offence was committed  and  the
        claimants conduct during that period;

     d) The nationalities of the various parties concerned;

     e) The Appellant's family's situation;

     f) Whether there are children in the marriage and if so their ages;

     g) The seriousness and the difficulties which the spouse is likely  to
        encounter in the country of the Appellant's origin;

     h) The best interests and well-being of any children of the Appellant;



     i) And in particular the seriousness of  any  difficulties  that  they
        would be likely to encounter in the country to which the  Appellant
        would be expelled;

     j) The solidity of social, cultural and  family  ties  with  the  host
        country and with the country of destination.

    We have borne these factors in mind when drawing together  the  strands
    of the Appellant's claim.

39. In accordance with these features we have considered the points  raised
    by Mr Vaughan. In particular we have had  regard  to  the  family  life
    which the Appellant has with his children Master AG and Miss CG.

40. We discount the claim of family life with his wife Mrs CG. He no longer
    lives with her and the children although we  note  from  her  statement
    that she refers to the Appellant as being supportive of  the  children.
    There is nothing about her relationship with the Appellant.

41. The Appellant's mother and his siblings have all provided statements of
    support. We note that the Appellant's mother Mrs  IT  states  that  the
    Appellant lives with her now and that he has  a  close  bond  with  his
    children. She is fearful that if he returns to Jamaica  she  will  lose
    him in the same way that she lost her other son  Mr  LG.  The  evidence
    from the Appellant's three adult sisters say much the same.

42. His mother and sisters are all adults and whilst he has de facto family
    life with them there is no evidence  of  dependency  on  him  by  those
    family members or him on them. Article 8 is not engaged so far as  they
    are concerned.

43. What the Appellant has left to fall back on is  his  relationship  with
    the children and a consideration of the best interests of the children.
    We accept the report of Sabrina Williams the Independent Social Worker.
    She reports that the family will  not  relocate  to  Jamaica  with  the
    Appellant. That stands to reason as the Appellant is  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with the children's mother.

44. She reports that the children's mother would be nervous  and  reluctant
    to allow her children to go to Jamaica on holiday. The reason  provided
    was that the Appellant's brother had  been  shot  dead  on  his  return
    there.

45. She also noted that Mrs CG noticed changes  in  Master  AG's  behaviour
    following Mr ARG's detention, but that his  academic  ability  remained
    consistent.

46. Set against those considerations Sabrina Williams reported that  Master
    AG and the Appellant kept in touch by telephone contact during the time
    that he was in prison. It is also noted that Master AG  uses  Skype  to
    keep in contact with relatives in Trinidad.

47. In JO (Uganda) and JT (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 the Court
    of Appeal stated:

         "In considering the position of family members in deportation cases
         the material question  is  not  whether  there  is  an  insuperable
         obstacle to their following the applicant to the country of removal
         but whether they cannot reasonably be expected to follow him there.
         This ensures that the seriousness of the  difficulties  which  they
         are likely to encounter in the removal country is properly assessed
         as a whole and taken into account together with all other  relevant
         matters in determining the proportionality of deportation;

         Even if difficulties make it unreasonable to expect family  members
         to join the applicant in the country that will not necessarily be a
         decisive feature in the overall assessment of  proportionality.  In
         the case of sufficiently serious  offending  that  the  factors  in
         favour of deportation will be strong enough to  render  deportation
         proportionate  even  if  it  does  have  the  effect  of   severing
         established family relationships; and

         The maintenance of effective immigration control  is  an  important
         matter but the protection of society against serious crime is  even
         more important and can  properly  be  given  corresponding  greater
         weight in the balancing exercise".

48. In Gurung v SSHD [2012]  the Court of Appeal said:

         "The Borders  Act  by  Section  32  decides  that  the  nature  and
         seriousness of the offence, as measured  by  the  sentence,  do  by
         themselves justify deportation".

49. In RU (Bangladesh) the Court of Appeal said:

         "The point about "deterrence" is not whether the deportation  of  a
         particular "foreign criminal" may  or  may  not  have  a  deterrent
         effect on other prospective offenders.  It  concerns  a  much  more
         fundamental concept which is explained by Judge LJ at [83]  of  his
         judgment in N (Kenya). The UK operates  an  immigration  system  by
         which control is exercised over non-British citizens who enter  and
         remain in the UK. The operation of that system must take account of
         broad issues of social cohesion in the UK. Moreover, the public has
         to have confidence in its operation. Those requirements are for the
         "public good" or are in the "public interest". For both of those to
         requirements to be fulfilled, the  operation  of  the  system  must
         contain an element of deterrence to non-British  citizens  who  are
         either already in the UK (even if refugees) or who are thinking  of
         coming to the UK, "so as to ensure  that  they  clearly  understand
         that, whatever  the  circumstances,  one  of  the  consequences  of
         serious crime may well be deportation".  That  element  of  "public
         interest" or "public good" is a part  of  the  legislative  policy,
         declared by Parliament in section  32(4)  of  the  UKBA,  that  the
         deportation of "foreign  criminals"  is  conducive  to  the  public
         good".

50. In Richards v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  244  the  Court  of  Appeal  after
    reviewing Masih, OH (Serbia) and Gurung said:

         "What in my judgment needs  emphasis  is  that  the  strong  public
         interest in deporting foreign  criminals  is  now  not  merely  the
         policy of the Secretary of State but the  judgment  of  Parliament.
         That gives it special weight, which the courts ought to  recognise,
         as no doubt the Strasbourg Court will. This approach sits with  the
         well-established approach to proportionality questions in  European
         Union laws where acts of  the  primary  legislator  enjoy  a  wider
         margin of discretion (see R v Secretary of  State  for  Health  ex-
         parte East Side Cheese [1999] 3c MLR)

51. In drawing these strands together and balancing proportionality we find
    that although  the  Appellant  clearly  enjoys  family  life  with  his
    children, what it amounts to at  its  highest  is  this.  He  sees  his
    children on a daily basis. There is nothing unusual or  exceptional  in
    that. Master AG and he have a strong bond; there is nothing exceptional
    in that, bearing in mind Master AG's main carer is his mother.

52. Contact with his children would not cease altogether.  The  Independent
    Social Worker explained that whilst it may difficult for  the  children
    to travel to Jamaica to  see  the  Appellant,  nevertheless  Master  AG
    already uses Skype to keep in contact with other relatives in Trinidad.



53. The loss which Master AG suffered when his father went to prison in our
    judgment is not exceptional. His schoolwork did suffer slightly but  to
    all intents and purposes this was of temporary duration.

54. The Appellant, we accept, did suffer from depression but not of such an
    order as to bring it within exceptional circumstances.

55. Summing up therefore it is our conclusion that the  Appellant  has  not
    shown any exceptional circumstances which  would  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deporting a foreign  national  who  has  committed  serious
    offences of robbery.

Decision

56. The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.  We
    remake the decision. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until the Tribunal directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.



Signature                                             Dated


Judge of the Upper Tribunal

