
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00646/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher instructed by Lawrence Lupin, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity  order  in  the  light  of  the
    respondent's personal circumstances and claim for asylum.   Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the Respondent  (JK).
    This direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent  and
    a failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court
    proceedings.

Introduction

 2. JK, whom I shall refer to hereafter as "the claimant", is a citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  His age is uncertain but he has been  treated  throughout
    these proceedings as having come to the United Kingdom in  August  2009
    when he was 14 years of age.  He claimed asylum on arrival on the basis
    that he feared being recruited by the Taliban and/or  being  persecuted
    by the Afghan authorities because they would impute to him his father's
    political  support  for  the  Taliban   and/or   Hisbi-i-Islami.    The
    claimant's application for asylum was refused by the Secretary of State
    but he was granted discretionary leave until 8 February 2010.

 3. Thereafter, the claimant made an in-time application for further  leave
    to remain but that was again refused on 30 May 2012.   He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") but that appeal  was  dismissed  on  21
    September 2012.  His subsequent appeal to the Upper Tribunal ("UT") was
    successful and his case  was  remitted  to  the  FtT.   However,  those
    proceedings came to an end when the Secretary  of  State  withdrew  the
    decision to refuse him leave to remain as  a  result  of  him  becoming
    liable deportation.

 4. The issue of his deportation arose because in  August  2011,  when  the
    claimant was 16, he was involved in the London riots  in  Croydon.   He
    effectively engaged in a number of acts  of  looting.   On  10  January
    2013, the claimant pleaded guilty at the Inner London Crown Court to  5
    offences of violent disorder, handling stolen goods and a burglary.  He
    was sentenced to a total of 28 months detention in a  Young  Offender's
    Institution.

 5. As a result of  that  conviction,  the  claimant  was  subject  to  the
    automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007 (the  "2007
    Act").  The claimant was notified that he  was  liable  to  deportation
    under those provisions on 29 January 2013.  On 25  February  2013,  the
    claimant's legal representative made representations on his behalf that
    his deportation would breach the  Refugee  Convention  and  his  rights
    under the European Convention on Human Rights, in particular Articles 3
    and 8.

 6. Following a screening and substantive interviews on 9 July 2013 and  27
    August 2013 respectively, the Secretary of State refused the claimant's
    asylum application and made the decision to deport him under  the  2007
    Act on 29 November 2013.  The decision that the claimant did  not  fall
    within one of the exceptions in s.33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  gave
    the claimant a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal to the FtT

 7. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    dated 16 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devittie  and  Ms  M
    Padfield) allowed the claimant's appeal under Articles 3 and 8  of  the
    ECHR.  The Tribunal accepted that the claimant's account that he  would
    be at risk from  the  Taliban  (although  not  the  Afghan  authorities
    themselves) in his home area was  well-founded  and  for  a  Convention
    reason.  However, the Tribunal concluded that the claimant could safely
    and reasonably internally relocate of Kabul and so was not  a  refugee.
    However, the Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 3 of  the  ECHR.
    The Tribunal found that there was a real risk that the  claimant  would
    commit suicide on return to Afghanistan and, as a  result,  there  were
    substantial grounds  for  believing  that  he  faced  a  real  risk  of
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

The Appeal to the UT

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's finding  that  the  claimant
    had established a breach of Article 3 (and probably Article 8)  on  the
    basis that there was a real  risk  that  he  would  commit  suicide  if
    returned to Kabul.

 9. The Secretary  of  State  did  not  seek  to  overturn  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's finding that the claimant had  a  well-founded  fear  for  a
    Convention reason in his home area.  Instead, the  Secretary  of  State
    argued that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in concluding that
    a breach of Article 3 had been established because  it  had  failed  to
    consider  the  background  evidence  concerning  the  availability   of
    psychiatric services including the availability of medicines  to  treat
    his diagnosed psychiatric condition of PTSD  and  other  mental  health
    issues and the support the claimant would have from  family  in  Kabul.
    The Tribunal's finding that the applicant would "not have  the  benefit
    of effective mental health strategies" was, as a consequence, flawed.

10. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  17
    October 2014, I granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal  on
    the basis that:
          "It is arguable that the FtT failed to take into account  evidence
         concerning  the  availability  of  treatment  for  the  appellant's
         medical health in Kabul and that he would have family support there
         and gave inadequate reasons for concluding that there  was  a  real
         risk he would commit suicide  on  return  and  during  the  removal
         process."

11. In his rule 24 Notice, the claimant sought to uphold the FtT's  finding
    that, as a result of the real risk he would commit suicide on return to
    Afghanistan, the claimant had established a breach of Article 3.

12. In a decision dated 12 March 2015, the Upper Tribunal (Nicol J and  UTJ
    Storey) set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  respect  of
    Articles 3 and 8 based upon the  risk  to  the  claimant  in  Kabul  of
    committing suicide.  The UT agreed that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to take into account the presence of relatives of  the  claimant
    in Kabul and the availability of drugs which the claimant was presently
    being prescribed.

13. The Upper Tribunal, perhaps unsurprisingly given the parties respective
    positions,  preserved  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that   the
    claimant had established a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason in his home area.   However,  the  Tribunal  observed
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss his appeal on asylum
    grounds might have to be revisited if, in truth, his  return  to  Kabul
    would breach Articles 3 or 8 of the ECHR because the  finding  that  he
    could reasonably and safely internally  relocate  would  not  obviously
    have a sound basis.

14. The appeal was relisted before me for a resumed  hearing  in  order  to
    remake the decision under Articles 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR  and,  to  the
    extent necessary, in relation to the claimant's refugee claim.

An Initial Matter

15. Ms Fisher, who represented the claimant, raised with me at  the  outset
    of the hearing that I was the Judge who had granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal. She indicated that she did so as  a  matter
    of courtesy and was not inviting me to recuse myself.

16. I also had considered whether it was proper for me to hear  the  appeal
    given that I had granted permission to the Secretary of State  earlier.
    As I have said, Ms Fisher did not seek to invite me  to  recuse  myself
    and Mr Richards,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,  had  no
    objection to my dealing with the appeal.

17. The common practice in the Upper Tribunal is that  a  Judge  who  deals
    with the error of law issue retains the appeal to remake it thereafter.
     It has never, to my knowledge, been suggested that a Judge is, in some
    way, disentitled to do so because he or she has been involved  at  that
    stage.  The permission stage is, of course, an  earlier  stage  in  the
    proceedings when only an arguable view is taken on the legal merits  of
    the appellant, here the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.   I  do
    not see any basis upon which it can be said that a Judge  dealing  with
    the legal issues raised by an appeal to  the  UT  cannot  properly  and
    fairly remake the decision except in  wholly  exceptional  and  unusual
    circumstances.  I see no basis for recusing  myself  on  the  basis  of
    there being any real possibility of bias applying the 'fair-minded  and
    informed observer' test in Porter v Magill [2002] AC 357.  In the light
    of that, I proceeded to hear the appeal.

The Evidence

18. The claimant  placed  before  the  UT  a  very  substantial  bundle  of
    documents, running to many hundreds of pages, some of  which,  but  not
    all, were previously before the FtT.  On behalf  of  the  claimant,  Ms
    Fisher sought permission to introduce a number of documents which  were
    not  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   including   additional
    objective evidence at pages 1-296 of  the  appeal  bundle;  an  updated
    expert report from Dr Antonio Guistozzi dated 4 July 2015 at pages  10-
    21 of the appeal bundle; and an expert  medical  report  from  Dr  Paul
    Foster, a Consultant Psychiatrist dated 1 February 2016 at  pages  1-20
    of an additional faxed bundle.  Mr  Richards  did  not  object  to  the
    admission of any of this evidence and I  granted  permission  to  admit
    this evidence under  rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

19. The claimant relied directly upon  a  number  of  documents  in  appeal
    bundle in relation to the objective evidence in respect of Afghanistan.
     In particular, in her submissions Ms Fisher referred me  to  the  EASO
    Country Of Origin Report: Afghanistan  Security  Situation  Update  (21
    January 2016)(at pages 1-31 of Tab B).  In addition the claimed  relied
    upon two expert reports prepared by Dr Guistozzi dated 21 June 2014 (at
    pages 1-28 of Tab E) and 4 July 2014 (at pages 10-21  of  Tab  A);  two
    supporting letters from Dr Juliet Cohen, a Forensic Physician dated  10
    September 2012 and 15  October  2012  (at  pages  110-111  and  107-109
    respectively of Tab E); an expert medical report from Dr Paul Foster, a
    Consultant  Psychiatrist  (at  pages  1-20  of  a  faxed  supplementary
    bundle).

20. In addition, there was the  evidence  referred  to  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and also the claimant briefly gave oral evidence before me  in
    relation to the issue of what, if any, relatives close or otherwise  he
    had in Kabul.

21. Mr Richards only drew my attention to the background  material  in  the
    Secretary of State's decision letter concerning psychiatric  facilities
    and drugs available in Afghanistan.  That material is helpfully set out
    on the  second  page  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The Issues

22. Ms Fisher submitted a detailed 19 page skeleton argument  and  I  heard
    oral submissions from both Ms Fisher and Mr Richards.  I am grateful to
    both representatives for their helpful and focussed submission  on  the
    live issues in the appeal.

23. Most of the factual issues in this appeal were not a matter of dispute.
     In particular, the claimant's past history in Afghanistan is  accepted
    including that he would be at risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason in his  home  area.   Further,  Mr  Richards  did  not  seek  to
    challenge the medical evidence  concerning  the  claimant's  underlying
    mental health problems.  In particular, he did not  seek  to  challenge
    the diagnosis set out in  Dr  Foster's  very  recent  report  that  the
    claimant  suffers  from  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  and
    Enduring Personality Change  After  Catastrophic  Experience  (EPCACE).
    Neither was it challenged that the claimant has a  tragic  and  lengthy
    history of self harm and attempting suicide.

24. The central issue  in  dispute  between  the  parties  was,  given  the
    claimant's medical health problems, what were the consequences  to  him
    of removing him to Kabul?  One disputed issue was the extent  to  which
    the claimant could, if at all, seek  support  from  family  members  in
    Kabul.  Mr Richards did not make any specific submission on the  expert
    reports  concerning  the  availability  of  psychiatric   services   or
    medication in Afghanistan.  However, that remains an issue  for  me  to
    resolve on the basis of the  background  evidence  (which  in  part  Mr
    Richards did rely upon) and the expert evidence.  The issue then arises
    whether any support or medical services or  drugs  available  would  be
    such as to obviate the risk of the claimant self harming or  attempting
    to commit suicide.  If there was a  real  risk  of  that,  despite  any
    family support or, to put it in general terms, medical intervention  Mr
    Richards did not make any submission that countered the claimant's case
    that his return  to  Afghanistan,  in  particular  Kabul  would  breach
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

25. Ms Fisher in her submissions primarily focussed upon the Article 3 risk
    based upon the claimant establishing that there was a real risk that he
    would commit suicide in Afghanistan.

26. In addition, particularly in her  skeleton  argument,  Ms  Fisher  also
    placed reliance upon Article 3 and the absence  of  adequate  treatment
    such that  the  claimant  fell  within  the  exceptional  circumstances
    contemplated in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423.  In that  regard,  she  also
    relied upon Article 8.

27. As will become clear shortly, I am of the clear view that  this  appeal
    is resolved on the basis of Ms Fisher's primary submission  based  upon
    Article 3 and the risk to the  claimant  of  attempting  or  committing
    suicide in Afghanistan.  It is not, in the result, necessary  therefore
    to consider in detail the claimant's Article 8 claim.

The Law

28. Article 3 of the ECHR states that:
         "No-one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

29. The burden of proof is upon the claimant to establish  that  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that there is a  real  risk  that  he
    will be subject to treatment contrary to Article 3 on return to  Kabul.



30. In the context of automatic deportation under the UK Borders Act  2007,
    his deportation would be unlawful if  he  can  establish  a  breach  of
    Article 3 as he would then fall within 'Exception 1' in  s.33(2)(a)  of
    that Act.

31. As regards the level of ill-treatment required to fall  within  Article
    3, the consistent and unabated jurisprudence of  the  Strasbourg  Court
    states that it must attain "a  minimum  level  of  severity"  before  a
    violation of Article 3 will be established  (see,  e.g.  Ireland  v  UK
    (1978) 2 EHRR 25).  The assessment of that minimum level of severity is
    relative which, in the words of the Strasbourg Court in, for example, A
    v UK (1998) 27 EHRR 611 at [20]:
         "Depends on all the circumstances of the case, such as  the  nature
         and the context of the treatment, its  duration,  its  physical  or
         mental effects and, in some instances the sex,  age  and  state  of
         health of the victim."

32. It was not suggested before me that serious incidents of self  harm  or
    attempted suicide would not reach the "minimum level of severity" as to
    engage Article 3.  The crucial issue was whether a real  risk  of  that
    consequence to the claimant had been established.

33. Recognising the fact that  the  consequence  of  suicide  or  attempted
    suicide fall potentially within Article 3, the Court of Appeal in  J  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629  set  out  the  proper  approach  to  applying
    Article 3 in this context.  Dyson LJ (as  he  then  was)  set  out  six
    points at [26]-[31] as follows:
         "26      First, the test requires an assessment to be made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that the  applicant
             would suffer if removed.  This must attain a minimum level  of
             severity.  The court has said on a number  of  occasions  that
             the  assessment  of  its   severity   depends   on   all   the
             circumstances  of  the  case.   But  the  ill-treatment   must
             "necessarily be serious"  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to
             fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to
             a country where he is at risk of  serious  ill-treatment"  see
             Ullah paras [38-39].
         27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the act
             or threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights.  Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:
                  "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or may
                  be incurred, it is liability incurred by  the  extraditing
                  Contracting State by reason of  its  having  taken  action
                  which has as a  direct  consequence  the  exposure  of  an
                  individual to proscribed ill-treatment" (emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that
             the examination of the article 3  issue  "must  focus  on  the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka...."
         28. Thirdly,  the  context  of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is a  foreign
             case.  And  it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged  inhuman
             treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility of  the
             public authorities of the receiving state,  but  results  from
             some naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.
             This is made in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
         29. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed  in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
         30. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of a  breach
             of article 3 in a suicide case, a question  of  importance  is
             whether the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving
             state upon which the risk of suicide is said to  be  based  is
             objectively well-founded.  If the fear  is  not  well-founded,
             that will tend to weigh against there being a real  risk  that
             the removal will be in breach of article 3.
         31. Sixthly, a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state has  effective
             mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.   If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her article
             3 rights."

34. That approach was subsequently approved  by  the  Strasbourg  Court  in
    Balogun v UK (2013) 56 EHRR 3 at [31]-[34].  It has also been  followed
    and applied in  subsequent  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  for
    example, AJ (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1736.

35. As Dyson LJ made clear in J (at  [29]),  an  Article  3  claim  may  in
    principle succeed in a suicide  case.   However,  it  is  necessary  to
    establish that there is a real risk that  the  individual  will  commit
    suicide and that a causal link exists between the  act  of  removal  or
    expulsion and the violation of Article 3.  There is a "high  threshold"
    and it  is  relevant  to  consider  whether  the  receiving  state  has
    "effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide".

36. It is accepted jurisprudence both in Strasbourg and  domestically  that
    the 'high threshold' recognised in cases such as D v UK (1997) 24  EHRR
    423 and N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 39 applies in
    cases of this  nature  where  the  individual's  claim  arises  from  a
    'naturally occurring illness" rather than as a result of  a  deliberate
    act by the State or third parties (see, e.g., J at [28];  AJ  (Liberia)
    at [12]-[14]; Balogun at 31]).

37. There is support for the view in Strasburg that  the  'high  threshold'
    test may require some modification, at least in its application,  where
    the circumstances befalling an individual arise from  'natural  causes'
    which are the product of state or third  party  actions,  for  example,
    appalling social and living conditions produced by civil war (see  Sufi
    and Elmi v UK (2012) 54 EHRR 9).

38. The point was picked up by the UT in GS and  EO  (Article  3  -  Health
    Cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC) at [85(9)] where the UT  suggested
    that in cases involving the risk of suicide the approach of the law may
    need some modification in its application because:
         "The removal of the individual creates  or  enhances  the  risk  of
         suicide and so  they  are  not  concerned  solely  with  a  natural
         underlying disease or illness which, although treatable in  the  UK
         would not be treated in the individual's home country."

39. It will be relevant whether the risk of suicide of  self  harm  can  be
    said to be the product of the ill-treatment meted out by the  receiving
    state or solely as a result of a  naturally  occurring  mental  illness
    (see, Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] INLR 178).

40. Whilst I accept  in  the  light  of  the  jurisprudence  that  a  'high
    threshold' must be met in suicide cases, that approach must be  applied
    in context.  In my judgement, the 'enhancement' of the risk of suicide,
    a consequence of the individual removal by the Secretary of State is an
    important aspect of the decisional matrix not least in  establishing  a
    causal link between the risk and the act or threatened act  of  removal
    or expulsion (see, J at  [27]).   I  accept,  however,  that  a  "high"
    threshold is imposed by the law in order to  establish,  in  effect,  a
    real and imminent risk of treatment  of  such  severity  as  to  engage
    Article 3.

41. With that legal structure in mind, I now turn to make  my  findings  in
    the light of all the evidence.

Findings

42. As I have said, the primary facts were not (with the exception of  what
    family support he had in Kabul) disputed by Mr Richards  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary  of  State.   Likewise,  Mr  Richards  did  not  seek  to
    challenge the  experts  view  on  the  claimant's  mental  health;  the
    availability of psychiatric treatment or  drugs  for  the  claimant  in
    Afghanistan or that he would be at  increased  risk  of  self-harm  and
    suicide if deported. However, despite that essential agreement,  it  is
    important that I set out the experts views that I have found persuasive
    and which leads me to my ultimate finding in respect of Article 3.

43. The claimant was born on 8 August 1993 and so is now 22 years  of  age.
    He came to the UK in August 2009 when he was 16 years old.

44. The claimant's mental health is dealt  with  in  a  number  of  reports
    including that  of  a  prison  psychiatrist  dated  15  December  2013,
    Professor Katona's report of 25 November 2013, Dr Cohen's  two  letters
    dated 10 September 2012 and 15 October 2012 and most  recently  in  the
    report of Dr Foster dated 1 February 2016.  The  claimant's  underlying
    mental health condition was not disputed by Mr Richards.  I set out  in
    some detail the report of Dr Foster which is very recent indeed and, in
    my judgment, is highly persuasive and I accept it.

45. In his report, Dr Foster identified that the claimant suffers from PTSD
    and EPCACE.  Dr Foster says this at paras 35-38 of his  report  (noting
    that here are 2 paragraphs each numbered 37 and 38 in the original):
         "35.     In my clinical opinion [the claimant] fulfils the criteria
             for the diagnosis  of  Post-traumatic  Stress  Disorder  ICD10
             F43.1.
               a) There are a number of  significant  stressful  events  and
                  situations before [the claimant] arrived in the  UK  which
                  were exceptionally threatening or catastrophic  in  nature
                  and likely to cause pervasive distress in any individual.
                  These would  include  witnessing  fighting,  injuries  and
                  death prior to the defeat of the Taliban  in  Afghanistan,
                  aggressive treatment by the Iranian authorities whilst  he
                  was residing there when he was reportedly kicked, punched,
                  slapped and told he would be deported.  On his  return  to
                  Afghanistan from Iran he was reportedly  attacked  by  the
                  Taliban who beat him and broke his  arm  and  one  of  his
                  teeth.  He learnt that his father had been killed and  his
                  older brother was forced to join  the  Taliban.   He  then
                  learnt that brother too had been killed  and  the  Taliban
                  demanded that [the claimant]  join  them  to  replace  his
                  brother.
               b) There is evidence of persistent remembering or  'reliving'
                  the stress or by  intrusive  flashbacks,  vivid  memories,
                  recurring dreams, or by experiencing distress when exposed
                  to  circumstances  resembling  or  associated   with   the
                  stressor  as  indicated  in   mental   state   examination
                  findings.
               c) Actual or preferred avoidance of circumstances  resembling
                  or  associated  with  the  stressor.   As  indicated  [the
                  claimant] avoids watching TV and on occasions leaving  his
                  home as he is fearful that he would  witness  an  incident
                  which would trigger a traumatic memory.
               d)  He  demonstrates  symptoms  of  increased   physiological
                  arousal   shown   by   difficulty   in   falling   asleep,
                  irritability  and  outbursts  or  anger,  and   difficulty
                  concentrating.  These were evident as outlined  in  mental
                  state examination.  His impairment  in  concentrating  and
                  his irritability was apparent in terms of his agitation at
                  interview and his difficulty waiting to be interviewed and
                  frequent wish to end the interview.
         36. In addition to this diagnosis the current  ICD-10  includes  a
             diagnosis of Enduring Personality  Change  After  Catastrophic
             Experience (EPCACE) in the Disorders of adult personality  and
             behaviour section. Code ICD 10 F62.0.
                  "Enduring personality change may follow the experience  of
                  catastrophic stress.  The stress must be so  extreme  that
                  it is unnecessary to consider  personal  vulnerability  in
                  order to explain its profound effect on  the  personality.
                  Examples include torture, and prolonged exposure to  life-
                  threatening circumstances Post-traumatic  stress  disorder
                  (F43.1) may precede this type of personality change, which
                  may then be seen as  a  chronic,  irreversible  sequel  of
                  stress disorder.   In  ICD-10  Diagnostic  guidelines  the
                  personality change should  be  enduring  and  manifest  as
                  inflexible  and  maladaptive  features   leading   to   an
                  impairment  in  interpersonal,  social,  and  occupational
                  functioning.  In  order  to  make  the  diagnosis,  it  is
                  essential  to  establish  the  presence  of  features  not
                  previously  seen,  such  as:   a  hostile  or  mistrustful
                  attitude towards the world; social withdrawal; feelings of
                  emptiness or hopelessness; a chronic feeling of being  "on
                  edge".   The personality change must have been present for
                  at least 2 years, and not be attributed to a  pre-existing
                  personality disorder or to a mental  disorder  other  than
                  post-traumatic stress disorder (F43.1.)
         37. The finding of personality disorder in the prison records does
             not therefore imply that [the claimant] is not suffering  from
             complex PTSD as the two conditions can  be  considered  to  be
             overlapping in terms of their aetiology and presentation.
         37. In my view  {the  claimant}  does  demonstrate  a  mistrustful
             attitude toward the world, social withdrawal and  feelings  of
             hopelessness together with chronic feeling of being 'on  edge'
             all of which were apparent  at  interview  and  from  previous
             accounts in the other psychiatric reports  have  been  present
             for at least 2 years.
         38. I agree with Professor Katona's comment that [the  claimant's]
             PTSD  are  not  likely  to  have  been  primarily  caused   by
             separation from his family and native country or by his  being
             stabbed in the UK an incident which post-dates  the  onset  of
             his mental health  problems.   I  also  agree  with  Professor
             Katona that his affective symptoms of depression  and  anxiety
             and his abnormal auditory experiences  i.e.  voices,  which  I
             would categorise as pseudo-hallucinations are best  understood
             as part of complex post traumatic stress disorder which, as he
             stated, can also manifest with psychotic symptoms.
         39.      Personality Change After Catastrophic  Experience  ICD  10
             F62.0 is regarded as  the  most  appropriate  description  for
             Complex PTSD in ICD classification.  This  condition  is  most
             likely to occur when there is interpersonal  trauma  which  is
             prolonged  and  occurs  in  childhood  or  adolescence.   [The
             claimant] experienced these  traumatic  experiences  prior  to
             arriving in UK at the age of 14  years.   The  nature  of  the
             trauma he experienced was largely  interpersonal  and  it  was
             prolonged for much  of  his  childhood.   I  am  therefore  in
             agreement with Professor Katona  that  he  is  suffering  with
             complex PTSD."

46.   The medical  and  other  evidence  demonstrates  that  the  claimant's
    mental health has resulted in several interventions as a  result  of  a
    number of instances of self  harm  including  attempted  suicide.   The
    claimant was, at one point, subject to compulsory detention  under  the
    mental health legislation between 9 September 2010 and 16 October 2010.
     Dr Foster states at  para  39  that,  having  considered  whether  the
    claimant is "feigning or exaggerating" his symptoms:
         "I do not find any evidence for this and, in my view, his  clinical
         presentation is in keeping with his reported experience  of  severe
         trauma."

47. Dr Foster's views are supported by both Professor Katona and Dr  Cohen.



48. In respect of the effect upon the claimant of returning to Afghanistan,
    Dr Foster deals with this at paras 45-51 of his report.  He says  this:


         "45.     I understand from the  country  expert  report  that  {the
             claimant's] living conditions if he  were  residing  in  Kabul
             would be limited.  Although his  relatives  may  provide  some
             accommodation it is stated that  it  is  likely  he  would  be
             expected to move out after a period.  The rising  unemployment
             in the area is reportedly driving many young men  into  crime.
             It was apparent from my interview with [the claimant] that  he
             is easily influenced and led by others and he  cited  this  as
             one factor resulting in him taking part in the  London  riots.
             He is likely to be particularly  vulnerable  to  be  led  into
             crime in his situation in Afghanistan.
         46. Others factors that make this more  likely  are  his  impaired
             cognitive  function,  his  continued  use  of  substances  and
             alcohol in potentially damaging ways, and the manner in  which
             he cuts off from his feeling  i.e.  dissociation.   All  these
             factors are likely to combine and would mitigate  him  seeking
             and accepting ongoing help fro his mental health problems.
         47. The country expert report highlights  the  paucity  of  mental
             health services in  Afghanistan,  with  only  6  psychiatrists
             employed.  There is no system of primary  and  secondary  care
             health services of the kind  provided  in  the  UK  making  it
             practically difficult for him to access help.  Furthermore  it
             is unlikely that there is the level of psychological expertise
             to deliver the kind of specialist evidence based psychological
             treatment that he requires for his mental health difficulties,
             which as indicated may need  to  be  continued  for  some  two
             years.  In addition I  would  agree  with  Professor  Katona's
             comment  that  [the  claimant's]  at   times   disturbed   and
             unpredictable behaviour would  make  him  more  vulnerable  to
             being stigmatised and treated in a potentially inhumane way.
         48. [The claimant] told me that he had been offered  psychological
             treatment whilst residing in Swansea.  He  could  give  me  no
             details of this and I have no independent corroboration of it.
              However he told me that he had not been able to  get  to  the
             appointments because of his sleep disturbance and at times his
             anxiety about leaving his home.
         49. There are also further  concerns  about  the  safety  of  [the
             claimant] returning to Afghanistan of a general nature related
             to the violence and unrest in  the  country  outlined  in  the
             country  expert  report  which  would  impact  on  his  mental
             health.  I am not able to comment on the general risks to  his
             safety in Afghanistan.
         50. With regard to  whether  the  present  of  family  members  in
             Afghanistan would make a material  difference  to  his  mental
             health problems, it is difficult to be  certain.   Whilst  his
             relatives may offer him accommodation and support, he  appears
             to regard his main source of support and his home to be in the
             UK.
         51. Regarding [the claimant's] risk of suicide if he were  removed
             to Afghanistan, in my view this would be increased.  He has  a
             long history of  self  harm  which  has  persisted  since  his
             arrival in the UK.  He  uses  this  as  a  maladaptive  coping
             mechanism.  It is very likely that he would continue  to  self
             harm  at  probably  increased  frequency   and   severity   in
             Afghanistan  because  of  the  stresses  associated  with  his
             residing there as outlined above.  His self harm attempts have
             been on occasions severe including  putting  ligatures  around
             his neck, putting a bag over his head and  cutting  his  neck.
             It appears likely, as Professor Katona stated,  that  some  of
             his violence to himself is motivated by his wish  to  die;  in
             addition his serious self harm attempts even if done with  the
             purpose of soothing his  emotional  state  could  accidentally
             result in his death.  [The claimant] also told me there  would
             be no life for him if he had to return to Afghanistan and that
             he would end his life using a knife or gun or jump from a high
             building."

49. Dr Foster's opinion that the claimant would be at an increased risk  of
    suicide if removed to Afghanistan is supported by Professor  Katona  in
    his report at para 10 where he states:
         "(e) Though his self harming is impulsive  and  usually  non  life-
         threatening, [the claimant] sometimes experienced a  real  wish  to
         die as well as a wish to use  pain  to  distract  from  his  mental
         symptoms.  Suicidality is increased in people with PTSD ... In  the
         light of this I think that there is high risk that  [the  claimant]
         would attempt suicide (with potentially fatal results) if  he  lost
         hope of remaining in the UK.  In my opinion the risk would be  very
         significant in the UK prior to removal and would remain  so  during
         the removal process and once he was back in Afghanistan."

50. The medical experts clearly link the claimant's  risk  of  suicide  and
    self harm to his underlying mental health pathology of PTSD and  EPCACE
    which are, themselves, the result of the claimant's adverse experiences
    in Afghanistan.

51. In his report, Dr Foster deals with the claimant's future treatment and
    prognosis at paras 40-44 as follows:
         "40.     NICE 2005 recommends  psychological  treatments  as  first
             line and  medication  second  line  treatment  in  PTSD.   The
             psychological treatments with the best evidence base  are  eye
             movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR)  and  trauma-
             focused cognitive behaviour therapy.  In the case  of  complex
             PTSD the length of treatment is greater and particular  skills
             and experience are required for this therapy.
         41. The ISTSS expert consensus treatment  guidelines  for  complex
             PTSD in adults Nov 5 2011 state  'The  treatment  for  Complex
             PTSD, then, emphasises not only the reduction  of  psychiatric
             symptoms,  but  equally,   improvement   in   key   functional
             capacities   for   self-regulation   and   strengthening    of
             psychosocial and environmental resources.'
         42. The recommended  treatment  model  involves  three  stages  of
             phases of treatment, each  with  a  distinct  function.   This
             protocol  is  supported  by  evidence  from   two   randomised
             controlled trial studies.
             Phase 1 focuses on ensuring the individual's safety,  reducing
             symptoms,  and  increasing  important  emotional,  social  and
             psychological competencies.  Phase 2 focuses on processing the
             unresolved aspects of the individual's memories  of  traumatic
             experiences.  Phase 3,  involves  consolidation  of  treatment
             gains to  facilitate  the  transition  from  the  end  of  the
             treatment to greater  engagement  in  relationships,  work  or
             education, the community life.
             Studies   suggest   that   therapies   which   include    both
             stabilisation/skills building and memory processing  generally
             appear superior to those which include only the  stabilisation
             component.
             The first goal in phase 1 is to ensure that  the  priority  of
             any  mental  health  treatment,  patient  safety,   has   been
             achieved.  A second goal is  to  strengthen  the  individual's
             capacities for emotional awareness  and  expression,  increase
             positive self- concept and address feelings of guilt and same,
             and increase interpersonal and social competencies.  The Phase
             1 goal of achieving patient safety entails reducing patient or
             environmental characteristics that make the patient  a  danger
             to him/herself or others.  This often  requires  reduction  of
             symptom acuity  (e.g.  through  the  use  of  medication)  and
             improvement in basic self-management skills.
             The majority of experts consider 6 months a reasonable  length
             of time for Phase 1, and 3 - 6 months for Phase  2.   Phase  3
             was pre-defined in the survey as a 6-12 month interval  during
             which symptoms were in emission and consolidation took  place.
             Thus this protocol  requires  up  to  2  years  of  specialist
             treatment.
         43. With regard to his psychotropic medication treatment which  is
             presently  the  antidepressant  Mirtazapine  45  mg  and   the
             antipsychotic Chlorpromazine 25 mg twice daily, I  agree  with
             Professor Katona that these medications should be reviewed  by
             a Consultant psychiatrist as there may be  better  medications
             for control of his symptoms, and Chlorpromazine is now  rarely
             used  as  a  medication  to  control  psychotic  symptoms.  In
             addition his voices  are  only  partially  controlled  by  his
             present regime.
         44. I agree with Professor Katona that [the  claimant's]  case  is
             complex and he would be best treated by a  specialist  trauma-
             focused Psychotherapy Service.  The early onset of his  trauma
             and his limited cognitive  functioning  on  mini-mental  state
             examination are poor prognostic factors."

52. Dr Foster's report is clear  and  unequivocal:  the  claimant's  mental
    health problems are complex and deep rooted.  Treatment is complex  and
    requires more than simply  the  prescription  of  anti-depressants.   A
    sophisticated therapeutic regime is called  for  straying  way  outside
    that  basis  therapeutic  response  to  the  claimant's  mental  health
    problems.  That regime involves placing the  claimant  in  a  safe  and
    supportive  environment.   That  is  important  o  bear  in  mind  when
    considering what effective mechanisms there are in  Kabul  for  dealing
    with the claimant's mental health needs.

53. What, if any, factors  or  'effective  mental  health  strategies'  are
    likely to be in place in Afghanistan to prevent the claimant  from,  as
    the evidence above clearly  leads  me  to  conclude,  of  being  at  an
    increased and real risk of committing suicide?

54. Mr Richards relied  upon  the  availability  of  two  drugs  which  the
    claimant currently takes namely Mirtazapine and Chlorpromazine.   These
    are conventional anti-depressant and anti-psychotic prescription drugs.
     Mr Richards submitted that the evidence dating back to 2013 as set out
    in the refusal letter (which is summarised in the Secretary of  State's
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal) demonstrates the  availability
    of this medication.  That evidence has, however, to be set against  the
    expert evidence both from Dr Foster and Professor Katona but  also  the
    non-medical evidence from Dr Giustozzi in his two reports.

55. Dr Foster's report makes  plain  that  the  anti-depressant  and  anti-
    psychotropic medication which may be available is not,  in  itself,  an
    adequate treatment for the claimant's complex  PTSD  which  requires  a
    three stage or phase treatment approach.  First, there  is  a  need  to
    reduce the claimant's symptoms and emotional, social and  psychological
    competencies.  Secondly, focus  upon  the  unresolved  aspects  of  his
    memories  of  traumatic  experiences  and  thirdly  a  transition  from
    treatment to greater engagement in relationships, work or education and
    community life (see para 42 of  his  report).   In  my  judgement,  the
    availability of  medication  in  itself  is  far  from  a  satisfactory
    treatment regime for the claimant's underlying conditions which  create
    the increased  risk  of  suicide.   In  my  judgement,  that  treatment
    requires a relatively sophisticated mental health treatment regime in a
    climate of relative stability.

56. The evidence of Dr Giustozzi, in particular, tells heavily against such
    a regime being available to the claimant in  Kabul.    In  his  earlier
    report dated 21 June 2014,  Dr  Giustozzi  sets  out  the  position  as
    follows at paras 21-28 of his report:
         "21.     In Afghanistan [the claimant] would not receive a level of
             mental health care even remotely comparable to that  he  could
             receive in the UK.  Outside a  few  cities  (see  below),  the
             provision of mental health care in Afghanistan is almost  non-
             existent. The country's only mental health hospital (Kabul) is
             in bad condition due to war damage and  lack  of  maintenance.
             Furthermore, it lacks equipment.  The  hospital  has  60  beds
             (2011).  In 2003 some patients were reported to be permanently
             chained to the beds, while violent and schizophrenic  patients
             were confined to darkened cells.  Plans to  expand  facilities
             with the building of new  hospitals  were  never  implemented.
             There is a problem of understaffing, as many  of  the  already
             limited number of trained mental health professional have left
             the country.  In  2010  there  were  only  two  fully  trained
             psychiatrists in the whole of  Afghanistan, a few  psychiatric
             nurses and not even one psychologist;  40  more  psychiatrists
             and psychologists had received  partial  training.   In  early
             2010 the National Health Strategy was  revised  to  give  more
             space to mental health  care,  the  focus  being  on  training
             health staff in mental health care awareness  and  in  forming
             psychosocial  counsellors.   However,  the  limited   training
             imparted in mental health care is resulting in  the  abuse  of
             psychotropic drugs, with an estimated 30%  of  the  population
             taking such drugs and abusing them (see below).
         22. If we consider that according to the World Health Organisation
             as of 2010 about 60% of Afghans suffer from various  forms  of
             mental health problems, it is  obvious  that  the  chances  of
             having access to care for  the  average  Afghan  patient  with
             mental health conditions are slim indeed.   The  opportunities
             for  psychosocial   support   are   almost   non-existent   in
             Afghanistan, mainly because of the extreme shortage of trained
             mental health professionals.  Although the government had made
             mental health one of the priorities in the  reconstruction  of
             the health system, in practice little was done,  not  even  in
             terms  of  starting  training  programs  for   mental   health
             specialists.  This situation led a doctor to define the mental
             health care system  of  Afghanistan  as  'almost  nonexistent'
             during a briefing to the Congress of the  United  States.   In
             early 2014 the International Medical Corps commented:
                  'National guidelines recommend  the  inclusion  of  mental
                  health services in the Basic Package  of  Health  Services
                  (BPHS) with linkages to other services provided under  the
                  Essential Package of Hospital Services  (EPHS).   However,
                  implementation is inconsistent and fragmented and reliable
                  results  are  still  unknown.   At  the  tertiary   level,
                  national guidelines do not currently exist  to  streamline
                  or improve the overall  staff  capacity,  quality  control
                  measures, or budgetary resources at the mental health  and
                  detoxification institutions in Kabul.'
             The European Union is supporting  the  rehabilitation  of  the
             mental health hospital and has paid for the construction of  a
             new building within it; the capacity of the  hospital  remains
             rated at 60 beds, however.  Counselling is available in  small
             clinics thinly distributed around the country.  Even in  Kabul
             they have  few  and  far  between  and  attending  them  could
             seriously disrupt attending school  or  presence  at  the  job
             place.   A  report  by  the  umbrella  organisation  of   NGOs
             operating in Afghanistan dated 2008 stated that
                  'NGOs  commented  that  healthcare  professionals  do  not
                  receive enough training or funding to train others.   NGOs
                  specified  mental  health  and  disability  as   an   area
                  extremely lacking of educated  and  qualified  staff  with
                  capacity  to  address  these   conditions   and   severely
                  inadequate monetary support as well.'
         23. Some international NGOs  offered  training  and  help  to  the
             Afghan mental health service; of all the NGOs listed as active
             in Afghanistan, only two appear to be active in mental  health
             care.  Greek NGO Klimaka for example provided some  equipment,
             translating a training manual into local languages,  renovated
             facilities and provided 8 week  training  courses.   HealthNet
             TPO is the largest NGO  involved  in  mental  health  care  in
             Afghanistan, but the impact has so  far  been  limited;  their
             main contribution is the supply of some medicines.   According
             to a WHO report,
                  'Psychosocial interventions centres  were  established  in
                  2005 by some international NGOs in the  capital  but  they
                  have not been implemented in rural areas.'
         24. In recent years a number of  psychotropic  drugs  have  become
             available in Afghanistan, usually imported from  Pakistan  and
             mostly illegally (80%).  In fact the country now suffers  from
             widespread  abuse  of  tranquillisers,  including   the   more
             powerful ones.  The import of tranquillisers is driven by drug
             addiction, not by prescription or hospital use.  To the extent
             that they are available, patients have to pay for  them.   The
             mental health hospital in Kabul only receives  $100  worth  of
             medicines monthly for 2,500 patients.  According to the WHO,
                  '100,000 US $ was directed towards mental health in  2004.
                  Of all the expenditures spent on mental health 50,000 US $
                  is directed towards mental hospitals.  The  percentage  of
                  the population with free access to essential  psychotropic
                  medicines is less than  1%  For  those  that  pay  out  of
                  pocket, the cost of antipsychotic medication is 6 Afghanis
                  (12% of daily minimum wage) and antidepressant  medication
                  is  8  Afghanis  (16%  of  daily  minimum  wage).   Mental
                  disorders are not covered by social insurance schemes.'
         25.  There  is  no  proper  supervision  of  the  distribution  of
             medicines in Afghanistan.  80 poorly paid inspectors from  the
             Ministry of Public Health are not even  able  to  ensure  that
             Pharmacies are staffed by at least one pharmacist as  required
             by the  law.   Two  distribution  channels  exist,  one  being
             International  NGOs  (such  as  the  Swedish   Committee   for
             Afghanistan, SCA), which deals with basic medicines only,  and
             the other being small importers who operate without licence or
             authorisation and mainly buy drugs  in  Pakistan  and  re-sell
             them in Afghanistan.  Such drugs  are  transported  in  common
             lorries without refrigeration or any  other  particular  care,
             which  can  lead  sometimes  to  the  deterioration   of   the
             medicines, without patients and medical personnel being  aware
             of that.  It is impossible to establish  exactly  which  drugs
             are imported through the second channel, but in general  these
             too appear  to  be  widely  requested  products,  rather  than
             specialist  medicines,  not  least  because   obtaining   such
             medicines in Pakistan might  be  difficult  and/or  expensive,
             while the possibility of selling them would remain  uncertain.
             Afghan  doctors  have  little  or  no  access  to   up-to-date
             information about the availability of new and specialist drugs
             and  therefore  tend  not  to  prescribe  them,  removing  any
             incentive for importers to seek the products in Pakistan.
         26. There is no  24  hour  supervised  care  hostel  for  patients
             suffering from mental health  problems  in  Afghanistan.   All
             that is available apart from the  mental  health  hospital  in
             Kabul mentioned above is counselling for PTSD with 16 'psycho-
             social centres' spread around the Afghan cities of  Kabul  and
             Heart, which essentially provide  counselling  to  individuals
             suffering  from  mental  health  problems,  mostly  PTSD   and
             depression.  These are manned by nurses and doctors  who  have
             been partially retained to deal  with  mental  health  issues,
             rather then by mental  health  specialists.   Given  the  very
             widespread incidence of PTSD in Afghanistan (a 2002 survey  by
             the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that
             42 percent  of Afghans  suffered  from  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder),   even  for  this  type   of   patients   receiving
             consistent support is very difficult.  It is not known whether
             psychological treatments such as 'eye movement desensitisation
             and  reprocessing'   (EMDR)   and   trauma-focused   cognitive
             behavioural  therapy'  are  available  in  Afghanistan;   they
             certainly would not  be  available  outside  the  only  mental
             health hospital existing in the country.
         27. Individuals will be considered by the  Afghan  health  service
             for mental health care assistance if they  present  themselves
             to a clinic or hospital of their own will or are brought there
             by their relatives.   Then  a  doctor  will  assess  them  and
             decide whether they are entitled to assistance.  It  will  not
             be the case, therefore,  of  the  health  service  proactively
             reaching out to [the claimant]. His  needs  will  be  assessed
             against those of the large number of people  who  suffer  from
             mental health condition (approx. 2 million in  Kabul,  but  of
             course not all seeking medical support).  It is unlikely  that
             he would then receive  more  than  cursory  attention  by  the
             medical staff at the country's only mental health hospital.
         28.  Several  antidepressants  are  available  in  Afghanistan  as
             authorised drugs, according  to  the  latest  (2007)  National
             Licensed Drug list.   However,  the  real  issue  is  that  in
             practice  having  access  to  treatment  will   be   extremely
             difficult:  [the claimant] will have to reside in  a  city  to
             have access, with only Kabul offering a relatively wide  range
             of treatment opportunities in the only mental health  hospital
             in the country.  In Kabul he would  have  to  compete  with  a
             large portion of the five million residents of the  city  (40%
             suffering  mental   health   issues,   but   unknown   numbers
             effectively reporting to the health system) for the  attention
             of a handful of  mental  health   staff  (see  above  for  the
             numbers).  Even these very limited opportunities for treatment
             will only be available in Kabul, but it is  far  from  certain
             that [the claimant] will be able to live in Kabul,  given  the
             high cost of living there and his likely inability  to  get  a
             well paid job given his condition. "

57. In his more recent report dated 4 July 2015 Dr  Guistozzi  updates  the
    position at para 8 of his report as follows:
         "8.      As mentioned in my previous report,  several  psychotropic
             medications are available in  Afghanistan,  even  if  not  all
             those that are available on the UK  market.   Mirtazapine  and
             Chlorprozamine  are  both   licensed   for   distribution   in
             Afghanistan.  There are issues with the quality of  medicines,
             due to the presence of counterfeits manufactured in  Pakistan;
             it is estimated that up to half of all  medicines  circulating
             in Afghanistan are Pakistani counterfeits.  There has been  no
             significant expansion  or  improvement  in  the  provision  of
             mental health facilities in Afghanistan  compared  to  what  I
             detailed in my previous report.  The  mental  health  hospital
             still has only 60 places, although the number of psychiatrists
             operating there has gone up to 6 (from 2 in 2010).  There  are
             also about 30 other doctors, who have received  some  training
             in  mental  health  care   without   being   fully   qualified
             psychiatrists.  It should be noted that to be admitted to this
             hospital, it is necessary to be accompanied by a relative  all
             the time."

58. As I have said early, none  of  this  evidence  was  challenged  by  Mr
    Richards.  The availability of treatment for mental health is bleak  in
    Afghanistan even though some provision is made in  Kabul.   Drugs  may,
    however, be black-market counterfeits.  Secondary psychiatric  care  is
    sparse in the extreme.   There  are  only  60  hospital  places  and  6
    practising psychiatrists in the whole  of  Afghanistan.   Dr  Guistozzi
    also makes the point that admission to hospital requires a relative  to
    accompany the individual.  For the reasons I give below, I am satisfied
    that it is unlikely that the claimant will have  the  familial  support
    (beyond possibly the short-term) that would allow  him  to  access  any
    needed hospital treatment.  Consequently, in my judgment there is

59. The dismal position that the claimant would face, as regards  treatment
    and professional support in Kabul, does not in my judgement obviate the
    real risk that he will attempt or  succeed  in  committing  suicide  on
    return.   There is very likelihood that he would not be able to  access
    effective treatment or medication.  There is no evidence, to  which  my
    attention was drawn, that suggests the sophisticated regime he requires
    for  his  complex  PTSD  is  available  in  Afghanistan.   The  parlous
    situation recognised in the reports and background material can provide
    no confidence that it is.

60. The claimant does, of course, have a well-founded fear  of  persecution
    in his home area.  That subjective (and objective) fear taken  together
    with the evidence which, I accept,  demonstrates  that  he  will  be  a
    vulnerable individual in Kabul creates the very milieu  of  instability
    and social and other support which is essential to the  treatment  that
    the experts,  in  particular  Dr  Foster,  indicate  is  vital  to  the
    claimant's wellbeing and road to recovery from  his  underlying  mental
    health pathology.  In my judgement, that will simply be  absent  if  he
    returns to Kabul.

61. The Secretary of State relies upon  the  fact  that  the  claimant  has
    family in Kabul to support him.  In his evidence, the claimant accepted
    that he had family on his mother's side in Kabul whom he  visited  when
    he was young but they were not close.   In his evidence before  me,  it
    was clear that this family was related  to  his  mother  and  had  been
    visited by his cousin (from the UK) to obtain documents which had  been
    left there by his maternal uncle.  The claimant maintains  that  he  is
    unaware where his close family are.  I bear in mind that the Red  Cross
    have been unable to trace the claimant's close family.

62. The claimant gave his oral evidence in a clear and open  manner  and  I
    accept what he told me.   It  is  unclear  to  me  why  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found, on evidence very similar to that which I heard, that he
    had "very close" relatives in Kabul. He clearly  does  not  have  close
    family in Kabul.  Likewise, I am satisfied that there is  no  realistic
    prospect that his close family  could  be  traced  and  could  come  to
    support him in Kabul if he lived there.  I accept that he  may  (and  I
    put in no higher than that) be able to obtain some  short-term  support
    from the family that he does have in Kabul but there is  no  reason  to
    believe that that support would be long term.  The family are not close
    and the claimant has little knowledge of them  or  they  of  him.   The
    claimant's social and medical needs are not short term.

63. In any event, in the absence of the necessary  professional  support  -
    which I find there is a real risk the claimant  will  not  be  able  to
    obtain in Kabul - the fact that he may obtain some  support  (including
    perhaps accommodation) in the short term with his relatives but whom he
    barely knows, will not provide a social structure that will  materially
    assist in removing the increased risk of suicide which, on the basis of
    the expert evidence, I find will  exist  if  the  claimant  returns  to
    Kabul.

64. I do not propose to set out  in  any  detail  the  background  evidence
    concerning the situation in Afghanistan, in particular in Kabul.  I was
    only fleetingly referred to it by Ms Fisher.   In  AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC), the UT noted the possibility of
    internal relocation to Kabul (where the  circumstances  were  not  such
    that Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  was  generally  engaged)
    but that  the  issues  of  "safety"  and  "reasonableness"  were  fact-
    sensitive.  That case dealt with background material up to early  2012.
    The  COI  Report,  Afghanistan  (August  2015)  (at  Tab   B,   p71-92)
    acknowledges that  the  "humanitarian  situation"  in  Afghanistan  has
    deteriorated although not to the extent to  engage  Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive (see para 2.4.4).   The  vulnerability  of  the
    individual is a factor to be considered.   Suffice  it  to  say,  Kabul
    remains a dangerous place (see COI Report, Afghanistan)  (August  2015)
    at para 4.4.  Dr Guistozzi, in his reports, highlights the difficulties
    that the claimant would face in obtaining employment  or  other  social
    support in Kabul (see in particular paras 31-32 of his report dated  21
    June 2014).  Dr Guistozzi also (at para 30 of that  report)  highlights
    the negative attitude towards individuals suffering from mental illness
    as follows:
         "30.     There is little understanding among the wider  public  and
             law enforcement agencies about mental illness.   The  dominant
             attitude towards mental health  conditions  remains  based  on
             prejudice.  It is still common to  think,  for  example,  that
             epileptic  people  are  possessed  by   djinns   or   spirits,
             particularly among rural folk  or  recent  immigrants  to  the
             cities.  Individuals  with  symptoms  of  mental  illness  are
             therefore likely to suffer discrimination and  face  increased
             difficulties obtaining accommodation, employment and jobs in a
             new area.  An attempted suicide could also lead to  internment
             and/or discrimination as suicide is look upon very  negatively
             in all Muslim countries.  If health staff are unable  to  deal
             with schizophrenia and other serious mental health  conditions
             adequately; one can imagine how the average man in the  street
             will deal with it."

65. Although Ms Fisher did not resile from the argument that  the  risk  of
    suicide by the claimant was not restricted to his circumstances when in
    Afghanistan, she relied principally upon  that  rather  than  any  risk
    before or during the process of removal itself.   She was right  to  do
    so.  The evidence does not establish that risk engaging Art 3 prior  to
    the claimant actually returning to Afghanistan.  I accept that  the  UK
    government is likely to put in place mechanisms to prevent the claimant
    committing or attempting to commit suicide  in  the  UK  and  prior  to
    arrival in Kabul.

66. Based upon the evidence, I  am  however  satisfied  that  there  is  an
    increased and real risk to the claimant of committing or attempting  to
    commit suicide on return to Kabul despite the potential availability of
    any medication (which is practically doubtful) and  despite  the  short
    term availability of some family to  provide  support  in  Kabul.   The
    claimant has a long history of self harm and attempted suicide.  He has
    attempted suicide many times.  His underlying mental  health  pathology
    is established and  is  not  in  dispute.   Also  established  are  the
    therapeutic needs for the treatment of his complex PTSD  which  is  the
    root cause of the risk to him taken with his past experiences  and  the
    well-founded fear he has  on  return  to  Afghanistan.   Equally,   his
    vulnerability on return is established as is the  lack  of  social  and
    other stability required  for  an  effective  mental  health  treatment
    strategy which itself is  not likely to be available to him  on  return
    to Kabul given the  parlous  state  of  mental  health  facilities  and
    treatment in Afghanistan including Kabul.

67. Applying the approach set out in J set out  above  at  para  33,  I  am
    satisfied that there is an increased and real risk to the claimant that
    he will self-harm or attempt suicide if he is  removed  to  Afghanistan
    which will be causally linked to the act of removal.  There  would  not
    be in place effective mental  health  strategies  or  familial  support
    which  would  obviate  that  risk.   Applying  the   "high   threshold"
    requirement, this  is  a  case  where  the  underlying  causes  of  the
    claimant's mental health problems derive from his past history and  his
    removal by the UK to Afghanistan. That is a relevant factor which  will
    exasperate his very real mental health  problems.   There  are,  in  my
    judgment,  analogues  with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  approach  to  the
    individuals' circumstances in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) where the individuals
    inability to seek the required treatment was born of the very objective
    fear in Sri Lanka that gave rise to their mental  health  problems  and
    the risk of suicide (see per Sedley LJ at [61]).    In  this  case  the
    claimant will also be returned to the place which is the source of  his
    mental health problems and where he has an objective well-founded  fear
    (at least in his home area) and for which  no  effective  treatment  or
    effective familial support will be available in order to  obviate  that
    risk.

68. On the basis of the evidence, I am confident those circumstances create
    a real risk that he will attempt suicide.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    'high threshold' is met  in  that  the  claimant's  circumstances  will
    degenerate on return in the  absence  of  adequate  medical  and  other
    support to  a  level  which  entails  a  severe  loss  of  dignity  and
    humiliation leaving him exposed to the real  risk  of  harming  himself
    including fatally.  That decline into a state of self-harm and suicidal
    propensity cannot, in my judgment, be seen as other  than  calling  out
    for the 'humanitarian' response through the application  of  Art  3  as
    presaged by the Strasbourg and domestic case law.

69. For these reasons, there are substantial grounds for believing that  if
    he is returned to Afghanistan (Kabul) he faces a real risk  of  inhuman
    or degrading treatment as the consequences to him of attempting suicide
    reach minimum level of severity to engage Article 3 of the ECHR.

70. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  claimant's  deportation  to
    Afghanistan (in particular to Kabul) would breach Article 3 of the ECHR
    and would, therefore, be unlawful under s.33 of the 2007 Act.

71. Mr Richards accepted that if that was my finding, the claimant was also
    a refugee as he had a well-founded fear of persecution in his own  area
    (as found by the First-tier Tribunal)  and  he  could  not  safely  and
    reasonably internally relocate to Kabul.   For  that  reason  also,  he
    accepted, that the claimant's deportation would be unlawful under  s.33
    of the 2007 Act as it would breach the Refugee Convention.

72. In the light of my finding in respect of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3, no separate issue arises in respect of Art 8.



Decision

73. For the reasons given by the Upper Tribunal in its  decision  dated  12
    March 2015, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and  that
    decision has been set aside.

74. For the reasons I have given above, I remake the decision allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against his deportation  pursuant  to  the  automatic
    deportation  provisions  in  the  2007  Act  on  the  basis  that   his
    deportation would breach Article 3 of the ECHR  and  also  the  Refugee
    Convention.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


