
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00437/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2019                              |On 29 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Responden


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Rea, Solicitor, Rea Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and MC  as  "the
    appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Romania.  The Secretary of State has been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Buchanan who  allowed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order dated 19 June 2018 on the grounds  of  public  policy
    and public security by reference to Regulation 23(6)(b) and  Regulation
    27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.   The
    decision sets out the immigration history  of  the  appellant  who  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 as a clandestine illegal migrant.
    He made  an  unsuccessful  application  for  asylum  against  which  he
    unsuccessfully appealed and was removed from  the  United  Kingdom  the
    same year.


 3. The appellant re-entered the United Kingdom sometime in April 2016.  In
    November that year he was encountered sleeping rough in London  and  as
    he was not considered to be exercising EEA treaty rights he was  served
    with removal papers.  On 18 October 2017 he  was  detained  and  served
    with notice of liability to deportation.  This was by reference to  his
    criminal history as follows:


         "On 06 May 2011 at Court Filasi, Romania,  you  were  convicted  of
         damage/destroy property, illegal entry  to  property  and  threats.
         You were sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.


         On 24 November 2015 at Aalborg Court, Denmark, you  were  convicted
         of intentionally cause minor injury and  unauthorised  entry.   You
         were sentenced to 40 days imprisonment and had  a  6  year  ban  on
         entering Denmark imposed.


         On 17 March 2016 at Aalborg Court, Denmark, you were  convicted  of
         unauthorised entry/violation of ban on entry.  You  were  sentenced
         to 3 months imprisonment.


         On 19 January 2017 in the United Kingdom, you were  issued  with  a
         police warning for the misuse of drugs.


         On 04 April 2017 you were arrested by Police Scotland.  You claimed
         to them that you were not working and had no fixed abode.


         On 22 June 2017 you received a police  penalty  notice  for  street
         drinking."


 4. The Secretary of State accepted that despite the lack of  evidence  the
    appellant had been working in the United Kingdom since  June  2016  and
    that he had been exercising his treaty rights until  November  2016  by
    when he had  been  encountered.   It  was  considered  clear  from  the
    appellant's criminal  history  that  he  had  a  propensity  to  offend
    including an offence of such severity that he had been  given  a  three
    year custodial sentence  in  Romania.   The  Secretary  of  State  also
    considered the case with reference to Article 8 and in  particular  the
    appellant's family life with children in the  United  Kingdom  who  had
    been born in 2004 and 2000,  as  well  as  his  family  life  with  his
    partner, Miss Brown for whom it would not be unduly harsh  to  live  in
    Romania should she choose to do so.  Finally, the  Secretary  of  State
    certified the  case  with  reference  to  Regulation  33  of  the  2016
    Regulations.


 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  reached  the  following  conclusions  at
    paragraphs [38] to [42]:


         "38. In my judgement, the personal conduct of  the  appellant  does
             not represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
             threat affecting the fundamental interests of society.  Taking
             into account past conduct of the appellant I am not  persuaded
             that  deportation  is  warranted.    I   conclude   that   the
             respondent's decision does not comply with  the  principle  of
             proportionality; and that the decision, based  exclusively  on
             the personal conduct of the appellant, is not warrant  in  the
             foregoing circumstances.  I  recognise  that  the  appellant's
             previous convictions do not in themselves justify  a  decision
             to deport; and in this appeal there are no reasonable  grounds
             to conclude that the decision  is  justified  on  preventative
             grounds because of the appellant's  criminal  history  or  the
             likelihood that the appellant will re-offend.


         39.  In my judgement,  there  is  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
             appellant has integrated in the United Kingdom.   He  has  met
             and formed a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  new
             partner since his arrival into the UK; and he has undertaken a
             positive role in the lives of his partner's children.


         40.  In my judgement, because of the limited number of offences for
             which the appellant has been convicted over a small  range  of
             offences over a relatively long period [2011-2017 - if the  UK
             encounters can be considered convictions] the  appellant  does
             not fall to be perceived as  a  persistent  offender  who  has
             served long sentences for his crimes.  It is unlikely,  in  my
             judgement, that the appellant's continued presence in  the  UK
             represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
             affecting the fundamental interests of society because of  his
             history of offending [see paragraph 3 of  Schedule  1  to  the
             2016 Regulations].


         41.  In reaching my judgement on the foregoing matters,  I  reflect
             on the nature of offences for which  the  appellant  has  been
             convicted.  There has clearly been damage to property at  some
             stage in Romania.   The  specifics  of  the  offence  are  not
             disclosed by any third-party report.  However, the  conviction
             is quite aged now and the other offences, for which there  are
             convictions, are not analogous.  The offences in Denmark  show
             an unintentional injury having been inflicted; but again,  the
             specifics of the offence are not disclosed in any report.  The
             sentence of imprisonment are so short that I do  not  consider
             them a "serious" offence nor a "serious threat" to one of  the
             fundamental interests of society.


         42.  In the instant appeal in my judgement, the UK state's interest
             in  protecting  its  citizens  from  crime  and  those   other
             interests listed in schedule 1 of the  2016  Regulations  does
             not override  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  appellant's
             family's hope that they might live together in the UK because:
             the criminality is at the lower if not the lowest end  of  the
             scale (including the 3  years  in  Romania  where  the  option
             appears to have been a period of  imprisonment  of  up  to  30
             years); because the offences  are  all  quite  aged;  and  the
             recent encounters with the police in Scotland did not lead  to
             convictions and arise out of  circumstances  which  cannot  be
             described as uncommon."


 6. The judge also addressed Article 8 and after reflecting on matters  set
    out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (but noting that the provision applied in relation to non-EU  citizens)
    concluded at [46]:


         "46. In my judgement, for the reasons given in my decision  on  the
             application of the 2016 Regulations, I am not persuaded by the
             respondent that interference with the rights to be accorded to
             the appellant and the individual family members by application
             of   article   8   ECHR   is   a    proportionate    response.
             Proportionality requires to be assessed when applying the 2016
             regulations to the appellant's circumstances; and I adopt  the
             reasons discussed above about the  appellant's  EU  rights  as
             forming the reasons  for  concluding  that  interference  with
             private  and  family  life  is  not  proportionate   in   this
             appellant's claim."


 7. The Secretary of State relies on the single ground that the  judge  had
    materially misdirected himself as to the law and  considered  that  the
    judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    appellant did not represent a threat with reference to:


    (i)  By downplaying the seriousness of the offence in Romania.


    (ii) The appellant's expulsion from Denmark, and being subject to a six
         year re-entry ban.


    (iii)    The erroneous use of Rule 398 as a "yardstick".


    (iv) Treatment of the appellant's mature years as  offending  was  more
         likely to be a one-off event.


    (v)  A failure  to  take  into  account  material  matters,  being  the
         appellant having continued to come to the attention of the police.


    (vi) There was no  reason  why  rehabilitation  might  not  take  place
         elsewhere than the United Kingdom.


    (vii)    A failure to consider Section 117C in the Article 8 exercise.


    (viii)    Error  over   assessment   of   the   appellant's   financial
         independence.


    (ix) Failure to take into account the appellant's record of attempt  to
         enter Denmark in breach of his six year travel ban.


 8. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede observed:


         "There is arguable merit in the assertion in the grounds  that  the
         judge  arguably  downplayed  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
         offending and his conduct, in assessing  the  threat  he  posed  to
         society, and arguably failed to have regard to all material matters
         as set out in the grounds ..."


 9. In response to my enquiries  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had no UK convictions but instead a warning
    and a penalty. It also emerged  that  the  offences  of  which  he  was
    convicted in Romania took place in  2008.  The  only  evidence  of  the
    foreign offending was a document provided by the UK  Central  Authority
    for the Exchange of Criminal  Records  and  no  sentencing  remarks  or
    probation report or its equivalents were provided.  As to the  criminal
    history the judge detailed this at [20] to [23]:


         "    [by age 32 - in or about April 2011]


         20.  The appellant was  convicted  in  Romania  on  21/04/2011  for
             "destruction  of  property";  "violation  of  domicile";   and
             "threat" and appears  from  the  record  to  have  received  a
             cumulative sentence of 3 years imprisonment [see  RB-E2  where
             listing under Decision 1  sanction  ID  S-00104  which  states
             "sanction S-00104 replaces S-00101 to S-00103."]


             [by age 36 - in or about November 2015]


         21.  The appellant was convicted in Denmark  on  24/11/2015  for  a
             crime of attempt or preparation of  violence  relating  to  an
             offence categorised as "unintentionally causing  minor  bodily
             injury"; and for a crime of "unauthorised entry or residence";
             and appears from the record to have received a sentence of  40
             days imprisonment and expulsion and ban  on  entering  Denmark
             for 6 years.


             [by age 37 - in or about March 2016]


         22.  The appellant was convicted in Denmark  on  17/03/2016  for  a
             crime of violating a ban on entry; and appears from the record
             to have received a sentence  of  3  months  imprisonment;  and
             expulsion and ban on entering Denmark for 6 years.


             [in or about January 2017 - June 2017]


         23.  The respondent does not produce a formal police record to  the
             appellant's conduct in the first half  of  2017,  but  in  the
             Notice of Decision dated 19 June 2018,  the  respondent  notes
             (1) police warning for the misuse of drugs; (2) arrest by  the
             police (for undisclosed circumstances); and (3) police penalty
             notice for street drinking.  The entries are not  convictions,
             though obviously the events leading to the intervention of the
             police  might  constitute  conduct  which  could  fall  to  be
             assessed  in  terms  of   regulation   27(5)   of   the   2016
             Regulations."


10. The judge also described  the  nature  of  the  offences  at  [24]  and
    thereafter gave his reasons:


         "24. The nature of  offences  for  which  the  appellant  has  been
             convicted overseas  are  varied  though  limited;  but  in  my
             judgement only  the  conviction  in  Romania  falls  within  a
             category which might be called a "serious" offence.


         25.  I reach that conclusion because the sanctions imposed for  the
             remaining offences  committed  overseas  illustrate  that  the
             convicting  courts  and/or  prosecuting  authorities  did  not
             regard the offences as "serious" crimes.   I  have  regard  to
             paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 of the 2016 regulations which states
             that where there is  a  custodial  sentence,  the  longer  the
             sentence or more numerous the  convictions,  the  greater  the
             likelihood that the appellant's continued presence in  the  UK
             represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
             affecting of [sic] the fundamental interests of  society.   In
             this appeal, the remaining sentences (those other than imposed
             in Romania) are not long and they are not  numerous.   I  also
             take as a yardstick, for want of any better comparative  tool,
             the  different  categories  of  foreign  criminal   given   in
             immigration rule 398 which distinguishes between those who are
             (i) sentenced for a period of  imprisonment  in  excess  of  4
             years; (ii) sentenced for a period of imprisonment of  between
             1 and 4 years; and  (iii)  persistent  offenders  who  show  a
             particular disregard for the law.  In my judgement none of the
             appellant's  conduct  other  than  the   events   leading   to
             conviction in Romania ought to be perceived  as  "serious"  or
             showing a particular disregard for the law  as  the  sanctions
             imposed for the relevant conduct is likely to have been at the
             lowest range of options for imprisonment for each conviction.


         26.   In  relation  to  the  events  leading  to  the   appellant's
             encounters with the police in the UK  in  the  first  half  of
             2017, I note that none has given rise to criminal proceedings.
              I am unable to hazard a guess at the  number  of  people  who
             might be encountered by the police conducting themselves in  a
             similar manner on any given  night  in  Scotland;  but  in  my
             judgement taken from informing myself by reading the press and
             taken from observing the community  at  large,  it  cannot  be
             considered to be uncommon  behaviour.   No  convictions  arise
             from that conduct."


11. The judge then described evidence he had heard regarding  the  Romanian
    offence at [27]:


         "27. The appellant explains at WS2  that  on  6  May  2011  he  was
             convicted  for  trespassing  in  Romania  which  led  to   his
             conviction there.  He states that the offence was committed in
             2008; and he states; "The reasons that I was  given  a  three-
             year prison sentence was because I did not attend at the diets
             for my criminal matter in Romania as I was in Denmark  at  the
             time."  In oral evidence, the appellant said that  the  events
             leading to conviction arose out of  an  argument  which  ended
             with him breaking a gate to property.  He said that he  served
             2 years and 5 months of the 3 years' sentence.  He  said  that
             his father was caught up in the events too."


12. Under the heading of Re-offending the judge set out his survey  of  the
    evidence and conclusions between [28] and 34 as follows:


         "28. In my judgement, having regard to the  very  small  number  of
             offences committed by the appellant over  the  course  of  his
             adult life I am persuaded that the prospects  of  re-offending
             are low.  I reach  that  conclusion  because  the  appellant's
             offence in Romania was committed when he was relatively mature
             in years.  He was not in the first flush  of  youth  when  the
             events took  place.   I  consider  that  that  is  significant
             because it illustrates that the appellant is  not  a  "career"
             criminal or indeed a "persistent" offender.  In my  judgement,
             to reach the age of about 32 before  being  convicted  for  an
             offence is more likely to arise in  circumstances  claimed  by
             the appellant: that there was an argument  which  got  out  of
             hand.  It is likely to be more  of  a  "one-off"  event;  than
             conduct which is likely to be repeated.


         29.  In the Notice issued by the respondent it  is  said  that  the
             appellant committed a serious criminal offence in Romania, and
             "as explained above, there is a real risk  that  you  may  re-
             offend in the future."  The explanation "above" is  summarised
             in a section entitled "Risk of  harm/reoffending  conclusion".
             There  the  respondent  states  "All  the  available  evidence
             indicates that you have a propensity to re-offend and that you
             represent a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to
             the public to justify your deportation on  grounds  of  public
             policy."  What is founded upon by the respondent as "evidence"
             is stated in the preceding paragraph in the following  manner:
             "It is clear from  your  criminal  history  that  you  have  a
             propensity to offend.  In Romania your offending was  of  such
             severity that you received a 3 year custodial sentence.  While
             this was some time ago, since then you have offended twice  in
             Denmark where  you  have  been  handed  a  re-entry  ban,  and
             convicted on three occasions since arriving in the UK."


         30.  I note that  the  factual  basis  upon  which  the  respondent
             proceeds to conclude that there is a risk of  re-offending  is
             incorrect if the summary given at  the  outset  for  "criminal
             history" is relied on.  There it is stated that on 19  January
             2017, the appellant was issued with a police warning  for  the
             misuse of drugs.  That is not a conviction.  Next it is stated
             that on 4 April 2017 the appellant was arrested.  That is  not
             a conviction.  Next it is stated that  on  22  June  2017  the
             appellant  received  a  police  penalty  notice   for   street
             drinking.  That is not a conviction.  Direct measures such  as
             a warning or a  penalty  notice  do  not  constitute  criminal
             convictions.  In my judgement, it was wrong for the respondent
             to conclude that the events in the UK amount to  "convictions"
             on three occasions since his arrival here.


         31.  Having regard to the nature  of  offences  in  Denmark,  these
             appear  to  be  at  the  very  lowest  end  of  the  scale  of
             criminality though the violation of  the  ban  on  entry  does
             indicate a disregard for the law.  AT WS3, the appellant  does
             not explain why  he  attempted  to  re-enter  Denmark  despite
             having received a travel ban.  But given that the appellant is
             no longer trying to enter Denmark and has committed himself to
             living in Scotland, it appears  unlikely  that  the  appellant
             would re-offend by travelling there within the period  of  the
             existing ban.  One of the offences relates to  "unintentional"
             minor bodily injury; and in my judgement that too must  be  at
             the lowest end of the scale of criminality, given  that  there
             was  an  "unintentional"  element  to  it;  and  standing  the
             sanction of imprisonment of only 40 days.  In my judgement, as
             the Tribunal was not informed  about  sentencing  options,  it
             cannot be  discounted  as  a  possibility  that  a  period  of
             imprisonment was imposed because a financial penalty might not
             have been thought appropriate due to impecuniosity  or  simply
             because it would be expected that the appellant would have  to
             leave the country and  so  would  have  little  likelihood  of
             paying a fine.


         32.  I note that there is no formal report  from  any  third  party
             agency about the risks of re-offending.


         33.  I do not regard the list of convictions  are  "numerous";  and
             with only one "long" sentence of  imprisonment  for  something
             committed (as claimed) in  2008  or  for  something  in  which
             conviction was imposed in 2011, I am not persuaded  that  that
             conviction along with the Denmark offences and encounters with
             the police in Scotland could be perceived  as  constituting  a
             present threat to one of the fundamental interests of society.


         34.  In my judgement, the prospects of "rehabilitation" if  a  live
             issue for  this  appellant  would  be  better  served  by  him
             remaining  in  the  UK.  He  has  only   recently   forged   a
             relationship with a British Citizen and her children; and  the
             British Citizen is pregnant with the appellant's  child.   The
             formation of family ties and the responsibilities of parenting
             are  likely  to  constitute  good  grounds  for  leaving   any
             offending behaviour in the past.  Thus it may be  argued  that
             the sort of behaviour which might have brought  the  appellant
             into contact with the police  in  Scotland  in  the  past  are
             unlikely to repeat themselves now that he has a stable  family
             relationship with at least two adults relying on him; and with
             parental responsibilities for the younger of his  wife's  boys
             and with impending parental  responsibility  for  a  new  born
             child which is hoped for in the near future."


13. After considering in brief terms the child's best interests  the  judge
    set out his conclusions under the Regulations during which he revisited
    some of the points already expressed before a final paragraph at [46]:


         "48. In my judgement, for the reasons given in my decision  on  the
             application of the 2016 Regulations, I am not persuaded by the
             respondent that interference with the rights to be accorded to
             the appellant and the individual family members by application
             of   article   8   ECHR   is   a    proportionate    response.
             Proportionality requires to be assessed when applying the 2016
             regulations to the appellant's circumstances; and I adopt  the
             reasons discussed above about the  appellant's  EU  rights  as
             forming the reasons  for  concluding  that  interference  with
             private  and  family  life  is  not  proportionate   in   this
             appellant's claim."


14. Consideration then turned to Article 8.


15. In his submissions, Mr Mathews explained that he  did  not  rely  on  a
    rationality challenge but  instead  relied  on  the  grounds  on  which
    permission was granted and (in summary) he contended that the judge had
    not logically taken all relevant matters into account.  For his part Mr
    Rea considered that the reference to the  foreign  criminal  provisions
    was a red herring and that the appellant had  been  believed  that  the
    Romanian offences had taken place in 2008.   He reminded  me  that  the
    burden was on the Secretary of State.  Both  accepted  that  the  human
    rights claim stood or  fell  with  the  claim  under  the  Regulations.
    Neither had anything to add in the event that I found error and set the
    decision aside.


16. I take each of the points of challenge in turn.  As to (i),  the  judge
    was entitled in my judgment to characterise the Romanian  offending  as
    he did.  The evidence before him was  limited  and  without  more,  the
    lengthy sentence may have been influenced by the appellant's  explained
    absence.  He did not seek  to  avoid  the  sentence.   Point  (ii)  was
    emphasised by Mr Mathews as a key factor.   He  argued  that  exclusion
    must have taken place on the same basis as  considered  by  the  judge.
    The effect of a decision by  the  Danish  authorities  to  exclude  the
    appellant is simply an indication  of  a  Member  State  deciding  that
    someone should be excluded.  There is no evidence that the decision was
    tested in the courts nor is there any evidence  given  of  the  process
    undertaken by Denmark before the decision  was  reached,  including  in
    particular whether any representations were invited.  It is not however
    something that the judge overlooked.  He refers  to  it  in  [29]  when
    setting out the Secretary of State's case and gave consideration to the
    offending in Denmark in detail in [31].  In my judgment the judge  gave
    appropriate weight to this aspect.


17. Turning to the reference to Rule 398 raised in point (iii),  I  am  not
    persuaded the judge erred.  He made it clear in [25] that he was  using
    the provisions as a  yardstick  in  deciding  the  seriousness  of  the
    offending.  He was entitled to do so.  Point (iv) overlooks the context
    in which the judge had regard to the appellant's maturity.  In [28] the
    judge  explained  why  this  was  significant  as  it  illustrated  the
    appellant was neither a career criminal nor a persistent offender.   It
    was a view legitimately  open  to  him  on  the  evidence.   Point  (v)
    suggests that the judge failed to have regard to  matters  in  the  UK.
    These however were taken into  account  and  properly  considered:  see
    [23].  The judge gave rational reasons without error on the subject  of
    rehabilitation (point vi).  In respect of point (vii) it is  not  clear
    why it is argued that Section 117C applies.  The appellant did not come
    within the definition of 'foreign criminal' as defined in Section  117D
    of the 2002 Act.  As to point (viii),  in  the  light  of  the  parties
    accepting in their submissions that the Article 8 claim stood  or  fell
    with the claim under the Regulations, this challenge  has  no  material
    relevance.  Finally, in relation to point (ix), the judge indicated  at
    [31] that the appellant had not explained why he attempted to  re-enter
    and gave a reason open to him to explain why he did not  consider  this
    of relevance.


18. In short, I consider that the grounds of challenge reveal no more  than
    a disagreement with the judge's decision which he reached on a  correct
    direction as to the law and proper understanding of the facts including
    the history of offending.  It was a decision that was open to the judge
    on what was before him and  one  reached  without  legal  error.   This
    appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 23 April 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



