
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00125/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport       |Determination Promulgated           |
|On 05 March 2015                       |On 10 March 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                     DTS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Ms Evans (of Counsel),  instructed  by  UK  Migration  Lawyers
Limited.
Respondent:   Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


ANONYMITY
I maintain  the  anonymity  direction  made  at  first  instance.   This  is
reflected in the title above.


                                  DECISION

 1. This is an appeal against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT"), dated 24 November 2014,  whereby  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    ("the  Respondent")   to  deport  him  from  the  United  Kingdom   was
    dismissed.

 2. It is clear from the terms of the permission order, and not disputed by
    either party, that the Appellant  has  been  granted  leave  to  appeal
    against the FtT's treatment of the issue of the non-attendance  of  his
    wife at the first instance hearing and the absence  of  any  supporting
    written evidence from her.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, aged 31 years.  He has resided  in
    the United Kingdom since September 2002.  Since then  he  has  applied,
    unsuccessfully, for asylum (twice) and settlement.  The impetus for his
    appeal to the FtT was his conviction at the Isle of Wight Crown  Court,
    on 15 March 2013, of burglary, giving rise to a sentence of  18  months
    imprisonment and the ensuing notification  by  the  Respondent  of  his
    vulnerability to deportation.

 4. The FtT treated the Appellant's appeal as a challenge to the refusal to
    grant him asylum and a further challenge to  the  deportation  decision
    based  on  Articles  2,  3  and  8  ECHR.   The  Appellant,   who   was
    unrepresented, gave evidence at the hearing.  It is not  disputed  that
    the Appellant married a British citizen in November 2006 and that  they
    have three children.  The two older children are  aged  eight  and  two
    years respectively.  The third child was born on 13 October  2014,  one
    month before the hearing.  In [13], the Judge recorded the  Appellant's
    evidence which was given in somewhat conflicting terms - that his  wife
    was "on the edge of" their relationship and  had  not  visited  him  in
    prison during the past six months (on the one hand) and that he had  "a
    good relationship with his wife", who had  sent  him  money  since  his
    incarceration (on the other).  In [14], the  Judge  recorded  that  the
    Appellant's wife did not attend the hearing.  In [79], the Judge  found
    that the Appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his wife, having regard to the evidence summarised above,  coupled
    with her non-attendance at the hearing and the absence of  any  written
    evidence from her.  This finding is reiterated in [100].

 5. I consider that the determination of the FtT is  vitiated  by  material
    errors of  law,  in  two  distinct  respects.   First,  in  making  the
    aforementioned conclusion, the Judge failed to  recognise  and  resolve
    the conflict in the evidence  to  which  I  have  adverted  above  and,
    further, did not weigh the second,  positive  part  of  this  evidence.
    Second, I consider that the  Appellant's  hearing  was  unfair  on  the
    ground that he was not given an opportunity to deal with the  issue  of
    his wife's non-attendance or the  absence  of  any  supporting  written
    evidence from her.  It was common  case  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    questioned about this matter by the  Respondent's  representative  and,
    further, that the Judge did not  raise  it  or  ventilate  any  concern
    pertaining thereto. Furthermore, it is not  in  dispute  that  if  this
    issue had been canvassed, the Appellant would have been in  a  position
    to furnish a compellingly  persuasive  explanation  for  both  matters,
    based on his  wife's  difficult  pregnancy  and  the  recent  premature
    delivery of their new born child, coupled with her need to care for the
    three children.


CONCLUSION

 6. Accordingly, I set aside the determination of the FtT.

 7. As the error of law consists of a failure to provide the Appellant with
    a fair hearing at first instance, I remit the appeal to  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal for rehearing and fresh determination.

 8. I do not confine the rehearing to the Article 8 ECHR issue,  given  the
    obscurity relating to paragraph 2(d) of  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, which neither representative was able to illuminate.

 9. Finally, I accede to the Appellant's application to adduce new evidence
    consisting of the Appellant's statement,  handwritten  statements  from
    his wife and children, marriage and birth certificates, photographs and
    the latest Government advice relating to conditions in Iraq.



                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                         Date: 05 March 2015
