

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00524/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision signed:   22.01.2018         |
|On    22.01.2018                    |On                24.01.2018          |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                             Kamil Karol SZCZECH
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  no appearance
For the respondent: Mr Paul Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS


       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Alan Baldwin), sitting at Harmondsworth on 23  October,
    to  a deportation appeal by a citizen of Poland, born 1988. He has been
    released from detention since that decision, and  was  sent  notice  of
    hearing at his present address at Crewe, but left a message to  say  he
    had no transport and couldn't  come.  For  reasons  which  will  become
    clear, I decided to go ahead with the hearing.


 2. The appellant had lived and worked here continuously,  he  said,  since
    2010; but the best evidence of his exercising Treaty rights before  the
    judge came as Revenue print-outs, dating back to  1  October  2012:  he
    said they would not supply records further back. The judge  found  that
    he had probably been doing so since 2010, and on that  basis  found  he
    had acquired the  necessary  five  years'  residence  as  a  'qualified
    person' to give him a right of permanent residence.





 3. However, the appellant had been sent to prison, for the first time,  in
    July 2016, so that broke the continuity of his residence. This was  the
    sole basis for the application for, and  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal. On the other hand, whether or not the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find that the appellant had been a 'qualified person' since  2010,  the
    question remains as to whether any error he  made  on  that  point  was
    crucial to his decision.


 4. The appellant had twice been sent to prison for six weeks for  offences
    of battery against his wife, first in July 2016, for one  committed  on
    Christmas Eve 2015; and then on 27 July 2017, for  another  on  24  May
    2016: both sentences had  followed  failure  to  respond  to  community
    penalties, and the second had  been  followed  by  a  letter  from  the
    respondent on 6 September 2016,  warning  the  appellant  that  further
    offences might lead to his deportation.


 5. As I pointed out to Mr Duffy, the judge in his first  (long)  paragraph
    18 began by accepting that these were  clearly  not  trivial  offences;
    but, contrary to the misreading in the application  for  permission  to
    appeal, he went on to find that they were not  "...  matters  of  great
    seriousness ...". The judge gave reasons for that  finding,  noting  in
    particular that the offence dealt  with  in  2017  had  been  committed
    before the warning letter was sent. He concluded:


       The seriousness and sequence of offending is not ... of a kind  which
       justifies Deportation and it is certainly not justified in  the  case
       of one who [has shown the necessary period of qualifying residence to
       establish a permanent right]. ... I conclude that the Respondent  has
       not proved that  the  Appellant's  convictions  and  conduct  pose  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the interests  of
       public policy ...


 6. While the conclusion as to the position of someone in  the  appellant's
    position with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  may  not  have  been
    justified by the evidence before the judge, it is quite clear that  the
    judge would have allowed  his  appeal  in  any  case.  Looking  at  the
    requirements of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 [the EEA Regulations], it is quite clear that the  judge  did  not
    find  the  appellant's  conduct  represented  the  necessary  'genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat' under  reg.  27  (5)  (c),  to
    justify his deportation on grounds of public policy, without needing to
    go on to consider whether any permanent right  of  residence  he  might
    have had required 'serious' grounds of that kind under reg. 27 (3).


 7. It follows that, though the judge may have been wrong in what  he  said
    about the appellant's having a permanent right  of  residence  in  this
    country, that was not a material  error  of  law  which  would  justify
    setting aside his decision. I should however  repeat  the  warning  the
    judge gave the appellant about his future conduct, with this  addition:
    he has


    not yet established any permanent right of residence, and may well  not
    be able to do  so  till  he  has  been  working  here  for  five  years
    continuously from his last release from prison,  presumably  in  August
    2017.  So  till  that  date  in  2022,  any  further  offences  of  any
    seriousness at all would most likely lead to his deportation.


Home Office appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
