
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00112/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On  7th December 2015                |On 7th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

                               MR RYTIS SETKUS
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania born on 30th  August  1981.  He
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State to make a deportation order against him under Section  3(5)(a)
    of the  Immigration  Act  1971  and  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as  amended)  (The  EEA  Regulations),
    specifically Regulation 19(3)(b) and Regulation 21.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom, on his own evidence, in  late
    2013 and lived with relatives, who  maintained  him.   His  mother  and
    sister are here.

 3. On 15 March 2015, the respondent's decision  to  remove  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom was  based  on  his  criminal  history  in  his
    country of origin before coming to  the  United  Kingdom,  obtained  by
    consulting  EURODAC  fingerprint  records.   The   Lithuanian   records
    disclosed 11 offences in 6 convictions, between April 1997 and  January
    2009:  two offences against property  in  2009,  2  fraud  and  kindred
    offences in 2008 and 7 theft and  similar  offences  between  1997  and
    2009. As at 25  September  2014,  the  Lithuanian  records  showed  the
    appellant to be unemployed. The detail of the  appellant's  convictions
    was as follows:

          a) 9 April 1997:  Convicted of  theft  on  12  November  1996  at
             Kaunas   City   District   Court   Lithuania,   sentenced   to
             imprisonment 2 years 6 months,  suspended  for  2  years,  and
             asset forfeiture

          b) 10 December 1997:    Convicted at Kaunas City  District  Court
             of burglary and  theft  from  a  dwelling  on  4  April  1997,
             sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment, concurrent with April 1997
             sentence,  asset  forfeiture,  later  reduced  to   3   years'
             imprisonment, and asset forfeiture.

          c) 13 June 2001:  Convicted at Kaunas Regional Court  of  robbery
             on 15 December 2000, sentenced to 6  years'  imprisonment  and
             forfeiture  of  assets.   Later   varied   to   revoke   asset
             forfeiture.

          d) 16 April 2008: Convicted at Kaunas  District  Court  of  theft
             committed on 13 November 2006, sentenced to 2 years 6  months'
             imprisonment concurrent with existing sentence.

          e) 21 April 2008: Convicted  at  Kaunas  City  District  Court  2
             charges of fraud and 1 of theft committed on 19 October  2006,
             sentenced  to  4  years'  imprisonment  concurrent  on  all  3
             charges.

          f) 16 January 2009:     Convicted at  Kaunas  District  Court  of
             theft and destruction or damage to  property  committed  on  9
             January 2006, sentenced to 6  years'  imprisonment  concurrent
             with the two previous sentences.

    It appears from that record that the appellant must have been  more  in
    prison than out, from at least 2001, and that during his  sentence,  he
    was convicted of further outstanding offences.

Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended)

 4. The power to remove an EEA citizen is given in Regulation 19(3) of  the
    Regulations, and so far as relevant to these proceedings is as follows:



         '19(3)   Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5) a person  who  has  been
         admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the  United  Kingdom
         under these Regulations may be removed from the United  Kingdom  if
         ...

                (b)    he would otherwise  be  entitled  to  reside  in  the
                United Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary  of
                State has decided that his removal is justified  on  grounds
                of public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
                accordance with regulation 21.'

 5. Regulation 21 identifies three levels of  protection,  a  basic  level,
    available to all EEA citizens exercising Treaty rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom, who can be removed only on grounds of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health; an intermediate  level  of  protection,  for
    those who have acquired a permanent right of residence under Regulation
    15, by showing that  they  have  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  'in
    accordance with these Regulations' for a continuous period of 5  years,
    or a number of other family-related conditions which  are  not  met  in
    this appellant's situation; and finally,  an  enhanced  protection  for
    those with a continuous period of 10 years'  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom immediately before the decision to remove was taken.

 6. The operative provisions of Regulation 21 are as follows:

         "(1)     In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health. ...

         (2)      A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
         ends. ...

         (5)      Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned   must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
                  relate to considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
                  justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

         (6)      Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

First-tier Tribunal hearing

 7.  The  appellant  appeared  without  representation  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in May 2014  and  gave  evidence.   He  confirmed  his
    criminal history, stating that he had  been  released  from  prison  in
    Lithuania in mid-2013, on a date he could  not  precisely  recall.   In
    Lithuania, he had  worked  in  construction.  He  relied  on  a  1-year
    relationship with a partner  who  he  stated  was  Lithuanian,  but  no
    evidence was produced from her and no one appeared at court to  support
    the appellant's appeal.  He stated that he had his mother  and  sister,
    her husband and their two children as family in the United Kingdom.  He
    had not been convicted of any offence while here: he regretted his past
    offences and would get help from his family.  He  had  been  young  and
    stupid and had committed the offences to get money.

 8. Since coming to the United Kingdom at the end of  2013,  the  appellant
    had lived with his sister for half a year, then moved out to live  with
    his girlfriend, who did not attend the hearing as it was  'too  far  to
    travel'.  There was no written evidence from  her.  The  appellant  had
    worked 'cash in hand' until early 2015 when he got a job.

 9. The threat to public safety was considered to  be  established  as  the
    appellant had resorted to crime repeatedly when short of money and  his
    offences had been  committed  over  a  period  of  12  years,  with  no
    opportunity to commit further offences  or  show  rehabilitation  after
    2009, the appellant having been released from  his  2009-2013  sentence
    shortly before coming to the United Kingdom.

10. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  evidence  given,  and
    applied the principles set out under Regulation 21(5)  and  21(6).   He
    took account of the personal circumstances of the  appellant,  who  was
    then 33 years old, in good health, with family in the  United  Kingdom.
    The partner was said to be Lithuanian  and  free  to  return  with  the
    appellant to Lithuania should she choose.  There was no  evidence  that
    the appellant had worked in the United Kingdom and no evidence  of  his
    social and cultural integration here.  At [29] the judge recorded  that
    the appellant had family in Lithuania who  could  support  him  on  his
    return.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that although there was no evidence
    that the appellant  had  committed  further  offences  since  his  last
    conviction, nor was there evidence of  his  undertaking  any  available
    courses to address his offending behaviour.   He  considered  that  the
    decision to deport the  appellant  was  justified  to  prevent  further
    offending, in other words, on the grounds of public  security.  Overall
    the decision to deport the appellant was found to be proportionate  and
    the respondent's reasons  adequate  to  support  her  conclusions.  His
    appeal was dismissed on both EEA Regulations and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal

12. The appellant sought and received permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
    adequately consider and make reasoned findings under Regulation 21.

13. That was the basis on which the appeal came before us.

Regulation 29AA applications

14. The appellant had been removed to Lithuania  before  the  hearing  took
    place. His removal was not without difficulty: on 27 April 2015,  prior
    to removal on a booked flight,  the  appellant  refused  to  leave  the
    removal centre, and removal directions were cancelled.  His removal was
    eventually effected on 13 July 2015.

15. Pursuant to Regulation 29AA(3) of the Regulations,  the  respondent  is
    entitled to refuse re-entry in order to make submissions in  person  at
    the hearing to a person (P) who has been removed, 'when P's  appearance
    may cause serious troubles to public policy or public security'.

16. On 4 December 2014, the appellant sought  permission  to  re-enter  the
    United  Kingdom:  the  respondent  refused,  citing  paragraph  29AA(3)
    reasons. A similar request was made and refused on 7 December 2015, the
    respondent  citing  both  the  appellant's   established   pattern   of
    reoffending and his previous non-compliance with the  removal  process:
    the respondent considered that there was a real  risk  he  would  again
    refuse to comply with restrictions placed upon him for the duration  of
    his stay, should he be readmitted.

17. No application to adjourn was before us  and  no  further  evidence  or
    written submissions have been received in respect of Regulation 29AA or
    these proceedings generally.  We  considered  whether  to  adjourn  the
    hearing, but as there had been no  judicial  review  challenge  to  the
    respondent's decision to refuse entry, and no  further  submissions  or
    application to adjourn made to the Upper Tribunal, and having regard to
    the overriding objective, we decided that it  was  not  appropriate  to
    adjourn the hearing of the Tribunal's own motion.

18. We considered that we had sufficient information, having regard to  the
    written grounds of appeal, with which to make a just decision.

Upper Tribunal hearing

19. We have treated the appellant's very full  grounds  of  appeal  as  his
    submissions in the appeal.  He says he wishes  to  appeal  against  the
    conclusions of fact by the  respondent  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    stating that he has not committed any disorder or crime  while  in  the
    United Kingdom; that there was no evidence to suggest  that  he  was  a
    threat to public policy, public security or public health, and that his
    Lithuanian convictions should be disregarded because 'everyone has have
    right to liberty...to a new life even he has  had  criminal  conviction
    before'. He regarded the reasons why the respondent  wished  to  deport
    him as incomprehensible; in Lithuania, he had worked but been unable to
    survive 'due to minimum income'.  He had come to the United Kingdom for
    employment, registered with the National Insurance  in  December  2014,
    and found employment in Peterborough.  Evidence could  be  provided  on
    request.  That registration and employment  both  appear  to  be  post-
    decision.

20. The appellant stated that 'all his family members' are  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He did not come here for rehabilitation, but  for  work.   He
    considered that his removal to Lithuania was a violation  of  his  free
    movement rights under the EEA Regulations, and Directive 2004/38/EC and
    1612/68, concerning the free movement of persons.  He agreed that he is
    healthy and 33 years old.  He had been in agency employment  since  New
    Year 2015 and his relationship with his mother and sister could not  be
    conducted in the same way  by  modern  methods  of  communication  from
    Lithuania.

21. In brief, he had registered and worked in the United  Kingdom;  he  had
    demonstrated good manners due to his family and work aspects;  he   had
    paid his expenses and assisted his family also; he had a girlfriend  in
    the United Kingdom and they had a close relationship; he had  respected
    the United Kingdom's law and not breached it;  and  he  'was  attentive
    person due to mistakes he was made before'.  The appellant sought mercy
    from the United Kingdom, seeing a right to a normal life and to  become
    a respectable person.  The crime had been committed 6 years ago and  he
    could not be blamed all his life for that.

22. For the respondent, Mr Avery submitted  that  the  appellant's  grounds
    merely disagreed with the judge's reasoning which  was  that  when  not
    earning  money  the  appellant  resorted  to  acquisitive  crime.   The
    appellant had family in Lithuania and his girl friend  was  Lithuanian.
    The judge had gone through the relevant factors and had  made  findings
    open to him.

Discussion

23. The first question is the level of protection to which  this  appellant
    is entitled.  He claims to have entered the United Kingdom towards  the
    end of 2013, which is consistent with his having  served  a  reasonable
    proportion  of  the  final  6-year  sentence  imposed  upon  him.   The
    Lithuanian  records,  disclosed  after  a  fingerprint  search  by  the
    Lithuanian authorities,  show  him  as  having  been  in  prison  until
    sometime in 2013, the year  he  claimed  to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom.  They also show him as 'unemployed' on 25 September 2014,  but
    that may have been the date of the respondent's fingerprint enquiry.

24. The appellant had therefore been in the United Kingdom for rather  less
    than a year, and perhaps only 6 months, when the respondent decided  to
    remove him to Lithuania, and accordingly he is  entitled  only  to  the
    lowest level of protection,  that  the  decision  should  be  taken  on
    grounds of public policy, public security, or public  health,  and  not
    for economic ends.  The respondent was required to consider the matters
    identified in Regulation 21(5) and (6) before reaching her decision.

25. The First-tier Tribunal found, and we concur, that the  respondent  had
    indeed made her decision on the grounds of public security,  making  it
    potentially a lawful decision to remove.  At paragraph [25] - [27], the
    Judge considered the nature and seriousness of the  offences  committed
    by the appellant through the length of sentences imposed and  that  his
    last sentence was in 2013 for six years for theft, concluding that:

         "27.     I find that there is a clear justification  in  this  case
         for deportation of the appellant, to prevent further  offending  by
         him in the United Kingdom.  I am also satisfied that  his  personal
         conduct represents  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,
         namely public safety.  He has demonstrated that he is  prepared  to
         disregard the law and commit acquisitive  offences  when  he  needs
         money.'

26. The First-tier Tribunal applied the relevant  EEA  Regulations,  giving
    brief but adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  presented  a
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, and that the decision to  deport  was
    proportionate.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed the elements of
    the appellant's claimed family and private life under  Article  8  ECHR
    and found that neither had been evidenced and thus established.

27. We find that the application by the appellant is merely a  disagreement
    with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   At  the  date  of
    decision, the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for a very short
    time, as balanced against a lengthy career of criminality in Lithuania.
     That was not sufficient to amount to evidence of rehabilitation or  to
    be predictive of his ability to cope  financially  and  remain  honest,
    since he had lived with, and at the expense of, his mother  and  sister
    until some time in early 2014.  We also note that until late  2014  the
    appellant worked  'cash  in  hand'  and  therefore  presumably  without
    payment of tax and National Insurance,  which  is  itself  an  offence,
    albeit one of which he has  not  been  convicted.   He  did  not  begin
    working 'on the books' and paying  tax  and  National  Insurance  until
    early 2015, 9 months after the decision to remove, and about 18  months
    after his arrival in the United Kingdom.

28. Having regard to the paucity of the evidence before him, the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was entitled to conclude  as  he  did  that  nothing  in
    Regulation 21(5) or (6) was such as to render the respondent's decision
    to remove the appellant to Lithuania unlawful or disproportionate.   We
    uphold the First-tier Tribunal decision and decline to reopen it.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.


Signed      Judith AJC Gleeson    Date 7th December 2015
      Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
