
                                    [pic]
IAC-fh-nl-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00681/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11 May 2016                                |On 19 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                        mr pedro filipe araujo soares
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Lester Dominic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision given immediately following the hearing  on  27  November
    2015, I found that there had been an error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  which  had  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's  decision  to  deport  him,  and  I  set  that
    decision aside and adjourned the application for  a  re-hearing  before
    me.  For the avoidance of doubt, I shall throughout this Decision refer
    to the appellant, Mr Soares (who was the respondent to the Secretary of
    State's appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal) as  the
    appellant, and  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  who  was  the  original
    respondent, as "the respondent".

 2. I shall incorporate much of what I said in my earlier Decision into  my
    Decision below.

 3. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  Angola  born  on  2  April  1992,
    originally entered this country on 21 April  2000  with  his  aunt  and
    cousin having been granted an EEA family permit in  Lisbon.   His  aunt
    had included him as a dependant on her own  EEA  application  following
    which his passport was endorsed to show a right of residence under  EEA
    law based on his aunt's status  which  initially  was  valid  until  16
    January 2002.  Apparently, as was explained during  this  hearing,  his
    aunt was a Portuguese citizen because at the time she was  born  Angola
    was part of Portugal, but by the time of the appellant's birth,  Angola
    was an independent country, which is why he is not himself a citizen of
    Portugal.  The appellant's mother, who was  his  aunt's  sister-in-law,
    had died when he was 2 years old, and his aunt had taken over his care.
     I was told during this hearing, and I accept, that it  was  not  until
    the appellant was about 10 years old that he was told  that  his  aunt,
    whom he had believed to be his mother, was not his biological mother.

 4. In any event, it is sufficient if I state  for  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal, as I did following the previous hearing,  that  the  respondent
    accepts that for the purposes of considering  whether  or  not  in  the
    circumstances of this case the appellant can properly be  deported,  he
    has by virtue of being  resident  in  this  country  with  a  right  of
    residence under EU law for more than five years acquired the  right  of
    permanent residence in this country.

 5. The consequence of that, which is accepted by  both  parties,  is  that
    pursuant to Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 he can only be  deported  under  Regulation  21(3)  on
    "serious grounds of public policy or public security".   In  order  for
    the appellant's deportation to be  justified  a  decision  maker  would
    first have to be satisfied that at the  time  of  decision  there  were
    serious grounds for  considering  that  the  applicant  constituted  "a
    genuine and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  the  right  of  the
    public in the UK to be protected from serious  crime",  which  was  the
    wording set out within paragraph 34 of the First-tier Tribunal  panel's
    decision which had originally allowed the appellant's appeal.

 6. Since arriving in this country, at the age of about 8,  the  appellant,
    from a very young age, has committed a large number of serious criminal
    offences, commencing from February 2006, when  he  was  not  quite  14.
    From then until September 2013 he was convicted on eleven occasions  in
    respect of 21 offences, which included sexual assault,  theft,  assault
    occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  robbery,  arson  endangering  life,
    battery, breach of supervision order, possessing cannabis,  assault  on
    constable, destroying or damaging property, common assault,  possessing
    a class B drug, using  threatening,  abusive  and  insulting  words  or
    behaviour  or  disorderly  behaviour  to  cause  harassment,  alarm  or
    distress, commission of further offences during the operational  period
    of a suspended sentence order and,  and  this  is  the  index  offence,
    possessing a class A drug (heroin) with intent to supply, for which  he
    was sentenced to  fourteen  months'  imprisonment,  which  offence  was
    itself committed while a community order was in force.

 7. The facts of this last offence were summarised  by  the  panel  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 8 onwards.  On 16  December  2016  the
    police were called to Finchley in London by a member of the public  who
    was concerned  for  the  welfare  of  a  female  who  was  seen  to  be
    distraught, initially incoherent, with dishevelled clothing and who  in
    terms apparently alleged that the appellant had been  her  drug  dealer
    and she had arranged to meet up with him to obtain heroin but had  been
    told that she would first have to have sexual intercourse with  him  as
    payment for the drugs, which she had not agreed  to,  and  she  alleged
    that she was sexually assaulted by the appellant.  I will deal  further
    with this aspect of the offence below.

 8. The appellant was identified at the scene by this lady and whilst being
    detained dropped a matchbox containing heroin  from  his  pocket.   The
    appellant was apparently in possession of seven "wraps" of  this  drug.
    The appellant initially denied having any knowledge of the drug or that
    he had dropped what had been picked up, which was  subsequently  tested
    and proved to be heroin.  The appellant's home was searched and various
    messages downloaded from his phone consistent with him  being  involved
    in drug supply.  He had three phones on his person which  he  initially
    denied were his.  He also denied any knowledge of seeing  the  messages
    or replying to the messages recorded on the phone even though a message
    had mentioned the name "Ped", which obviously referred to him.

 9. The judge in his sentencing remarks was unimpressed  by  the  appellant
    and at page 1 of his sentencing  remarks,  at  paragraph  F,  noted  as
    follows:
         "You have a large number of previous  convictions  for  someone  so
         young.  Nine convictions for twenty offences and it is a feature of
         this case that you were at this court on 7 December, slap  bang  in
         the middle of the period when you were supplying  heroin  to  these
         acquaintances and you were then stopped with the heroin a few  days
         later, the court having made you subject to a community order which
         you subsequently breached by committing further offences."

10. The judge noted that a "close examination" of the appellant's record of
    previous offending showed that a number of orders had been  made  which
    the appellant had simply not complied with.  As the judge put it, "your
    record... is plainly an aggravating  feature  in  this  case  and  your
    commission of further offences whilst subject  to  court  orders  is  a
    worry".  The judge then noted that having read the pre-sentence  report
    (a copy of which had not been included within the  file  either  before
    the hearing on 27 November last year or before this hearing,  but  with
    which I was supplied during the course of the hearing) "it's clear that
    you don't really take responsibility for what you have  done  and  it's
    clear that the author of the report struggles to  trust  anything  that
    you have to say".  I shall refer further below to the  reason  why  the
    author of the report was unable to trust what  the  appellant  said  to
    her.

11. The judge remarked then that "the reality is that over  the  past,  the
    youth offending team have offered you a lot of support but  you  simply
    re-offended".  Although the judge noted that the  appellant  had  "done
    well in terms of complying with the licence in the last few months" and
    that he had managed to get a  job  "albeit  just  shortly  before  this
    sentence hearing" there was nonetheless "a  lot  of  mucking  about  in
    respect of your basis of plea".  This, as I shall discuss below, was  a
    major factor  influencing  the  writer  of  the  pre-sentence  report's
    inability to have confidence in the truth  of  anything  the  appellant
    said  to  her.    Notwithstanding  this  "mucking  about"   the   judge
    nonetheless gave the appellant full  credit  for  his  plea  of  guilty
    although he did remark that "you don't deserve it".

12. A pre-sentence report had been prepared by the  Probation  Service  for
    the purposes of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in which the
    appellant's position was very carefully analysed and  as  at  September
    2014 (which was just prior  to  that  hearing)  the  reporting  officer
    assessed the appellant's likelihood of reconviction as "high" which was
    the highest category available.

13. As I noted in my previous decision immediately following the hearing on
    27 November last year, the respondent, unsurprisingly, made a  decision
    to deport the appellant on 3 December 2013  and  it  was  against  that
    decision that the appellant appealed.  It remains common ground between
    the parties  that  because  the  appellant  had  acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence in the UK, in  order  for  the  deportation  to  be
    lawful under European law,  the  decision  maker  (which  is  now  this
    Tribunal) would have to be satisfied that the appellant remains at  the
    present time a serious threat to one of the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.

14. The First-tier Tribunal panel concluded (and I have  accepted  that  it
    was correct in so doing) that  on  its  face  the  offences  which  the
    appellant had previously committed  were  sufficiently  serious  as  to
    amount to a serious threat to  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society were they to be repeated, and this finding has been retained.

15. At paragraph 34 of its decision, the panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found as follows:
         "Had we been considering  the  position  as  at  the  date  of  the
         appellant's  conviction  and  sentencing,  for  an  offence   which
         occurred one and three quarter years ago in  December  2012,  then,
         especially bearing  in  mind  the  assessment  that  the  appellant
         presented a high risk of re-conviction and a medium risk of causing
         serious harm, we could not but conclude that the appellant at  that
         time constituted,  by  his  conduct,  a  genuine  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting the right of the public in the  UK  to  be
         protected from serious crime."

16. In my judgement, this finding is undoubtedly  correct,  but  the  panel
    then went on to find at paragraph  40  that  although  "we  can  hardly
    totally exclude the possibility that the appellant  still  remains,  at
    the present time, a serious threat to the public" it was able to:
         "... find, on the basis of  the  evidence  and  our  considerations
         detailed above, that that risk has been reduced so that on the date
         of the hearing before us, we are able to decide  that,  albeit  the
         issue is finely balanced, the respondent does not satisfy  us  that
         the appellant constitutes a present and sufficiently serious threat
         to society."

17. The panel's proportionality assessment, which had (and still has) to be
    undertaken  pursuant  to  Regulations  21(5)  and  (6)  of   the   2006
    Regulations referred to above, was then made on the basis as set out at
    paragraph 41(a) of its decision, namely that the panel  was  ultimately
    not satisfied that the appellant's conduct represented  a  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting the protection of the public such
    as might justify his deportation.

18. When setting out her reasons for granting the respondent permission  to
    appeal against the panel's decision, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  stated
    that, "it is, just about, arguable that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal was perverse given the evidence before it".

19. Having heard submissions on behalf of both parties, and having in  mind
    in particular the finding that the panel had  made  that  had  it  been
    considering the position as at the date of the  appellant's  conviction
    and sentencing it "could not but conclude that the  appellant  at  that
    time constituted, by his conduct, a genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting the right of the public in the UK to be protected from
    serious crime", I considered that its ultimate finding at paragraph  40
    that "albeit the issue is finely  balanced,  the  respondent  does  not
    satisfy us that the appellant constitutes a  present  and  sufficiently
    serious  threat  to  society",  was  both  inadequately  reasoned   and
    regrettably perverse in the sense that  this  was  a  finding  that  no
    reasonable Tribunal properly considering the evidence in light  of  the
    finding in the first sentence  of  paragraph  34  could  properly  have
    reached.  My main reason for so finding was that the only factors which
    had changed since the date of the appellant's conviction  and  sentence
    was that the appellant had been incarcerated until very shortly  before
    the hearing before the panel of the First-tier  Tribunal.   Given  that
    the view of the Probation Officer  who  had  written  the  pre-sentence
    report was that the appellant was  a  high  risk  of  re-offending  and
    represented a medium risk "of  serious  harm  to  the  public"  in  the
    absence of a supplementary report changing that opinion,  I  considered
    that the panel had not adequately explained how it could possibly  have
    come to a decision that there was such a  change  in  circumstances  as
    could justify it in departing from a decision it  says  it  would  have
    made had it been deciding this appeal as at the date of the appellant's
    conviction.  As I noted in my earlier decision, the panel stated at the
    beginning of paragraph 40 that  it  "can  hardly  totally  exclude  the
    possibility that the appellant still remains, at the  present  time,  a
    serious threat to the public", but the only  evidence  which  could  be
    said to be new was that  of  the  appellant's  partner,  [R],  and  her
    mother, and, as the panel had noted, [R], who was still only 17 at  the
    date of the hearing before the panel, had been  made  pregnant  by  the
    appellant at the age of 14, which was hardly a factor  which  could  be
    said to be to his credit.

20. I  also  considered  that  the  panel  had  been  wrong  to  take  into
    consideration at paragraph 9 as a "significant fact" that the appellant
    had taken steps to move away from the place of  his  offending  in  the
    Hendon area, moving to Southampton, especially as  it  was  noted  that
    this was "albeit only in the last few days before the hearing" or  that
    his efforts to find work gave  "some  basis  for  optimism,  given  his
    earlier qualifications as a bricklayer".  I was reluctantly  forced  to
    the conclusion that the reasons given by the panel were insufficient as
    could properly persuade a decision maker considering all  the  evidence
    to reach the conclusions which this Tribunal did, and that accordingly,
    even though the threshold for such  a  finding  is  a  high  one,  this
    decision could properly be said to be "perverse", and was, in any event
    inadequately reasoned.

21.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  at  the  earlier  hearing,  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller, very properly accepted that the Tribunal  could  not
    simply at that stage substitute a decision dismissing the appeal  first
    because a further fourteen months had passed and so the Tribunal  would
    have to make an assessment of whether at the time of its  decision  the
    presence of the appellant in this country remained a serious threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society  but  also,  secondly,  the
    Tribunal would still have to  carry  out  a  proportionality  exercise,
    having taken account of the factors set out within Regulation 21(6)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

22. I accordingly gave directions orally immediately following the  hearing
    on 27 November 2015 in  order  to  facilitate  the  re-hearing  of  the
    appellant's appeal.  These  directions  (which  were  recorded  by  the
    parties' respective representatives at the time) set out the  times  by
    which the parties should do what they were required to  do  within  the
    directions, and also set out in precise terms just  what  it  was  they
    were expected to do.

23. These directions were not sent to the parties  in  written  form  until
    some time later, and the  Tribunal  was  informed  by  the  applicant's
    solicitors that it had not been brought to their attention  as  a  firm
    that the directions had been given orally following the hearing, and in
    consequence they requested an extension of time in which to comply with
    the directions which had been made.  I was informed by Mr Jaisri at the
    subsequent hearing that he had in fact notified his solicitors  of  the
    directions, but it appears that the person at his solicitors to whom he
    relayed the instructions had very shortly afterwards gone on  maternity
    leave, without properly updating the file.

24. Be that as it may, on 9 February 2016 (which is some three months prior
    to the date when the appeal came back before the Tribunal), I sent  out
    in writing further directions to the parties, in  which  the  times  by
    which the parties had  to  do  what  they  were  required  to  do  were
    extended.  The following directions were included:
         "...
         4)   The finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  offences
             previously committed by the  [appellant]  were  such  that  if
             repeated he would constitute a serious threat to the public is
             retained.
         5)   The respondent must notify the [appellant's] solicitors by  no
             later than Friday, 26 February 2016 of all  the  documents  on
             which she intends to rely.
         6)   The [appellant] must thereafter file  with  the  Tribunal  and
             serve on [the respondent] a paginated  bundle  containing  all
             the documents on which either party  intends  to  rely  by  no
             later than Friday, 18 March 2016.  For the avoidance of  doubt
             it is the intention of the Tribunal that this  appeal  can  be
             heard by reference to this bundle only and without there being
             a need to refer to any documents which  are  elsewhere  within
             the file.
         7)    This  bundle  must  contain  in  respect  of  all   witnesses
             (including the [appellant]) on whose evidence the  [appellant]
             wishes to rely, a witness statement  capable  of  standing  as
             evidence-in-chief."

    I also included a provision granting the parties leave to apply.

25. Regrettably, the respondent did not notify the  appellant's  solicitors
    at all of the  documents  on  which  she  intended  to  rely,  and  the
    appellant's solicitors did not prepare a  paginated  bundle  containing
    all the documents on which either party wished to rely  (or  even  just
    those documents on which the appellant sought to rely), even though, as
    Mr Jaisri on behalf  of  the  appellant  was  obliged  to  accept,  the
    direction which had been given was  extremely  clear.   Apparently  his
    solicitors misunderstood the directions, the consequence  of  which  is
    that  all  that  was  served  was  a  supplementary  bundle  containing
    supplemental witness statements of the appellant, his aunt  (who  until
    the age of about 10 he had believed was his mother, and who had brought
    him up since the age of 2) and his partner, [RF]  (hereinafter  "[R]"),
    who is the mother of his daughter, who was at the time of the hearing 2
    days off her 4th birthday.  Regrettably, the supplementary  bundle  had
    not made its way into the file, and neither was the pre-sentence report
    included.  The consequence was that  the  Tribunal's  time  during  the
    hearing was taken up with photocopying documents which should have been
    properly included in a bundle before the hearing and the Tribunal  also
    had to refer back to other bundles which had previously been  prepared.
    While the failure of the appellant's solicitors  in  particular  to  do
    what the Tribunal had directed and  re-directed  in  clear  terms  they
    should do has not had an impact on the decision which this Tribunal  is
    obliged to make in this appeal, which is made entirely on  the  merits,
    it has caused inconvenience and delay to the Tribunal, and but for  the
    late adjournment of another  case  which  had  previously  been  listed
    before the Tribunal on this day, might  have  resulted  in  significant
    waste of costs had that other case had to be adjourned because  of  the
    extra time the Tribunal needed to spend on the hearing of this appeal.

The Resumed Hearing

26. At the resumed  hearing  I  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his
    partner, [R] and his aunt, [FS], who relied on the  witness  statements
    they had made and were cross-examined (the  appellant  at  length).   I
    then heard submissions on behalf of both parties.  Although I will  not
    set out below everything which was said during the hearing, I have  had
    regard  to  everything  which  was  said,  both  in  evidence  and   in
    submissions, as well as to all the documents to which I  was  referred,
    together with the other material contained within the file, whether  or
    not the same is specifically referred to below.

27. In the course of an  extensive  cross-examination,  the  appellant  was
    asked detailed questions concerning the offences of which he  had  been
    convicted prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, and also
    about his subsequent convictions  (in  March  2015  at  West  Hampshire
    Magistrates'  Court  and  on  14  September  2015  at  Central   London
    Magistrates' Court) for  being  drunk  and  disorderly.   He  was  also
    questioned about matters which  appeared  in  the  pre-sentence  report
    referred to above. [R] was asked questions regarding  her  relationship
    with the appellant, and also her knowledge regarding his offending, and
    [FS] was also asked about her nephew's criminal past.

28. In submissions, Mr Tarlow, on behalf of the respondent, relied  on  the
    reasons given by the respondent for making  the  deportation  decision.
    He accepted that this would be a difficult decision for the Tribunal to
    make, because on the one hand  there  had  been  repeated  and  serious
    criminality over  a  long  period  of  time  which  was  increasing  in
    seriousness, and suggested that the continued presence of the appellant
    in this  country  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society",
    but on the other side, he had  to  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a
    partner and a daughter who was a British citizen  and  that  were  this
    appellant to be deported this would effectively  separate  the  family.
    Mr Tarlow also questioned the  level  of  the  appellant's  integration
    within the UK in light of his criminality.

29. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jaisri submitted that the first question
    which the Tribunal had to consider was whether within the terms set out
    within Regulation 21 the appellant could properly be  said  as  at  the
    date of the decision to represent a sufficiently  serious  threat,  but
    even if he did, the Tribunal would still then have to consider  whether
    his removal was proportionate having taken into account the factors set
    out within Regulation 21(6).  It was not entirely clear as to how  much
    guidance could  be  gleaned  from  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  the
    respondent had stated in the refusal  letters  did  not  apply  to  EEA
    Regulation cases.  There were however questions which would arise  when
    considering proportionality as to whether, and if so  to  what  extent,
    the provisions of Section 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum  Act  2002  applied,  and/or  the  provisions  set  out   within
    paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules.

30. Mr Jaisri submitted that although there might be some doubts as to  how
    reformed a character the appellant was now, even if his reformation was
    not 100% complete, he had moved  some  way  towards  being  a  reformed
    character, as shown by the fact that he had appeared not to  have  been
    in any trouble since September of last year.

31. While it was acknowledged that the Tribunal might  have  some  question
    marks as to the extent to which he was fully reformed, nonetheless  his
    reformation had advanced to a  sufficient  extent  that  he  should  no
    longer be regarded as  posing  a  serious  threat  as  set  out  within
    Regulation 21(5) and in any event, even if he did,  that  threat  would
    only be just over the threshold necessary before deportation  could  be
    justified and in those circumstances this should  not  be  regarded  as
    sufficient to outweigh the very weighty factors on the other side which
    would make his deportation so harsh on his family.

Discussion

32. The starting point of this Tribunal must be Regulation 21 of  the  2006
    Regulations, the relevant provisions of which are as follows:
         "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
         health grounds
         21.- (1)   In this regulation a 'relevant decision'  means  an  EEA
                  decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health.
             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                  ends.
             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                  person  with  a  permanent  right   of   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  or public security.
             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                  grounds of public security in respect of an  EEA  national
                  who -
                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                      period of at least ten years prior  to  the  relevant
                      decision; or
                  ...
             (5)  where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                  policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to
                  complying  with   the   preceding   paragraphs   of   this
                  regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with  the  following
                  principles -
                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;
                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;
                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;
                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;
                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision.
             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                  public policy or public security in relation to  a  person
                  who is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker
                  must take account of considerations such as the age, state
                  of health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,
                  the person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
                  the person's social  and  cultural  integration  into  the
                  United Kingdom."

33. It is not argued on the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  provisions  of
    Regulation 21(4) apply (which, if they did, would prevent the  decision
    being taken except on imperative grounds of public  security)  and  the
    appellant was right not  so  to  argue;  this  is  because  periods  of
    imprisonment do not count for this purpose and the ten years would have
    to be counted back from the date of  the  relevant  decision.   As  the
    appellant has been in prison within this period, and this is not a case
    where exceptionally it could be argued that nonetheless his integration
    is at a sufficiently high level that imperative grounds should still be
    required, he is a person who must be regarded as  having  acquired  the
    right to permanent residence, but no more (as the parties have agreed).
     The effect of this is that a deportation decision may not be taken  in
    respect of him (or affirmed by this Tribunal) save on  serious  grounds
    of public policy or public security, and such a decision cannot in  any
    event be justified unless his personal conduct  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

34. The First-tier Tribunal panel which originally allowed the  appellant's
    appeal had already decided that as  at  the  date  of  the  appellant's
    conviction and sentence his conduct  represented  such  a  sufficiently
    serious threat and I have  already  expressed  my  judgment  that  that
    finding was clearly correct.  In my judgment, as I have already  found,
    the fact that the appellant had not committed  further  offences  until
    the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal cannot amount to
    a sufficient reason for finding that his presence in this  country  had
    by that stage ceased to represent a serious threat.  As I have  already
    noted above, other than the fact that he had been in custody for almost
    the entire period after the  pre-sentence  report  had  been  compiled,
    there was no proper basis upon which it could be said that  he  had  by
    then ceased to represent such a threat.  In  any  event,  the  decision
    that he had so ceased was inadequately reasoned.

35. Accordingly, I  start  from  the  proposition  (which  I  anyway  reach
    independently) that as at September 2014, when the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision was promulgated,  the  appellant  represented  a  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society
    (in this case the need for society to protect itself from the effect of
    serious crime) that the decision to deport him would be justified under
    Regulation 21(5)(c).  What this Tribunal now has  to  decide  is  first
    whether or not, in light of all the evidence adduced, that position has
    now changed, or whether the appellant's personal conduct  continues  to
    represent such a serious threat and also whether, even if it  does,  it
    would be proportionate to deport him, having regard to the matters  set
    out within Regulation 21(6).  I agree  with  the  approach  adopted  on
    behalf of both parties in argument  that  effectively  the  requirement
    that the appellant can only be deported if his conduct does represent a
    sufficiently serious threat is in effect the threshold  which  must  be
    passed before deportation can be justified at all; it is only  if  that
    threshold is passed that the Tribunal  must  then  go  on  to  consider
    whether in any event his deportation would be proportionate.

36. I turn now to consider in more detail the pre-sentence report,  because
    that is the most recent independent evidence relating to this appellant
    there is.  Having done so, I will then consider whether and  if  so  to
    what extent  the  evidence  given  at  the  hearing  is  sufficient  to
    establish that the threat posed by this appellant is now less  than  it
    was  found  to  be  in  the  pre-sentence  report  before   considering
    proportionality.

37. The overwhelming impression one obtains from reading  the  pre-sentence
    report is of a dishonest individual who says whatever he feels  at  any
    given time he needs to say in order to improve his position.   So,  for
    example, it is noted that the original basis on which  he  intended  to
    plead guilty was that he had purchased  the  heroin  for  his  own  use
    through his ex-partner and had had no intention to sell any of  it  for
    money or sex, but that after he had bought the drugs he agreed to share
    them at the request of his ex-partner.  He even went as far as to  tell
    the Probation Officer who was writing the report that he  felt  he  had
    been "set up" by his ex-partner who was unhappy that he had moved on to
    be with his current partner and that they had had a child together.  He
    told the Probation Officer also that the accusations that he  "had  met
    with [his ex-partner] for sex was part of a conspiracy to split him  up
    from his current partner [who] wished to cause him  trouble".   I  deal
    with this aspect of the offence in a  little  more  detail  below  when
    considering the evidence given by the appellant and his current partner
    and mother of his child, [R].

38. However, after this interview with the Probation Officer, the basis  of
    plea changed, because the appellant eventually  admitted  that  he  had
    indeed met his former partner "for sex" and that "in  return  he  would
    give  her  the  drugs".   Ms  Westmoreland,  the   Probation   Officer,
    unsurprisingly states with regard to the new basis of plea that  "again
    I am unable to comment further as [the appellant] stated to me that  he
    had no intention to have  sex  with  [his  ex-partner]".   Because  the
    appellant had clearly not been honest  with  her,  she  was  unable  to
    comment on his motivations and triggers but  stated  clearly  that  the
    appellant "seeks to minimise his behaviour, as to date he had not  been
    honest with Probation".

39. With regard to the offence for which he was about to be  sentenced,  Ms
    Westmoreland noted his previous convictions for possession of  cannabis
    and considered that "this does indicate a pattern of  drugs  offending"
    and that although this was his first offence of possession with  intent
    to supply "it is of concern that [the appellant] now admits to the  use
    of class A drugs but more concerningly  also  the  supply  of  class  A
    drugs".

40. It was noted under the assessment of likelihood  of  re-offending  that
    the appellant had admitted that he had previously felt both  drugs  and
    alcohol were problematic to him and had "previously spent about �80  on
    alcohol each week" and "was using crack once a  day  when  he  had  the
    money".

41. Regarding his long record of previous offending it was noted that  "the
    nature of previous offending  has  an  element  of  recklessness".   Ms
    Westmoreland also noted that "although he seeks to put  some  blame  on
    "negative peers", "[the appellant] acted alone in this offence and  has
    admitted that he was selling the drugs to peers".  Her unhelpful  (from
    the appellant's point of view) assessment of the appellant was that:
         "His dishonesty during the PSR interview would indicate  that  [the
         appellant] still fails to consider the consequences of his actions.
          In my assessment [he] has feared returning  to  custody,  he  felt
         that by denying his full involvement in the offence would help  him
         avoid immediate custody".

42. When assessing the risk of serious harm posed  by  this  appellant,  Ms
    Westmoreland noted his "long history of offending given his young  age"
    of which "some... were serious and unprovoked acts of  violence,  which
    occasioned harm to others as well as property".  Having considered  all
    the factors, as already noted, Ms Westmoreland assessed  the  appellant
    "as posing a medium risk of serious harm to the public" and also  noted
    that "current  assessment  tools"  placed  the  appellant  "as  a  high
    likelihood of re-conviction", with which  she  would  concur.   In  her
    "professional  opinion"  the  appellant   "poses   a   high   risk   of
    reconviction".

43. In her conclusion, Ms Westmoreland felt  it  appropriate  to  emphasise
    that "throughout the duration of the PSR interview, [the appellant] was
    dishonest".

44. These conclusions were relied upon by the sentencing judge, as  already
    noted at paragraph 10 of this decision, the  judge  observing  that  Ms
    Westmoreland "struggles to trust anything that you have to  say".   The
    judge also noted "a lot of mucking about in respect of  your  basis  of
    plea".

45. I have listened very carefully to everything the appellant had  to  say
    to the Tribunal in the course of his evidence, and also to the evidence
    given by his witnesses but regrettably I also  found  it  difficult  to
    accept what the appellant said to the Tribunal in his evidence,  during
    the course of which it was apparent that he had also been dishonest  to
    his partner, [R], and was not being  wholly  frank  with  the  Tribunal
    either.  I shall set out below some extracts from  the  evidence  which
    the appellant gave, a lot of which I found particularly unimpressive.

46. Towards the start of his cross-examination, the appellant was asked  to
    explain the circumstances in which he had pleaded guilty  to  a  sexual
    assault on a female.  He had been 14 at the time, and  the  victim  was
    aged about 13.  The appellant said that he had been with  "a  group  of
    lads" from around the area and travelling back on a bus,  when  one  of
    his friends had noticed a girl who was pretty and had sat next to  her.
    The appellant said he was behind her, but that his friend who was  next
    to her "must have touched her chest section with his right hand".   The
    lady driver of the bus said she was calling the police and that it  was
    the appellant who had touched her, but he had not touched her  and  was
    angry with the young girl.

47. The appellant told this Tribunal in terms that he had not  touched  her
    but before he knew it the police had come.

48. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to why in that case he had
    pleaded guilty to the offence, the appellant  replied  that  "the  main
    reason I pleaded guilty was the pride I  had  for  my  friends.   So  I
    thought I would take this on the chin for them".  He  went  on  to  say
    that his heart "is clear for this" because "I know  I  didn't  do  that
    sexual assault".

49. The appellant accepted that the girl must have made  a  complaint,  but
    repeated that he had pleaded guilty even though he was  not.   I  found
    his explanation for pleading guilty ludicrous and  considered  that  he
    only gave his explanation because it was the first  answer  which  came
    into his head when confronted with  a  question  (why  he  had  pleaded
    guilty in light of the account he was now giving) to which  he  had  no
    rational answer. I regret that the impression which  I  got  from  this
    evidence was that even now the appellant's initial response was to deny
    his past criminality if he thought this might help  him,  and  that  he
    would then tell any lie which came into his head when confronted with a
    question he could not otherwise answer.

50. When asked about his next offence of theft, the appellant  claimed  not
    to remember what he had stolen, because "from the bottom of my heart, I
    can't remember all these things from the past".

51. The appellant's claimed lack of memory  continued  when  he  was  asked
    about the rather more serious offence, some six months later  in  March
    2007 of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and robbery, to which he
    said that he was "trying to remember when and where  this  took  place"
    but that he could not remember what had happened because "it has been a
    long time" and he just did not remember.  However, he did say  that  he
    had "learnt from it".

52. In answer to the obvious question as to how he could have  learnt  from
    something that he did not remember, the only answer the  appellant  was
    able to give was that "I know it and it is no good  but  I  have  moved
    on".  When he was pressed by Mr Tarlow as to whether he  was  seriously
    saying that he did not remember what he had done on the occasion he had
    committed what was a serious offence the appellant  said  that  "I  can
    tell you, yes I did it but I can't tell you when and where".  In answer
    to a question from the Tribunal as to how many people he had assaulted,
    he said that he would "say about five".

53. When asked about his conviction for possession of heroin with intent to
    supply  in  2013,  the  appellant  initially  said  that  although   he
    appreciated this was serious "I wasn't a heavy  dealer",  and  was  not
    even dealing, but it was more "a friendly  social  supply  thing".   He
    said that he "wasn't a big time heroin seller" although he realised  it
    was serious, which was why he did not do it any more.  When  asked  why
    he was not complying with the supervision order which  he  breached  by
    committing this offence he said that "I think I  was  going  through  a
    phase".

54. In other words, his initial response to the Tribunal was  that  it  was
    more an offence committed amongst friends than a money making exercise.



55. However, when Mr Tarlow returned to this conviction later on in  cross-
    examination, the appellant gave a different explanation.  He then  said
    that he was "not mentally well", and had turned  to  drugs  "because  I
    thought I would be able to make some quick money to support [R] and  my
    daughter".  He repeated that he had no job at that stage and "thought I
    could make some quick money to support my family".

56. When it was pointed out to the appellant that earlier he had said  that
    he was just doing this socially, rather than as a dealer, the appellant
    said that it was in "stages" and that "sometimes it was  socially,  but
    he also did it to make money".

57. When he was asked if he meant by that that there were  other  occasions
    on which he had been dealing as well, he immediately replied that  that
    was not the position and that he had "got caught two days from when" he
    was given the drugs.

58. As it is clear from the evidence (he had dropped a bag containing seven
    "wraps" which contained heroin and his mobile phones showed that he had
    been dealing) that he had been engaged in commercial dealing, again the
    evasive and changing responses from the  appellant  indicated  to  this
    Tribunal that he was still not prepared to admit the truth of  what  he
    had done, which is not an indication of the reformed character  he  now
    claims to be, who has been able to address his behaviour.

59. The respondent's evidence as  to  how  he  had  addressed  his  alcohol
    problem was also unimpressive. When asked about what he had done to get
    insight into his behaviour, initially he said that he had been  reading
    books, and searching out "spiritual insights "on line, things that  are
    connected with him and that he also meditated.  He had been doing  this
    for over a year now, which had helped him.  However, when asked why  it
    was that he had during this period woken up in a  police  cell,  having
    got so drunk that he could not remember what had happened (one  of  his
    two drunk and disorderly convictions  recently)  he  then  changed  his
    evidence, or rather corrected it, to say  that  a  year  had  been  "an
    exaggeration".  When asked whether he had been meditating when  he  had
    gone out and got drunk, he replied that he had not.  When  asked  again
    why in that case he had said that he had been meditating  for  a  year,
    his response changed yet again.  His explanation now was  that  he  had
    been meditating for a year, "but not seriously".  So in the course of a
    very short period he had given three different accounts.  The first was
    that he had been meditating for a year which had changed his behaviour,
    the second was that he had been meditating for less than a year and the
    third was that, yes he had been meditating for a year, but it had  only
    been serious later.

60. The appellant when he was about 18 had been sleeping with [R],  who  at
    that time was about 14, but claimed in evidence that he had  not  known
    her age, had never seen her in school uniform, and  had  not  discussed
    with her what she did beyond that she was not working.  He thought  she
    was 17.  Although [R] confirmed in her evidence that she had  not  told
    him her age, this answer  appeared  rehearsed,  and  in  light  of  the
    appellant's propensity to lie, coupled with  his  previous  history  of
    sexual offending, I did not believe him.

61. In the course of cross-examination, the appellant conceded that he  had
    indeed agreed with his former partner that he would give her heroin  in
    return for sex, and (when specifically asked) that this  was  some  six
    months after his daughter had been born.  I considered  this  admission
    relevant in light of the evidence given shortly after by  [R],  because
    the Tribunal was able to obtain yet another insight in this appellant's
    general dishonesty.

62. [R] relied upon her statement  and  was  cross-examined.   I  have  had
    regard to all her evidence, but will only refer below to such of it  as
    I consider to be particularly relevant.  She told the Tribunal that the
    couple "had our ups and downs" but there  was  "nothing  major".   When
    asked whether as far as she knew the appellant  had  been  faithful  to
    her, she replied that he had  "cheated  me  when  I  was  eight  months
    pregnant", but that that was the  only  time.   When  asked  about  the
    circumstances of the 2013 heroin conviction, and the involvement of the
    appellant's former  partner,  [R]  said  that  "she  wanted  drugs,  he
    wouldn't give it to her so she threw allegations around".   When  asked
    what allegations she was referring to, [R] replied "that he  had  raped
    her".  When asked whether there was anything  sexual  between  them  at
    this time, she replied "not that I know of" continuing  that  "I  doubt
    there was because he was very honest with me from the beginning".

63. As the appellant has admitted to the Tribunal that he had  indeed  only
    agreed to supply his ex-partner with heroin if she had sex with him, it
    is quite apparent that he has been deceiving [R].

64. When this was developed in cross-examination by Mr Tarlow and  [R]  was
    asked whether she had been aware of the assertion  from  the  Probation
    Service that the appellant was "going to meet a girl and in return  for
    sex he would give her heroin" on 16 December 2012, [R] said she "didn't
    think" she was aware of this.

65. Later  in  cross-examination,  when  [R]  was  again  asked  about  the
    suggestion that the appellant  had  offered  his  ex-partner  drugs  in
    return for sex, she replied on this occasion that she was not aware  he
    was going to meet his ex-partner, but that "when  he  was  arrested  he
    told me everything".

66. As it was clear from her earlier answers that what  the  appellant  had
    told her was not what he had admitted to the Tribunal,  she  was  asked
    again about this, to which she said that "I know he had  drugs  on  him
    when she asked for some, he refused and so she told the police  he  had
    raped her.  That is what he told me.  So I thought he was being  honest
    with me at the time".  This Tribunal knows that he was not.

67. When asked if the appellant still drank, she  said  "occasionally,  but
    not to get drunk" although she accepted that she  could  not  say  100%
    that he would not.  In re-examination she told  the  Tribunal  she  had
    faith in him because she knew how much his daughter meant to  him,  but
    the Tribunal has to take note of the fact that not only did he agree to
    supply his ex-partner with class A drugs in return  for  sex  when  his
    daughter was just six months old, but that he has consistently lied  to
    [R] about this even up to the date of the hearing before this Tribunal,
    knowing that she was likely to believe him.  I did not regard  this  as
    an indication that he was someone who was addressing his past behaviour
    in a responsible way.

68. The appellant's aunt gave evidence and told the Tribunal that  she  had
    run up about �8,000 of debt on her credit card in order  to  help  him,
    which she had done by regularly  transferring  the  balance  to  a  new
    provider and therefore avoiding interest payments.  She had transferred
    her account some three or four times in  order  to  assist  her  nephew
    while he has been in trouble.  She agreed that she had  tried  to  stop
    his criminal behaviour many times without success and that this  was  a
    source of great shame to her.  However she asked the Tribunal  to  give
    him another chance because she believed he would change.

69. Although I have great sympathy with the appellant's aunt, regrettably I
    cannot share her belief that the appellant has changed, or that  he  is
    sufficiently reformed as not to constitute a serious threat to  society
    now.  As already expressed above, I found the  appellant  still  to  be
    thoroughly dishonest, in that his evidence would  change  according  to
    what at the time he considered to be in his own interests, and  he  has
    also lied to [R], taking advantage of her belief that he has  now  told
    her everything.  Taking my view of the  appellant's  evidence  together
    with his very serious record of criminal behaviour (and the  fact  that
    he was prepared to force his ex-partner to have sex with him  when  she
    did not want to in return for heroin, at a time  when  he  was  in  the
    relationship which he now claims is permanent and had  a  daughter  who
    was only 6 months old) taken together  also  with  his  two  subsequent
    convictions for being drunk and disorderly, both of which were  in  the
    period after his release from prison when he was living  with  [R]  and
    his daughter, I do not consider there is any proper basis upon which  I
    find that the risk assessment previously contained in the  pre-sentence
    report still applies.  It follows that I consider that the  appellant's
    personal conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  (that  is
    the right of society generally  to  be  protected  from  crime)  as  to
    justify his deportation even though as the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national he had previously acquired a right of permanent  residence  in
    the UK.

70. Even despite this finding, it is still necessary to consider  (pursuant
    to Regulation 21(5)(a)) whether his removal is proportionate, and  when
    considering this, the Tribunal must have regard to the matters set  out
    at Regulation 21(6), "such as the age,  state  of  health,  family  and
    economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural  integration  into
    the United Kingdom".

71. It is not in my judgment necessary to conduct a tick box exercise going
    through each of these items in turn, but I have taken all these factors
    into account.  It is also not appropriate to have regard to the matters
    set out within Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  from  28
    July 2014 onwards) because strictly this Section applies when  a  Court
    or Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under  the
    Immigration Acts breaches a person's Article 8 rights, whereas in  this
    case the appellant's rights have to be considered through the prism  of
    the EEA Regulations,  which  prevent  this  Tribunal  from  considering
    factors such as deterrence and revulsion which would normally form part
    of the public interest in deporting an applicant.  If and to the extent
    that this Tribunal finds that the decision to deport this applicant  is
    proportionate having regard to the  matters  set  out  within  the  EEA
    Regulations, it could not realistically at the same time find  that  it
    was disproportionate under article 8 generally.

72. The key factors which are said on the appellant's behalf to have weight
    are his relationship with  [R]  and  what  is  said  to  be  his  close
    relationship with  his  daughter.   I  accept  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect them to leave the UK with him and  so  I  consider
    proportionality on the basis that the  deportation  of  this  appellant
    would result in his separation from his family.  However, against  this
    must be the very large public interest in removing from the UK a person
    whom I have already  found  represents  a  serious  threat  to  one  of
    society's fundamental interests.   Although  the  appellant's  daughter
    will be separated from her father, given my finding that the assessment
    in the pre-sentence report which shows that he poses "a  high  risk  of
    reconviction" must remain unchanged, it is likely  that  even  if  this
    appellant is not deported now, it would only be a matter of time before
    the appellant's daughter and her father were separated in any event.  I
    also question just how positive a role model this  applicant  would  be
    his daughter, giving his general dishonesty and propensity to lie  when
    he regards this as being in his  best  interests.  So  far  as  [R]  is
    concerned, the appellant has not been honest with her up until now, and
    again, it is likely that it would only be a matter of time before  they
    were again separated in any event.

73. I do not consider that it is right to expect society to bear  the  risk
    of this  appellant  re-offending,  but  that  the  public  interest  in
    deporting the appellant is sufficiently high that it  is  proportionate
    to do so not withstanding that the inevitable consequence will be  that
    [R] and the appellant's daughter will be separated from him.   As  Lord
    Justice Sedley remarked in his well-known dictum in AD  Lee,  "that  is
    what deportation does".

74.  It  follows  that  the  decision  must  be  re-made,  dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  allowing   the
appellant's appeal and re-make it as follows:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 16 August 2016
