
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00432/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2013                          |On 15 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               bernard finlay

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Leonard & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 3 October  1971.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on  14  April  1990  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  British  ancestry.   On  23
    July 1997 he was convicted at Winchester  Crown  Court  of  murder  and
    sentenced to life imprisonment.  The  appellant  was  notified  of  his
    liability to be deported and he claimed asylum.  On 20  February  2013,
    the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.  In  that  letter,
    the Secretary of State certified  under  s.72(9)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the presumption under  s.72(2)  of
    that act applied, namely the presumption that the  appellant  had  been
    convicted by a  final  judgment  of  a  particular  serious  crime  and
    constituted a danger to the community of the UK applied.  The Secretary
    of State also made a decision that s.32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  2007
    applied.  On  19  February  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  signed  a
    deportation order pursuant to the automatic deportation  provisions  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  Tribunal
    (Judge Britton and Dr T Okitikpi)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    First, the Tribunal concluded that the  appellant's  deportation  would
    not breach Art 8.  Secondly, the Tribunal concluded  that,  given  that
    the appellant had never been involved in politics  or  a  member  of  a
    political party, he  could  safely  be  returned  to  Zimbabwe  and  so
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

 3. On 25 June 2013, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Garratt)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, primarily on  the
    ground that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  arguably  erred  in  law  in
    failing to adjourn the hearing in order that a  report  to  be  shortly
    produced by the Parole Board dealing with the appellant's  future  risk
    to the community could be considered by the Tribunal.   Permission  was
    also granted on the basis that the Tribunal had failed to apply s.72 of
    the 2002 Act and make findings in relation to the presumption that  the
    appellant constituted a danger to the community.

Scope of the Appeal

 4. In response to that grant  of  permission,  in  a  rule  24  reply  the
    Secretary of State stated at para 2 as follows:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
         appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing."

 5. That is a familiar phraseology  seen  in  rule  24  notices  where  the
    Secretary of State concedes the error of law and invites  the  Tribunal
    to find as such and to remake the decision.

 6. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Slatter,  whilst  accepting  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation  to  Art  8  could  not
    stand and would have to be remade,  nevertheless  maintained  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect  of  the  asylum  claim  also
    could not stand.  In his oral submissions, he  developed  a  number  of
    arguments.

 7. Mr Slatter submitted that prior to the First-tier Tribunal hearing  the
    Court of Appeal had granted permission to appeal  against  the  country
    guidance case of CM (Zimbabwe) [2013] UKUT 00059 (see CM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 660 (13 June 2012)) which the First-tier  Tribunal
    had applied in  this  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    adjourned the appeal in order to determine, when the transcript of  the
    permission hearing was available, the scope of  the  challenge  in  the
    Court of Appeal to the country guidance in CM.  He  submitted,  relying
    upon SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [77] per Maurice  Kay  LJ,
    that in granting permission in CM the Court  of  Appeal  had  indicated
    that the entirety of the country guidance  was  being  challenged  (see
    Laws LJ at [42]).  As I understood  Mr  Slatter's  submission,  in  the
    light of this, his submission was that the applicable guidance that the
    First-tier Tribunal should have applied  was  not  CM  but  rather  the
    previous country guidance that  was  in  force,  namely  RN  (Returnee)
    Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083.  As a subsidiary submission to that, Mr
    Slatter submitted  that  if  the  Tribunal  had  applied  RN  then  the
    appellant should have succeeded.

 8. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards accepted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law in failing to adjourn in  order  to  consider
    the soon to be produced report of the Parole Board.  That  report  has,
    in fact, been produced and was filed  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    cover of a letter from the appellant's solicitors dated 13 August 2013.
     Mr Richards accepted, therefore, that the decision in respect of Art 8
    could not stand and  had  to  be  remade  taking  account  of  all  the
    evidence, including the Parole Board's report.   However,  he  did  not
    concede the other ground upon which permission to  appeal  was  sought.
    In particular,  he  did  not  accept  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the
    ECHR was wrong in law.  Further, he did not accept that the  First-tier
    Tribunal was obligated to adjourn the hearing pending  the  outcome  of
    the Court of Appeal's decision in the most recent country guidance case
    for Zimbabwe in CM (Zimbabwe) [2013] UKUT 00059.

 9. In my judgment, Mr Slatter's submissions are unsustainable.  He  relied
    on a paragraph in the judgment of Maurice Kay LJ in SG (Iraq)  at  [77]
    which is in the following terms:

         "In future, when a Country Guidance  case  is  the  subject  of  an
         application to this Court  for  permission  to  appeal,  the  Civil
         Appeals  Office  will  seek  to  ensure  that  it  is  dealt   with
         expeditiously.  The application will not  be  referred  to  a  Lord
         Justice for consideration on the papers.  It will be listed as soon
         as is practicable before one or  more  Lord  Justices  as  an  oral
         application for permission to appeal, on notice to the  Respondent.
         If permission is granted, the Court will endeavour  to  make  clear
         whether it is the whole of the guidance which will be  reviewed  on
         the hearing of the substantive appeal or only part of it.   If  the
         latter, the Court will identify which part or parts, as was done by
         Carnwath LJ in PO (Nigeria  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2011] EWCA Civ  132,  at  paragraph  58.   This  should
         assist the tribunals and practitioners in relation to other pending
         cases.  When permission to appeal has been granted, whether by  the
         Upper Tribunal or by  this  Court,  the  Court  will  endeavour  to
         arrange an early listing of the substantive appeal."

10. That paragraph has to be seen in the context of what was  said  by  the
    court in SG (Iraq) as a whole.  Maurice Kay LJ agreed with the judgment
    of Stanley Burnton LJ who gave the leading judgment.  At  [50]  Stanley
    Burnton LJ endorsed the view of Mr CMG Ockelton (sitting  as  a  Deputy
    High Court Judge) in the case of R (Qader)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  1765
    (Admin) at [33]-[35] where he concluded as follows:

         "33. ... I do not derive any assistance from submissions about what
         Pill LJ may have thought or intended in granting permission in  HM,
         or from speculation about what the outcome of  the  appeal  to  the
         Court of Appeal may be.  There are many reasons why permission  may
         be granted, one (albeit only one) of which is  to  allow  a  higher
         court to give its approval to a process or decision that  has  been
         challenged.  And it is not unknown for challenges in the  Court  of
         Appeal to country guidance decisions to  be  successful  solely  in
         relation to the specific appellant,  leaving  the  guidance  itself
         essentially unimpaired.  No substantive  conclusion  can  be  drawn
         from the grant of permission; but nor on the other hand can  it  be
         assumed, as Mr Dunlop would have it, that the  only  issues  to  be
         considered  by  the  Court  will  be  related  to  the   Tribunal's
         procedure.

         34.  The proposition that a decision endorsed as  country  guidance
         by the President of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper
         Tribunal loses its force by being challenged, or even by permission
         to appeal it being granted, I regard as entirely  unarguable.   The
         Tribunal has reached a reasoned decision after a review of  a  mass
         of relevant evidence.  That conclusion remains binding  within  the
         terms of the Practice Direction, unless or until it  is  overturned
         on appeal or replaced by other guidance.  And even if that were not
         so, it remains in the highest degree relevant to the issues that  a
         decision-maker (whether the Secretary of State, or a representative
         seeking to advise a claimant) needs to take into account.  On  many
         questions, there is no country guidance at all, but that  does  not
         prevent  the  Secretary  of  State  taking   decisions,   including
         decisions rejecting fresh claims and imposing certification under s
         94.  A challenged country guidance decision cannot be worse than no
         guidance at all.

         35.  The country guidance system has been endorsed by Parliament in
         s 105 of the 2002 Act (as amended), and by the Court of Appeal, and
         appears to be regarded with the highest respect by  the  Courts  in
         Strasbourg and Luxembourg.  That is not to suggest that  individual
         country guidance decisions are infallible, but it is a good  reason
         for supposing that it would be  undesirable  to  render  it  wholly
         ineffectual.  But the claimant's  submission  would,  if  accepted,
         have that effect.  Whenever a decision was under  challenge  nobody
         would be  entitled  to  rely  on  it,  however  reliable  it  might
         otherwise appear to be, until the challenge was  resolved  and  (if
         necessary) further guidance had been given - which might itself  be
         subject  to  challenge.   That  cannot  be  right:   it   is   both
         unnecessary and wasteful of resources."

11. As that makes abundantly clear, country guidance remains  binding  upon
    the First-tier Tribunal (and indeed  the  Upper  Tribunal)  unless  and
    until it is overturned on appeal by the Court  of  Appeal  or  departed
    from by the Upper Tribunal itself.  The mere  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal against a country guidance case does not deprive  that  decision
    of its authoritative force within the  Tribunal  structure  as  country
    guidance.

12. As Stanley Burnton LJ stated at [67]:

         "A  Country  Guidance   determination   of   the   Upper   Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) remains authoritative  unless  and
         until it is set aside on appeal or replaced by a subsequent Country
         Guidance determination."

13. As I have said,  Maurice  Kay  LJ  agreed  with  Stanley  Burnton  LJ's
    judgment; as did Gross LJ.  Nothing in [77] said by Maurice Kay LJ was,
    in my judgment, intended to detract from the very clear view  expressed
    by Stanley Burnton LJ.

14. Consequently, I reject Mr Slatter's  submissions  that  simply  because
    permission to appeal had been granted by the Court of Appeal in CM,  it
    ceased to be authoritative country guidance for  the  purposes  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing this appeal.  On the contrary, it  remained
    authoritative and the First-tier Tribunal was required to apply  it  to
    the facts and circumstances as found in relation to this appellant.

15. I note that there was no suggestion before the First-tier Tribunal that
    more recent "cogent evidence" since the Upper Tribunal's decision in CM
    justified departure from it.  Consequently, the First-tier Tribunal did
    not err in law in applying CM to the appellant's case and  it  did  not
    err in law in failing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  order  that  more
    information could be obtained about the scope of the appeal  being  run
    in the Court of Appeal in CM.

Other Grounds

16. Mr Slatter also submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law
    in its assessment of the appellant's risk on return in the light of  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and HS (Returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG
    [2007] UKAIT 0094 as regards the risk to the  appellant  on  return  to
    Harare Airport.  He submitted that, on the basis  of  those  decisions,
    the appellant would be at risk on return because he would  be  required
    to claim allegiance with ZANU-PF which he did not have.  Mr Slatter did
    not, however, put before me the decisions in RT and HS.  I indicated at
    the hearing that I intended  to  look  at  those  decisions  after  the
    hearing.  Having done so, I reject Mr Slatter's  submissions.   As  the
    Upper Tribunal made clear in CM, the country guidance in  HS  concerned
    with the risk on return to Zimbabwe at Harare Airport remained  correct
    (see [202]-[205]).  The risk from the CIO,  recognised  in  HS,  is  to
    those who are perceived or regarded as low-level MDC  supporters.   The
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which led to  its  finding  in
    para 45, was that the appellant:

         "has never been involved in politics or a  member  of  a  political
         party.  We are satisfied that the appellant will not be a target of
         any violence and will be able to go through the airport without any
         problems and return to Bulawayo in safety."

17. That finding is wholly consistent with, indeed it  complies  with,  the
    country guidance in HS.  The Supreme Court's decision in  RT  does  not
    affect that guidance as, again, the Upper Tribunal made  clear  in  CM.
    In amending its earlier  country  guidance  in  the  light  of  RT,  it
    reflected that decision in relation to the  risk  of  individuals  once
    they have returned to their home area  and  any  risk  to  them  whilst
    there.  The Tribunal stated its guidance as follows:

         "5.  A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF."

18. Nothing in that adjustment to the country guidance affects the guidance
    in relation to any risk at the airport.

19. Consequently, I reject Mr  Slatter's  submission  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in finding  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    establish that he would be at risk on return to the airport at Harare.

20. Finally, Mr Slatter, as I understood his  submissions,  submitted  that
    the appellant should have won on the  basis  of  CM.   That  submission
    cannot stand in the light of the guidance in CM  itself.   It  will  be
    recalled that the  appellant  comes  from  Bulawayo.   In  its  country
    guidance in CM, the Upper Tribunal said this:

         "A returnee to Bulawayo will in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile."

21. The appellant  is  from  Bulawayo.   As  I  have  already  noted,  this
    appellant had no political  profile  at  all.   He  had  no  basis  for
    succeeding in the light of CM.

22. For all these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  in
    finding that the appellant could not succeed in  establishing  that  he
    was a refugee.

23. That said, I accept that the  Tribunal  should  first  have  considered
    whether the certificate under s.72(9) of the 2002 Act applied.  That is
    a statutory requirement set out in s.72(10) of the 2002 Act where it is
    stated that:

         "The Tribunal .... hearing the appeal -

         (a)   must  begin  substantive  deliberation  of  the   appeal   by
             considering the certificate, and

         (b)  if in agreement that presumptions under sub-section  (2),  (3)
             or (4) apply (having given the appellant  an  opportunity  for
             rebuttal, must dismiss the appeal insofar as it relies on  the
             ground specified in sub-section (9)(a)."

24. In other words, the Tribunal should determine whether the appellant has
    rebutted the presumption that he has been convicted of  a  particularly
    serious crime and constitutes a danger to the  public  and,  therefore,
    whether the certificate is to be upheld first.  Only if the certificate
    is not upheld should the Tribunal go on and consider the merits of  the
    individual's asylum claim.  Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly
    was in error in failing to do that, that error could not possibly  have
    been material to their decision in relation to the  appellant's  asylum
    claim.  For the reasons I have already given, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was properly entitled to conclude that his asylum claim (and under  Art
    3 of the ECHR) could not succeed.

Disposal

25. The only live issue, therefore,  left  in  the  appellant's  appeal  is
    whether his deportation would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

26. Mr Slatter invited me to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as, in effect, their  failure  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  order  to
    consider the forthcoming Parole Board report had denied the appellant a
    fair hearing.  Mr Richards  did  not  express  any  dissent  from  that
    invitation.  In all the circumstances, and having regard to para 7.2 of
    the Senior President's Practice Statements, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    proper disposal of this  appeal  is  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to remake the decision in respect of Art 8.

27. To that extent, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed
    and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision in respect of  Art  8.   The  appeal  should  be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted panel.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
