
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00864/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 January 2018                    |On 26 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                             MRS JUSTICE LAING DBE
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P D KING TD


                                   Between

                                     HA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Faruk, Counsel instructed by Direct Public
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr N Sheldon, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on [  ]  1976.   He  seeks  to
    appeal against a decision of  the  respondent  dated  6  October  2010,
    making him the subject of a deportation order following his  conviction
    for possessing class A drugs with intent to supply, for  which  he  was
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

2.   The appeal process in  relation  to  that  decision  has  been  one  of
    considerable procedural complexity, there having been hearings  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Court  of  Appeal  and
    finally in the Supreme Court. The hearing in the Supreme Court  was  on
    12, 13 and 14 January 2016 and judgment was given on 16 November  2016.
    Essentially, the previous decision of the Upper Tribunal  allowing  the
    appeal in a determination promulgated  on  11  February  2013  was  set
    aside.

3.   It was directed that the Upper Tribunal consider the  appeal  de  novo.
    Thus it is that the matter comes before  us  to  determine  the  issues
    presented.

4.   In summary, the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  in
    2000.  He made an asylum claim in July 2002 which  was  refused  and  a
    subsequent appeal was dismissed.  He remained in the United Kingdom and
    on 10 November 2005 was convicted of possessing class  A  and  class  C
    drugs for which he was fined.  On 4 December 2006 he was  convicted  at
    the Crown Court, sitting at Snaresbrook, of two  counts  of  possessing
    class A controlled drugs with intent to supply  and  was  sentenced  to
    four years' imprisonment.  He sought to appeal against the  convictions
    but was unsuccessful in that challenge.  On 4 April 2007 he was  served
    with notice of liability  to  deportation.   Further  submissions  were
    presented as a fresh claim  for  asylum  which  were  rejected  by  the
    respondent on 22 January 2008.   A  subsequent  decision  to  make  the
    appellant the subject of a deportation order was withdrawn because  the
    appellant's nationality had not been established.   Further  interviews
    were conducted on that aspect and in due course the  relevant  decision
    of 6 October 2010 was made.

5.   The appellant seeks to claim  that  his  personal  safety  were  he  to
    return to Iraq.  As a Sunni  Muslim  he  fears  attack  from  the  Shia
    inhabitants.  He is tattooed, particularly to the body  and  hands  and
    contends that that would be viewed in any event as un-Islamic and would
    also expose him to violence.  As a person who has been out of Iraq  for
    many years he would also be perceived to have been westernised and that
    would expose him to the risk of abduction for the purposes of financial
    gain.   Further,  he  would  be  unable   to   obtain   the   necessary
    documentation to live in Iraq and that would expose him  to  danger  or
    destitution.

6.   As a separate head to his claim he maintains that he is in a  committed
    and genuine relationship with JW, with a child  expected  shortly.   He
    contends  that  his  removal  from  the   United   Kingdom   would   be
    disproportionate and would in any event be in breach of his fundamental
    human rights.

7.   The appellant  gave  evidence  before  us,  relying  upon  his  witness
    statements of 3 April 2017 and 15 January 2018.

8.   The appellant stated that he was born in Palestine and that his  mother
    died at childbirth, as  did  his  twin  brother.   He  and  his  father
    travelled to Iraq, and lived in region of Masa and Yamouk,  a  district
    of Baghdad.  There his father married  a  woman  who  became,  for  all
    intents and purposes,  his  mother.   She  had  a  son  by  a  previous
    relationship.  At some stage the appellant's real father left  and  his
    stepmother married again.  He and his stepfather did not enjoy  a  good
    relationship and indeed he claims that he was abused by him.

9.   The appellant lived in the family setting until he  was  9  years  old.
    He left home because of the abusive  stepfather  and  for  three  years
    worked in or around Yamouk as a mechanic and, when aged  12,  moved  to
    Jordan.  He worked in various restaurants until he was 19.  He did  not
    have any identification papers.  He would visit  his  stepmother  every
    two years, crossing the border  by  clandestine  means.   On  one  such
    occasion, when he was aged 16 or 17 he was arrested by the army in Iraq
    for draft evasion.  Although under age he was  unable  to  confirm  his
    age. He was sent for army training and escaped after eight months.   At
    some stage his mother moved to Basra.

10.  Whilst in Jordan he formed a relationship with an Irish woman and  they
    had a child together, K, who is a British citizen. The appellant claims
    to have been in contact with him since he was 17.

11.  At some stage his stepbrother died in the Iraqi army.  His  mother  did
    not want the same fate to happen to him so  she  decided  to  sell  her
    house in Iraq, which took some  three  years  to  be  completed.   That
    raised 12,000 US dollars and smugglers thereafter brought  him  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2000, when he was some 23 years of age, since when he
    has worked as a dancer in nightclubs and has spent much  time  training
    young people in martial arts such as Jiu Jitsu.

12.  The appellant contends that, having lived for so  long  in  the  United
    Kingdom, he has become westernised both in mannerisms and in  language.
    That would  result  in  his  being  kidnapped  upon  return,  it  being
    perceived that he would be someone who may have money.

13.  In terms of his private life, he has had  a  number  of  relationships,
    one with CH lasting from  2005  until  2013.  That  relationship  ended
    because of his lack of settled status, especially when  his  successful
    appeal had come under challenge.  He is now in a relationship  with  JW
    and a baby is expected in April 2018.

14.  When questioned  by  Mr  Sheldon,  the  appellant  indicated  that  his
    stepbrother was killed when he was about 15 or 16.  At some  stage  his
    stepmother had divorced his stepfather and moved to  Basra,  living  by
    herself.  He knew little of her family circumstances.  He had  not  met
    her parents nor indeed had he ever asked about them.  He had no idea as
    to her friends.

15.  It was suggested to the appellant that he had not  given  a  consistent
    account of his experiences.  His attention was drawn to  paragraphs  10
    and 11 in particular, of the  determination  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins promulgated on 11 February 2013.  In that determination  it  is
    recorded that he had attended  a  screening  interview,  where  he  had
    identified himself as having been born in Baghdad. He had  returned  to
    Iraq from Jordan when aged 14 or 15 and had  been  intercepted  by  the
    Iraqi authorities for avoiding military service.  He  was  detained  in
    prison for two days and released when his mother proved his  age.   The
    appellant indicated that his mother had  produced  false  documents  in
    order to establish his age.  He returned to Jordan but later,  when  he
    had returned in 1995, he again had been  taken  into  detention.   This
    time his mother was unsuccessful in securing his release because he was
    of an age when people were required to join the  Iraqi  army.   He  did
    some military training but absented himself from the camp  after  three
    months, returning briefly  to  Jordan  before  fleeing  to  the  United
    Kingdom. It was suggested that that evidence, as  recorded,  contrasted
    with his evidence that he escaped after eight months and went to Jordan
    and remained there for a number of years until  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom. He agreed that the account as recorded was more accurate.

16.  The appellant repeated that his mother had sold her house in  Basra  to
    pay for him to come to the United Kingdom.  He did not know  where  she
    lived thereafter but believed she lived with friends. He had no contact
    with her but it was his  understanding that she died in 2004.   He  had
    met people by chance in the United Kingdom, who came from the same area
    of Basra who gave him that information.

17.  A statement (A1), extracted from the  court  file,  seems  to  set  out
    details as to his early life in the  Yamouk  district  in  Baghdad.  It
    speaks of the fact that his mother raised the funds for him to come  to
    the United Kingdom by mortgaging her house.  The  statement  concludes,
    "the Home Office do not believe I am from Iraq.  I have  explained  the
    street I lived, the area I am from, the  school  I  attended.   I  have
    named countries close to Iraq."  The appellant denied that this  was  a
    statement relating to him or prepared on his instructions.   He  points
    out that the signature on that statement does not match  his  signature
    as can be seen from his most recent statements.

18.  The appellant indicated that he had worked as a mechanic from  the  age
    of 9 to 13.  He could not, however, remember the name of  the  employer
    or precisely where he had worked.  He conceded, however,  that  he  had
    worked in the region of Yamouk, near to Baghdad.

19.   Finally  the  appellant's  attention  was  drawn  to  details  of  the
    interview which was conducted on 29 August 2002.   At  question  19  of
    that interview the appellant was asked:

         "Q:  When did you first receive your military service papers?


         A:   Since I was 18, my mother received.  I was not in Iraq at that
             time."

    He went on to say in that interview that he  had  lived  in  Yamouk  in
    Baghdad but had left Iraq because his mother did not want him  to  stay
    in Iraq because of the troubles there.


20.  In  reply  to  question  28  the  appellant  indicated  that  he  lived
    sometimes in Amman, sometimes in Petra and "when I called my mother she
    tells me don't come now, cos they send you letters".


21.  At question 27 he was asked "how many times did  the  authorities  send
    your call-up papers" he answered "many times for  that  reason  I  left
    Iraq".  The appellant did not agree  that  what  was  recorded  in  the
    interview was what he had said.  He was insistent that no military call-
    up papers were sent to his mother and, in relation to the  question  at
    question 27, he said that that was not asked.

22.   His previous relationship with CH had ended at Christmas 2013 and  his
    long-term friendship with JW had become a serious relationship  towards
    the end of 2014.  He entered into an Islamic marriage on 12 May 2017.

23.  The appellant's wife, JW, also gave evidence and  adopted  her  witness
    statements of 3 April 2017 and 15 January 2018.

24.  Prior to her becoming pregnant she had worked as a salon manager  in  a
    number of prestigious venues.  She had worked since 16 and had acquired
    very good qualifications in laser treatment  and    in  the  sector  of
    beauty therapy.

25.  Her pregnancy is not an easy one.  It is painful and there are  several
    medical complications which necessitate her having to  attend  hospital
    on a regular basis. She  had  suffered  a  previous  miscarriage.   The
    anxiety caused by the uncertainty of the appellant's position was  also
    badly affecting her health.  She has a mother aged  71  years  of  age,
    living in a council flat nearby,whom she sees on a regular basis.   She
    spoke in glowing terms of the quality of the appellant  as  a  husband,
    indicating that if he were to be removed  from  the  jurisdiction  that
    would cause her difficulty in returning to work as there  would  be  no
    support for her in looking after the baby.  Her experience has been  in
    the United Kingdom.  If the appellant could remain she  would  then  be
    able to resume work and support the family  or  alternatively  that  he
    could work and support her. She indicated that  she  depends  upon  the
    appellant emotionally and in every other way and has no other source of
    support.

26.  Both parties made their representations.  We are grateful for both  the
    depth and attention to detail which has been given.  On behalf  of  the
    appellant considerable weight is placed on the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]  UKUT  00018  (IAC).
    The appellant in that case claimed to  face  similar  circumstances  to
    those clamed by the appellant in this. Such are set  out  in  paragraph
    10, as follows:-

         "The appellant's current fear of return  to  Iraq  is  based  on  a
         combination of factors.  He fears that he would be at real risk  of
         serious harm on return because (i)  having  worked  for  a  western
         international company might be perceived as a collaborator; (ii) as
         a Sunni Muslim he might be targeted by Shia  militia;  (iii)  as  a
         person who has spent time  living  in  the  west  he  might  be  at
         heightened risk of kidnapping, and (iv) these risks are enhanced in
         the context of general insecurity and high levels  of  violence  in
         Baghdad."

     In that connection our attention was  drawn  to  paragraph  75  of  the
    Judgement, which is concerned with trends in Iraqi kidnapping  and  its
    nature.

27.  The decision in BA is also relevant as  to  the  risk  posed  to  Sunni
    Muslims by Shia militias.   This  is  also  discussed  in  considerable
    detail in the decision itself.  Mr Faruk relies upon  the  decision  as
    supporting his submissions that there is a significant and serious risk
    of kidnapping to those who would be perceived as  from  the  west.   He
    also  submitted  that  that  decision  is  authority  to  support   his
    contention of significant risk also from  the  Shia  militants  and  of
    indiscriminate violence in or around Baghdad.  In fact  he  adopts  the
    argument as submitted to the Tribunal at paragraph  111,  namely  that,
    although one factor if taken alone may not be sufficient,  there  is  a
    real risk on a cumulative basis.

28.  Our attention was also drawn to the decision of AA (Iraq)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944  which  highlights
    potential difficulties  in  relocation  to  the  Baghdad  area  and  in
    obtaining an Iraqi civil status identity  document  (CSID).   Mr  Faruk
    submits that the lack of contact in  the  area  by  the  appellant  and
    indeed his long separation  from  any  potential  sponsor  or  support,
    rendered it almost impossible to obtain such a document, the absence of
    which would have a significant impact upon his ability to live or  work
    or indeed to survive in that environment.

29.  In terms of family and private life, it  is  submitted  that  it  is  a
    committed relationship, and that the removal of the appellant would  be
    devastating for his wife. Mr Faruk  submits that, in  these  particular
    circumstances, there are  very  compelling  circumstances  which  would
    enable us to find that the appellant's Article 8 claim is  sufficiently
    strong to outweigh the strength of public interest in deportation.   He
    invites us to find that  the  appellant's  offending  is  now  of  some
    antiquity and that he has adapted well to society, contributing to  the
    welfare particularly of the young people in  the  activities  which  he
    runs with them.  Mr Faruk invites us to find that the  public  interest
    is not such as would require his removal in all the circumstances.

30.  On behalf of  the  respondent  Mr  Sheldon  relies  upon  his  skeleton
    argument of 10 January 2018.

31.  In terms of the protection  claim  he  invites  our  attention  to  the
    Country Policy and Information  Note,  Iraq:  Sunni/Arab  Muslims  June
    2017, which assesses the risk  of  reprisals  by  Shias  against  Sunni
    individuals to be low.  In  terms  of  kidnapping  we  are  invited  to
    consider the authority of BA in its  full  context.   He  submits  that
    there is little evidence concerning the risk posed by tattoos.

32.  In terms of obtaining  a  CSID,  we  were  invited  to  find  that  the
    appellant, contrary to his contentions, has  relations  in  and  around
    Baghdad or indeed elsewhere in that  region,  or  contacts,  who  could
    afford him assistance in obtaining such document.

33.  In terms of family and human rights our  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    statutory regime as set out in  Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 Sections 117B- 117D in particular.  We were invited
    to find that the statutory regime is such that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest  for  the  appellant  to  be  deported,  notwithstanding   the
    difficulties for JW which such would or may create.

34.   In considering the protection issues that have been raised, we  remind
    ourselves that the central issue for determination in  this  appeal  is
    whether there is a "reasonable degree of  likelihood"  or  "substantial
    grounds for believing" that there is a real risk of such serious  harm.
    Clearly matters should be considered holistically, which  will  require
    in this case an assessment of a number of cumulative factors.

35.  It seems to us that it is important in such  consideration  of  context
    to determine the nature of the appellant's former involvement with  the
    area; his familiarity with  its  customs  and  community,  and  of  any
    potential network of accommodation or support.

36.  The appellant in his evidence, as  we  so  find,  has  been  less  than
    forthcoming  on  those  matters  and  untruthful  in  material  aspects
    concerning his  connection  with  Baghdad  and  the  surrounding  area.
    Although he claims to have been born  in  Palestine  of  a  Palestinian
    father, such is not the position as set out in the interview  in  2002.
    He indicated in clear terms in that  interview  that  he  was  born  in
    Baghdad and certainly lived in that area and grew  up  in  a  household
    during his formative years.  We do not understand why it is that in his
    written statement of April 2017 he seeks to suggest that he grew up  in
    or around Mosul and not in or around Baghdad.

37.  The appellant was at pains to indicate that he had little knowledge  of
    where he had lived or of his family situation,  because  he  left  when
    very young.   We do not find him to be credible in that matter. It  was
    his account, as highlighted in the determination of the Upper Tribunal,
    that although he may indeed have lived  and  worked  in  Jordan  for  a
    number of years, nevertheless he grew up and  worked  in  the  area  of
    Baghdad and would make visits to his mother in Iraq from Jordan. As  he
    left for the United Kingdom  when  aged  23  or  24,   it  is  entirely
    reasonable to assume that he  was  familiar  with  precisely  where  he
    lived.  When pressed as to his community involvement he indicated  that
    he did not go to school but attended Islamic teaching and therefore had
    little contact with the community.

38.  We regard the statement A1 as being a significant document. We  do  not
    accept that the appellant was unaware of that document.   There  was  a
    period, particularly after 2008, when the issue  with  his  nationality
    was an important one and  clearly  he  would  have  been  motivated  to
    persuade the authorities that he was indeed from  Iraq.   Although  the
    appellant denies that the  statement  is  about  his  circumstances  it
    contains so much information that is common or  potentially  common  to
    his case as to leave us in no doubt that it was prepared for him or  on
    his behalf.

39.  In that statement it is said that the appellant was  born  in  Baghdad.
    He lived at a named street in the Yamouk district of Baghdad.  He  went
    to the local school in Yamouk.   He remembered that school and his  two
    teachers.  He stopped going to school when 9 years old and worked in  a
    local garage, cleaning engines.  The garage owner was Hajisaif who paid
    him two or three dinar per week.  He worked there until he was about 12
    years old and then he left Iraq and went to Jordan.

40.  His mother had encouraged him to leave Iraq because the  situation  was
    so bad.  He worked in restaurants and coffee shops in Amman for  a  few
    years, then went to Petra to guide tourists who  wanted  to  visit  the
    desert.  He would visit Baghdad once in a while and such visits were to
    see his mother and give her money.  He was called for military  service
    at the age of 18 but by then he was in Jordan. When  he  was  about  21
    he travelled between Basra and Baghdad on a minibus and was stopped  at
    a checkpoint by police.  He had no identification and  was  transferred
    to prison.  He was there for two months.  He was sent to the desert for
    military training.  He was there for  three  months  and  escaped.   He
    hitchhiked to Baghdad.  He went to his mother, collected money and went
    to Jordan.

41.  He had stayed in Jordan working between  Amman  and  Petra  and  saving
    money.  He  went  back  to  Baghdad  after  his  escape  to  deal  with
    arrangements to leave the country and find a safe  place.   His  mother
    made arrangements for him to go to Europe.  She mortgaged her house  to
    raise some money to obtain some false papers.  The  appellant  went  to
    Cyprus from Amman, travelling on a false passport.

42.  The statement concludes  that  this  was  explained  in  the  interview
    recorded.  The statement is clearly to persuade the authorities that he
    was indeed from Baghdad.

43.  The coincidence of that statement with what is contained  in  the  2002
    interview  leaves us in no doubt that AI is a  statement   relating  to
    the appellant

44.  In the screening interview the appellant  indicated  that  he  went  to
    Cyprus from Jordan, the date of the interview being 11 September  2002.
    He used a Jordanian passport.   His  mother  had  sold  the  house  for
    US$13,000 which is precisely the amount set out in paragraph 7 of AI.

45.  We have already made reference to the interview  itself,  conducted  on
    29 August 2002, in which the  appellant  indicated  that  he  lived  in
    Yamouk in Baghdad, leaving Iraq  to  avoid  the  troubles,  working  in
    restaurants in Amman and Petra.  He indicated  that  he  had  travelled
    many times between Baghdad and Amman.  He called his  mother  who  told
    him not to return because of the conscription papers.   Since  then  he
    had been stopped in the minibus at  the  checkpoint.   He  was  put  in
    prison in Baghdad for two  months  eventually  escaping  from  military
    service.  The interview speaks of  his  arriving  in  Baghdad  and  his
    mother giving him money which he used to escape to Jordan.

46.  He speaks of his mother's friends issuing him  with  a  false  passport
    which he then used to go to Cyprus.  In answer to a  question  from  Mr
    Sheldon, he indicated that he  thought  then  they  were  his  mother's
    friends but they were in fact smugglers.  He  had  been  too  young  to
    appreciate that difference.

47.  What emerges from the generality of such matters, as  we  so  find,  is
    that the appellant had a fixed address in Baghdad region for many years
    where his mother lived which was known to the  authorities.   When  the
    appellant was 19 or  older  call-up  papers  were  dispatched  to  that
    address.

48.  Whether or not his mother  moved  to  Basra  is  less  clear  than  the
    financing of his trip to the United Kingdom which would  seem  to  have
    been put in train by his mother.  It seems to us  to  lack  credibility
    that if the  appellant's  mother  had  sold  her  house  in  2000,  the
    appellant would not  have  made  enquiries  as  to  her  wellbeing  and
    whereabouts thereafter.  We do not find it credible that he  only  came
    to know about her death by reason of chance meetings with  people  from
    the area after 2004 in the United Kingdom.  Given his long  association
    with his mother and with the area we find more likely  than  otherwise,
    that the appellant had maintained close contact  with  his  mother  and
    with the region in which he grew up.  We do not find it  credible  that
    he has since then lost all contact with the region. We  find  that  the
    appellant continues to have family and/or friends  in  the  Baghdad  or
    Basra areas.

49.  In the general situation  of  return  we  have  regard  to  the  latest
    country guidance  decision,  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.   That
    decision is relevant to the  question  as  to  whether  there  are  any
    grounds for considering  that  humanitarian  protection  arises  having
    regard to Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  It  is  to  be
    noted that the guidance in relation to that is set  out  in  the  Annex
    that:

         "The degree of armed conflict in the remainder of  Iraq  (including
         Baghdad City) is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to such serious harm to civilians,  irrespective
         of their  individual  characteristics,  so  as  to  engage  Article
         15(c)."

     Similarly it is set  out  also  that  decision-makers  in  Iraqi  cases
    should assess the individual characteristics  of  the  person  claiming
    humanitarian  protection,  in  order   to   ascertain   whether   those
    characteristics are such as to put that person at real risk of  Article
    15(c) harm.


50.   Internal  relocation  within  Iraq,  particularly  to   Baghdad,   was
    considered in the decision.  Matters which make it  unreasonable/unduly
    harsh to relocate to Baghdad include the  ability  to  obtain  a  CSID;
    whether the person can speak Arabic, whether there are  family  friends
    or family members in Baghdad  able  to  accommodate  him;  his  finding
    employment and whether there is support available.

51.  It is to be noted that there is no real risk of an  ordinary  civilian,
    travelling from Baghdad Airport to the southern governorates, suffering
    serious harm en route, so as to engage Article 15(c).  In one sense  of
    course this is not a relocation of the appellant but his return  to  an
    area known to the appellant and in which  he  grew  up  and  maintained
    contact with as a young adult. We do not find that  he  has  discharged
    the burden of showing, albeit to the lower standard, that he has ceased
    contact with friends or family members within it.

52.  In considering the possibility of a safe return, it  is  necessary  for
    us to decide whether the appellant would be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID,
    reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  Such is generally  required  in
    order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance to  the  authorities;
    employment; education; housing and medical treatment.  As indicated the
    appellant has failed to demonstrate that there are no friends or family
    members able to support or accommodate him.  We do  not  find  that  he
    would have any undue difficulty in satisfying the authorities as to his
    identity, particularly given the call-up papers that were delivered  to
    his address, and his knowledge at the exact address in which he  lived.
    We are not persuaded otherwise than that there are  family  members  or
    other individuals still in the area  with  whom  the  appellant  is  in
    contact who can vouch for  him  and  lend  support.   We  do  not  find
    therefore that were he to be returned to Baghdad he would be unable  to
    obtain a CSID.

53.  In assessing the appellant's ability to adapt back to life in  Baghdad,
    to access accommodation and find work, we bear in mind that he has been
    throughout a very resourceful person,  working  when  he  was  still  a
    teenager and being able to live seemingly without too  much  difficulty
    in Jordan, undertaking a variety of tasks.  The appellant was at  pains
    to indicate that he is still very active within his local community  in
    the United Kingdom and teaching martial arts is part of that  practice.
    Care must obviously be taken in placing undue  weight  upon  demeanour.
    However, it is our observation of him at some  length  at  the  hearing
    that he is articulate and  able  to  give  responses,  not  necessarily
    credible ones, to suit his purposes. He is someone who is  "streetwise"
    and not unfamiliar also with criminal elements in society.  We have  no
    doubt that he would  be  able  to  apply  his  mind  to  obtaining  the
    requisite documents from the authorities and would have  no  difficulty
    in establishing himself in terms of support and employment.  It  is  to
    be noted that the Civil Status Affairs Office is situated  in  Baghdad.
    There is a National Status Court also in Baghdad to which the appellant
    could apply for formal recognition of identity.

54.  In terms of the suggestion that the appellant, as a Sunni, would be  at
    risk from the Shia population, we pay regard to the Country Policy  and
    Information Note of June 2017 to which reference has been made.  It  is
    to be noted Sunnis, although marginalised by  the  Shia  population  in
    Baghdad, are still represented in society and government. We note  that
    which is set out at  2.2.2 that although there are sectarian  tensions,
    the Haider-Al-Abadi's Government has attempted reconciliation with  the
    Sunni population.

55.  The appellant in his evidence has sought to indicate that he  has  also
    had contact with Basra, the area to which his mother had gone  at  some
    stage in her life.  It is to be noted from 4.1.2 that there  are  Sunni
    communities in that area as well.

56.  In terms of statistics, those from the CIA World  Fact  book  estimated
    that in 2010 the population of Iraq was 99% Muslim with 60-65% Shia and
    32-37% Sunni.  In the year 2014, the US State Department  International
    Religious Freedom Report published in October 2015 stated that Arab and
    Kurdish Sunni  Muslims  made  up  31-37%  of  the  population.   Jane's
    Sentinel Security Assessment in May 2016 estimated that Arabs form  77%
    of the population, Shias representing 62.5% and Sunnis 34.5%.  This  is
    in terms of a total population in the region of 34 million.   It  would
    seem also that generally, although Baghdad is Shia dominated, there are
    areas in which Sunni members live, in particular Mansour and Abughraib.

57.  In terms of the Policy Guidance, it was considered that in general  the
    treatment of Sunnis by the state is not  sufficiently  serious  by  its
    nature and reputation to reach the threshold of  being  persecutory  or
    inhumane or degrading.  Whether a Sunni will be able to  demonstrate  a
    real risk of persecution or serious harm from  the  Shia  militia  will
    depend upon his/her own personal profile including  family  connections
    and  origin.  It is perhaps also in that connection that we consider BA
    (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 0018 (IAC).

58.  The headline of that decision indicates  that  although  the  level  of
    general violence in  Baghdad  city  remains  significant,  the  current
    evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion of the Tribunal
    in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).   The  appellant
    is not someone who would  be  perceived  as  having  collaborated  with
    foreign coalition forces or having worked for non security  western  or
    international companies.  Although a returnee from the west  is  likely
    to be perceived as a potential target for kidnapping in  Baghdad,  this
    may depend on how long he or she has been away from Iraq.  In principle
    however, the longer a person has spent abroad the greater the risk  but
    the evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this
    ground alone.  Similarly, a Sunni identity  alone  was  not  considered
    sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious harm.   The appellant
    relies upon the combination of factors as indicated at  the  outset  of
    this decision.  It is in that context that the assessment of  the  past
    ability of the appellant to  have  survived  in  community,  relatively
    successfully, often in difficult circumstances, is a relevant factor to
    determine  how he will adapt, indeed cope,  with  the  various  demands
    that present themselves.  We note that the appellant actually  bears  a
    Shia name. He does not present himself as someone involved in the wider
    politics of Sunni culture. He is someone,  as  we  find,  who  is  very
    adaptable, able to look after himself and if necessary giving a good or
    plausible account of himself, if challenged.

59.  It is significant  to  note  the  comments  made  by  the  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 81 of the determination in BA  that  there  was  no  specific
    evidence showing targeting of recent returnees to Baghdad.  Dr  George,
    whose report was considered, was unable to give any specific  examples.
    It was noted in paragraph  82  of  that  decision  that,  on  a  purely
    statistical analysis, it cannot be said that there is in general a real
    risk of kidnapping to a returnee from abroad given  the  population  of
    Baghdad.      In terms of a statistical assessment of  the  numbers  of
    Sunnis and reported killings as conducted, the number of killings  only
    form a small percentage of the overall population of Sunnis in Baghdad.

60.  As indicated at paragraph 98:

         "Both parties are in agreement that the evidence does not show that
         a person would be at real risk of serious harm solely on account of
         his or her religious identity if returned to Baghdad at the current
         time."

61.  It is also relevant in our consideration to note that  the   connection
    which the appellant had with the area was not  confined to Baghdad City
    itself but to the wider areas such as Yamouk and indeed as  far  afield
    as Basra.

62.  In terms of tattoos, the appellant has significant  tattoos  which  are
    well-hidden by his normal clothing although there are  tattoos  visible
    to his hands.  There is little direct authority as to the dangers posed
    simply by having such tattoos and we have been addressed to no specific
    evidential or background authority or  report  which  deals  with  that
    matter.  They  may  possibly  be  regarded  as  un-Islamic  by  certain
    fundamentalists.  It is far from clear to  what  extent  the  appellant
    would be in proximity to such individuals or  involved  with  them.  If
    need be the  tattoos  can  be  concealed  by  clothing.   As  indicated
    already, we find the appellant to be very streetwise such that  he  has
    the ability very well to read a situation and  to  make  an  assessment
    upon it. That assessment is also relevant to potential situations where
    the appellant might be at risk of kidnapping.  He has many  skills  and
    abilities including martial arts.  We  find  that  he  is  not  without
    support in the areas to which return would be made.  In  conclusion  we
    find to the requisite standard of proof that the appellant  may  safely
    return to the Baghdad area and that his claimed fears of doing  so  are
    unfounded.

63.   We  turn  therefore  to  the  issue  of  family  and   private   life,
    particularly family and private life with JW.   No challenge  has  been
    made to the genuineness of the relationship, although it  is  of  short
    duration as a committed relationship. JW in her statement  of  3  April
    2017 indicated that there had been friendship of five years before  the
    more committed relationship;  said to have existed for over a year.

64.  In her evidence JW indicated that that the committed  relationship  had
    started two years ago,  that  would  have  been  in  2015  whereas  the
    appellant sought to indicate that it had  started  in  2014.   What  is
    entirely clear, however, from the account of the appellant is that  his
    relationship commenced when  his  future  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    entirely uncertain.  Although he had succeeded in his appeal before the
    Upper Tribunal that appeal was soon under challenge and was set  aside.
    As the appellant indicated,  it  was  that  factor  which  led  to  the
    breakdown of his previous relationship.

65.  It is to be recognised that there would certainly be some hardship  for
    JW were the appellant to removed. Her health is  not  good  and  it  is
    understandable that the support of the appellant is  important  to  her
    with a baby shortly to be born.  We find that JW seeks  to  stress  her
    isolation perhaps over much.  She is well-qualified as a beautician and
    laser treatment specialist and has worked in a number of  salons,  some
    of prestigious nature.  She thus clearly has the means to work and find
    a livelihood.  We would be surprised in these circumstances  where  her
    work obviously involves considerable interaction on  a  personal  level
    with colleagues and customers, that JW is without friends/colleagues to
    help or share her concerns.  Although she helps look after her  mother,
    her mother is not an invalid and could no lend some support in  helping
    care for the child.  It is not of course a comfortable  situation,  but
    is a situation which would be true of most separations of this  nature.
    We bear in mind the difficulties with the pregnancy but note that  that
    is  something  which  can  be  monitored  and   supported   by   health
    specialists, particularly at the hospital.

66.  It is in these circumstances that the  statutory  and  legal  framework
    for consideration of such appeals is of utmost importance.   Since  the
    appellant's appeal  was  last  before  the  Tribunal  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has come into force.

67.  The definition of foreign criminal in Section 117D  is  materially  the
    same as the definition under the 2007 Act.  The proper  application  of
    Section 117D to deportation appeals brought to the Tribunal by  foreign
    criminals has been  considered  in  a  number  of  recent  cases.   The
    position is conveniently distilled in the judgment of Sales  LJ  in  NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]  1WLR
    207:-

         "35. The Court of Appeal said in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department [2014] 1LR 544  that  paragraphs  398-
             399A of the 2012 Rules constituted a complete code.  The  same
             is true of  sections  117A-117D  of  the  2002  Act,  read  in
             conjunction with paragraph 398-399A of the  2014  rules.   The
             scheme of the Act and the rules together provide the following
             structure for deciding whether a foreign criminal  can  resist
             deportation on Article 8 grounds."

    Insofar as Article 8 is concerned the considerations involving  foreign
    criminals are those set out in 117C, namely:

         "that the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.  In the case of a foreign  criminal,  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public  interest  requires  deportation  unless  Exception   1   or
         Exception 2 applies.  Perhaps Exception 2 is the most relevant,  in
         these circumstances, namely where the appellant has a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and  the
         effects of deportation on the partner  or  child  would  be  unduly
         harsh."

    117C(6) provides:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

68.  The approach to that matter as set out in NA perhaps can  be  shown  in
    the paragraph 37 which provides:-

         "In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible first
         to  see  whether  his  case  involves  circumstances  of  the  kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2, both because the circumstances  so
         described set out particularly  significant  factors  bearing  upon
         respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect for family  life
         (Exception 2) and because that may provide a helpful basis on which
         an assessment can  be  made  whether  there  are  'very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2' as is required under  Section  117C(6).   Although  it  will  be
         necessary to look to see whether any of the factors falling  within
         Exceptions 1 and 2 are of such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or
         taken in conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered in
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2,  as  to  satisfy
         the test in 117C(6)."

69.  As the appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for four years he  falls
    to be considered as a serious offender.

70.  It is to be noted that the  correct  approach  to  the  test  of  undue
    harshness requires that account be taken of the extent  of  the  public
    interest and the deportation of the foreign criminal  when  determining
    whether the effect of  his  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh.   As
    explained in the judgment of Laws LJ in  MM  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 at paragraph 22-25:

         "What is due or undue depends on all the circumstances, not  merely
         the impact on the child or partner  in  the  given  case.   In  the
         present  context  relevant  circumstances  certainly  include   the
         criminal's immigration and criminal history."

71.  It is relevant in that connection also to bear in mind Section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act that little weight should be given to a  private  life  or
    relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is established by  a
    person at a time when the person is in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    and little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status was precarious.

72.  We note also the comments  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  R  (Agyarko)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 at  paragraph
    57:-

         "In general, in cases concerned with precarious family life, a very
         strong or compelling claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in immigration control."

73.  Those remarks of course are made in the  context  of  relationships  in
    general and not those involving foreign  criminals  and  certainly  not
    those that involve serious offenders, as is the appellant.

74.  We do not find, even looking  at  Exception  2,  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would have an unduly harsh effect on his partner.   Clearly
    there will be difficulties and emotional upset.  As we  have  indicated
    we are not persuaded that JW would be without  the  means  of  support,
    both financially in terms of  employment,  or  in  terms  of  emotional
    support from her mother and  from  friends  and  colleagues.   She  has
    sought to paint a very dark picture as to her future, which we  do  not
    find necessarily to be made out in all the circumstances. She  embarked
    upon her relationship  knowing  of  the  immigration  position  of  the
    appellant. Thus we do not find that the circumstances of the  appellant
    and JW meet the circumstances of Exception 2 nor do we  consider   that
    there are any other  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in Exception 2 that apply in  this  case,  so  as  to  render
    removal  disproportionate.   There  is  little  in  the  situation  and
    circumstance of the appellant, such as health, which can be  placed  in
    the balance in his favour. We bear in mind that he has  not  reoffended
    and the significant time  that  has  elapsed  in  the  course  of  this
    protracted appeal process.  We  note  his  community  work  with  young
    people.  Although he has other children by other relationships  he  has
    no connection with them otherwise than with K who  is  serving  in  the
    armed forces.  There is no reason why that connection  cannot  continue
    from elsewhere.

75.  Overall, and having clearly some sympathy  with  JW,  we  find  nothing
    within the statutory framework or otherwise, to over- ride  the  public
    interest in the appellant's deportation.

76.  In all the circumstances therefore the appellant's appeal is  dismissed
    in all respects as to the Immigration Rules,  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection. Similarly the appeal is dismissed as to Articles  3  and  8
    and human rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is Dismissed in respect of all issues and grounds as advanced.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 20 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

