

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00783/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd November 2015                     |On 5th November 2015              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                VIET HONG SAM
                      (aka Viet Man Sam; Viet Nam Sam)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      M C M Fielding, counsel, instructed by Victory@law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin granted the appellant permission to  a
      decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Panel  sitting  in   Birmingham
      dismissing his appeal against the decision that s32(5) UK Borders  Act
      2007 applies.


   2. Permission had been sought on the grounds that:

   a) The  panel  erred  in  finding  that  Exception  1  of  s117C  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not apply and  failing
      to consider whether there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
      above those described in Exception 1.
   b) The panel erred in failing to consider all the factors relevant to the
      appellant as referred to in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  and  in
      particular that there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the  relevant
      factors in striking the appropriate balance; no consideration  of  the
      probation report; the steps taken by  the  appellant  to  rehabilitate
      himself.


   3. Permission was granted on all grounds.


   4. Before me it was submitted by  Ms  Fielding  that  the  basis  of  the
      grounds upon which permission was granted went to  the  heart  of  the
      findings of the FtT that there were no very  compelling  circumstances
      over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  or  2.  Ms  Fielding
      acknowledged that the FtT decision set out the evidence before it  and
      that there was nothing before the FtT that had not been referred to in
      the decision,  so  far  as  she  was  aware.  Although  she  initially
      submitted that it  would  be  important  to  hear  oral  evidence  she
      subsequently accepted that there was nothing  that  appeared  to  have
      been given in oral and/or  documentary  evidence  that  had  not  been
      accurately recorded in the decision and that could not be  taken  into
      account by me if required. There had been no  application  under  Rule
      15(2) of the Procedure Rules to admit further evidence.


   5. The appellant has the following convictions:

   i. 12th October 1995 - wounding with intent to do grievous  bodily  harm:
      30 months imprisonment
  ii. 4th January 1999 - criminal damage: 12 month conditional discharge
 iii. 16th August 1999 - assault occasioning actual bodily  harm:  8  months
      imprisonment
  iv. 18th October 2006 - common assault: 4 months imprisonment
   v. 2nd July 2007 - persistently soliciting a woman  for  prostitution  or
      cause annoyance to others: fine and costs
  vi. 6th August 2010 - possession with intent to supply class  B  drugs:  5
      years imprisonment.

   6. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born  15th  November  1975.  He
      arrived in the UK in 1992 aged 17, accompanying his mother and brother
      who were joining his father who had been recognised as a  refugee.  On
      7th `November 2000 he was issued with a travel document stating he was
      a refugee. On 12th May 2003 he applied for  leave  to  remain  as  the
      spouse of a person settled in the UK and  he  was  granted  indefinite
      leave to remain on 5th June 2003. On 22nd January 2013 he was notified
      of the respondent's intention to 'cease' his refugee status;  he  made
      no representations in response. On 20th  May  2013  his  status  as  a
      refugee  ceased.  He  did  not  appeal  the  deportation  decision  on
      international protection grounds.


   7. The appellant is separated from his spouse (who has now naturalised as
      a British Citizen). He has a daughter who is British by birth and  was
      born in the UK on 27th December 2004. The appellant's  mother,  father
      and brother live in the UK.

   8. The unchallenged  and  thus  preserved,  findings  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal panel are as follows:

   a. The appellant has a degree of contact with his daughter, aged 10
   b. The child's best interests would be served by being brought up by both
      parents
   c. If he is deported the child will continue to be brought  up  and  live
      with her mother with a degree of continued support  and  contact  from
      the appellant's parents and brother
   d. The child will be disappointed to lose contact with her father but she
      has managed without him for extended periods before and will adapt and
      do so again.


   9. Reference is made in the decision to other evidence given, on none  of
      which was there a specific finding but appears to be undisputed:


   a. The appellant's mother has been suffering from diabetes for some years
      and has to go to hospital. When the appellant was in prison either her
      other son or other people would take her to hospital when needed.
   b. The appellant's brother has family of his own.
   c. The appellant's parents see the child
   d. The appellant has no family in Vietnam and has  not  been  to  Vietnam
      since his arrival in the UK aged 17.
   e. The appellant's father was born in China.
   f. A letter from the National Probation Service states that the appellant
      is currently assessed as "a low risk of harm  and  he  remains  stable
      currently. There are no concerns in relation to an escalation in  risk
      or his current behaviour."


  10. Given the length of the appellant's sentence, even if he were to  meet
      Exception 1 or 2, there would have to be very compelling circumstances
      over and above those in the Exceptions  to  enable  the  appellant  to
      succeed in  his  appeal  (see  paragraph  398  Immigration  Rules  and
      s117C(6) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


  11. In so far as the child is concerned the  appellant  submits  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Panel  failed  to  have  adequate  regard  to  the
      child's British citizenship, that she has  a  right  to  be  with  her
      father, that the child having renewed contact with her father would be
      devastated by future loss of contact such as to amount to  detrimental
      effects over and above the usual consequences of deportation and would
      seriously jeopardise her best interests.  It was submitted that  these
      matters were, in line with MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, required
      to  be  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the  proportionality   of
      deportation.


  12. The Immigration Rules provide for a complete code for  the  assessment
      of Article 8 in deportation proceedings - see MF. Although Ms Fielding
      identified matters that she asserted had not been  considered  in  the
      panel's decision this is plainly a misreading of the FtT decision  and
      the context within which MF is to be considered. It is plain that  the
      Rules are a complete code and that the weight to be  attached  to  the
      public interest is as recorded in the Rules and, when assessed by  the
      Tribunal, the legislation.  The  weight  to  be  attached  to  various
      factors is a weight  to  be  considered  within  the  context  of  the
      Immigration Rules and, in this case, the circumstances connected  with
      the child. The FtT considered whether the deportation of the appellant
      would be unduly harsh for the child and reached  a  fully  sustainable
      conclusion for the reasons advanced that it would not. The panel  then
      went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  other  very   compelling
      circumstances  such  as  would  displace  the   public   interest   in
      deportation and found there were not. In so far as the child  and  her
      relationship with the appellant is concerned  there  is  nothing  else
      recorded that could have resulted in any other outcome.


  13. The Panel stated in paragraph 22 of the decision "Exception 1 does not
      apply to this appellant". The panel gives no reasons for this finding.
      Plainly such a finding without consideration of the factual matrix, is
      an error of law  -  as  acknowledged  by  Mr  Whitwell.  In  terms  of
      Exception 1, as acknowledged by Mr Whitwell, the  appellant  has  been
      lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life (he arrived  aged  17
      and has been lawfully in the UK for 22 years) and he is  socially  and
      culturally integrated in the UK. Mr Whitwell submitted that there were
      not 'very significant obstacles' to the appellant's  integration  into
      Vietnam where it is proposed he was to be deported:  the appellant had
      spent the first 17 years of his life in Vietnam; he spoke  Vietnamese;
      he is a Vietnamese national; he had the benefit of working in  the  UK
      and had attended college and obtained qualifications that would be  of
      use to him there. Mr Whitwell submitted that even if there  were  very
      significant  obstacles  to  integration  such  as  required  to   meet
      Exception  1,  there  was  no  evidence   of   any   very   compelling
      circumstances over and above this  such  as  to  displace  the  public
      interest in deportation.




  14. Ms Fielding submitted  that  not  only  were  there  very  significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration in  Vietnam  but  there  were
      very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
      Exceptions 1  and  2,  in  particular  the  appellant's  parents  were
      dependent upon him; he was needed to assist his mother in her  medical
      and other needs; his daughter needed him and it would  be  devastating
      for her if the resumed contact were displaced; he was at low  risk  of
      re-offending; he had only been in Vietnam as a  child  and  had  never
      been back; his background was more Chinese than Vietnamese because his
      father and his wife were of Chinese origin; LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ
      1310 could be distinguished on the facts.




  15. The obstacles to the appellant integrating into Vietnam are likely  to
      be challenging. He has been away from the country for many  years  and
      his departure was occasioned under family reunion because  his  father
      had  been  recognised  as  a  refugee.  He  himself  was  subsequently
      recognised as a refugee although that status ceased  and  he  made  no
      appeal on international protection grounds. Nevertheless  it  is  only
      reasonable to recognise that he  is  likely  to  find  any  return  to
      Vietnam challenging - the country will have changed considerably since
      his departure over 22 years ago  and  he  does  not  have  friends  or
      relatives there. However he  has  advantages  in  terms  of  language,
      knowledge of culture together with work experience and  qualifications
      gained in the UK. His family will  no  doubt  provide  him  with  some
      assistance given they have supported him throughout his life. The fact
      that he is likely to find integration  challenging  if  not  difficult
      initially does not begin to  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles.
      There is nothing identified in the evidence that  amounts  to  such  a
      high test. He doesn't meet Exception 1.



  16. Even if there were very significant obstacles to his integration,  the
      nature of the appellant's offence and the length of sentence mean that
      there must be very compelling circumstances over and above  such  very
      significant obstacles.




  17. The additional such factors averred to by Ms Fielding  amount  to  the
      combination of the probation report and the combination of  the  whole
      factual matrix including his child, his mother and father and his  low
      risk of further  offending.  These  do  not  by  any  stretch  of  the
      imagination amount to very compelling circumstances over and above the
      matters in Exceptions 1 and 2, taking those matters at their highest.




  18. Although the factual basis of LC (China) was different - the appellant
      in that case was an illegal entrant and  had  been  sentenced  to  two
      terms of five years to run concurrently for robbery - the  ratio  that
      where a person has been sentenced  to  a  period  of  imprisonment  in
      excess of four years the public interest in deporting  such  criminals
      is so  great  that  only  in  exceptional  circumstances  will  it  be
      outweighed by other factors, including the effect  of  deportation  on
      any children remains. In this case it is difficult to see  what  other
      rational decision could have been reached by the FtT other  than  that
      the appeal was dismissed.



  19. Although the FtT erred in  law  in  failing  to  provide  reasons  for
      finding that Exception 1 did not apply,  the  error  of  law  was  not
      material and I therefore do not set aside  the  decision  of  the  FtT
      dismissing the appeal.




  20. Even if I had found the error to be material such that the decision is
      set aside, the outcome on re-making would have been  the  same  namely
      the appeal would be dismissed for the reasons set out above.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision is  set
    aside.


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



[pic]

                                    Date 3rd November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
