
DA 00078 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2013                             |On 19 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          JONATHAN KENRICK CHARLES

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Bassiri-Dezfouli, of counsel, instructed by
ROCK solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of the Dominican Republic,  born  on  19
      August 1978, as the appellant herein.

   2. The appellant came to the United  Kingdom  in  2001  and  returned  to
      Dominica in 2003. The appellant obtained a visa as  the  spouse  of  a
      British citizen in 2004. He re-entered the UK on 9 August 2004.

   3. The appellant was arrested at Gatwick  airport  and  was  subsequently
      convicted at Croydon Magistrates'  Court  and  sentenced  to  8  years
      imprisonment  at  Croydon  Crown  Court  on  10  September,  2007  for
      importing cocaine.

   4. The  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  deport  the  appellant  on  30
      September, 2011. There was reference in paragraph 4 of the decision to
      the Secretary of State's  duty  under  section  55   of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and Article 8 was considered on a
      conventional basis prior to the change in  the  rules.  The  appellant
      appealed against this decision and his appeal came before a panel on 9
      February, 2012. The appellant was represented then as he is now by Mrs
      Bassiri-Dezfouli.

   5. The panel decided that the  duty  of  the  Secretary  of  State  under
      section 55 had not been properly carried out. The panel  remitted  the
      matter back to the Secretary of State to consider this duty in respect
      of the appellant's daughter.

   6. On 20 December, 2012 the Secretary of State again  decided  to  deport
      the appellant. By this stage the new rules had come  into  affect  and
      Article 8 was considered in the context of the new rules.

   7. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a different panel on
      24 April, 2013. The appellant was again represented  by  Mrs  Bassiri-
      Dezfouli. She submitted that Article 8 had not been considered outside
      the rules and that given that Article 8 was a central matter in  issue
      "the correct and pragmatic approach was to find the decision  unlawful
      thereby giving the respondent the opportunity to properly consider the
      appellant's circumstances."

   8. The panel considered it appropriate to remit the matter for the second
      time to Secretary of State and commented  that  this  would  give  the
      appellant the  opportunity  to  produce  up-to-date  evidence  of  his
      relationship with his British daughter. The panel indicated  that  the
      appeal was allowed solely on the technical ground that  the  Secretary
      of State had failed to lawfully consider the appellant's circumstances
      within the decision. The effect of the decision was that the appellant
      awaited a lawful consideration and decision.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on 29 May 2013. It was arguable  that
      the panel had erred in law in that the proper course was to proceed to
      consider  the  merits  of  the  appeal  both  under  and  outside  the
      immigration rules. The judge commented that the appeal  had  not  been
      allowed because the appellant should be afforded a further opportunity
      to present evidence-he did  not  find  much  merit  in  the  complaint
      advanced on this point by the Secretary of State.

  10. Mr Tufan submitted that the  panel  should  have  gone  onto  consider
      Article 8 on its merits and the matter should be remitted to the First-
      tier tribunal.

  11. Counsel submitted there was no material error  of  law  and  submitted
      that the panel had  directed  itself  by  reference  to  the  relevant
      authorities.  The  daughter  had  sickle  cell  anaemia.  Insufficient
      reasoning  had  been  given  in  the  refusal  letter.  She  had   not
      recollected that there had been a previous hearing before a  different
      panel which had also remitted the matter-there had been  a  change  of
      solicitors.

  12. Mr Tufan in reply submitted that the  panel  should  have  taken  into
      account s 55 as part of the Article 8 analysis in  the  light  of  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in AJ (India) v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1191.

  13. I indicated at the hearing that the procedures in this case  were  far
      from ideal. I of course accept that counsel might not have recollected
      the fact that a previous Tribunal had remitted the matter  and  it  is
      true that the previous decision is imperfectly copied in the Secretary
      of State's bundle.

  14. There may be occasions where it is expedient to remit a case  back  to
      the Secretary of State and it  may  be  that  the  Presenting  Officer
      indeed requests such a course to be taken on proper grounds.

  15. There was no challenge apparently to  the  previous  decision  by  the
      first panel to remit the matter. Counsel relied on the case of  BN,  R
      (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2011] EWHC 2367 (Admin) on that occasion.

  16. However as a general rule the First-tier Tribunal  should  only  remit
      matters in the  clearest  cases.  After  all  the  appellant  and  his
      witnesses can give their evidence  and  the  Tribunal   can  make  its
      findings on that evidence  doing  justice  to  the  welfare  and  best
      interests of any child involved. Simply putting the appeal back in the
      hands of the Secretary of State does not appear to be the ideal way of
      resolving matters. The cases of AJ (India), MF (Nigeria)  [2012]  UKUT
      393 (IAC) and Izauzu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) do  not  appear  to  provide
      encouragement for what happened in  this  case.  It  is  difficult  to
      conceive of circumstances where it would be right to  remit  a  matter
      twice to the Secretary of State as happened here.

  17. I have no hesitation in finding the panel materially erred in  law  in
      dealing with the case it did.

  18. This is a case which has not been considered on its merits at  all  by
      the First-tier Tribunal and I accept Mr Tufan's  submission  that  the
      appropriate course is for the appeal to be  heard  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

      Appeal of Secretary of State allowed.

      Appeal remitted to First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on all issues.



                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               14 August 2013



