
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2016                 |On 10 April 2019                     |
|And 25 January 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Alexandre [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Solomon, instructed by MKM solicitors (29/09/16)
     Ms S Iqbal instructed by EA Law Solicitors (25/01/19)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 6 January 2015 to deport him pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(b) of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  His  appeal
    against that decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
    on 27 October 2015.  For the reasons given in my  decision  promulgated
    on 30 September 2016 that decision was set aside.

 2. The remaking of that decision did not take place until 25 January  2019
    for a number of reasons including the appellant being  held  on  remand
    pending a trial in which he was found  not  guilty,  that  trial  being
    postponed until June 2017, and, on account of the reference made to the
    CJEU in SSHD v Vomero [2016] UKSC  49  which  was  not  resolved  until
    relatively  recently.   Difficulties  arose  also  as  the  appellant's
    representatives were the subject of intervention and there has  had  to
    be two changes of solicitors.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal who  was  born  on  18  February
    1986. He arrived in the United Kingdom in March 1994  with  his  mother
    and siblings, and has remained here ever since.  He was educated  here,
    and has worked in short-term jobs. He has a partner with whom he has  a
    child; he and his partner have children from previous relationships.

    The appellant's case

 4. On 14 October 2008, the appellant was on his own  confession  convicted
    of robbery, possession of a firearm and  taking  a  conveyance  without
    consent. This was because he had participated in the armed robbery of a
    delivery van. He was sentenced to 9 years' imprisonment  as  a  result.
    He was released from custody on 8 November  2012,  entered  immigration
    detention, and was released on bail on 13 December 2012.

 5. On 7 October 2012,  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant. He appealed against  that  decision  and  the  decision  was
    withdrawn at his appeal on 8 February 2013.  On 9 January 2015, he  was
    convicted  of  mail  in  transmission  and  sentenced   to   28   days'
    imprisonment.

 6. The appellant's case is that,  having  lived  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 10 years prior to his imprisonment, he is entitled  to  the
    benefit of reg. 21 (4) of  the  EEA  Regulations;  has  not  lost  that
    benefit despite being imprisoned; and, that  it  is  for  Secretary  of
    State to show that there are  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    justifying his deportation.

 7. Alternatively, the appellant submits that  he  has  acquired  permanent
    residence under the EEA Regulations; has  not  lost  it  through  being
    imprisoned; and so is entitled to benefit from reg. 21 (3) of  the  EEA
    Regulations such that it is for the Secretary of  State  to  show  that
    there are serious reasons  of  public  policy  or  security  justifying
    deportation.

 8. The appellant further submits that, in the event  of  having  lost  the
    benefit of regs. 21 (3) and (4), it is still for the respondent to show
    that he does not constitute a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  and  that
    she has not done so. It is also the appellant's case that,  having  had
    regard to the factors set out in reg. 21 (5), his deportation would, on
    any basis, be disproportionate.




    The respondent's case

 9. The respondent accepted that the appellant  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 1995 but did not  accept  that  he  is  entitled  to  the
    benefit of regs. 21 (3) or (4) on the basis that he had not shown  that
    he had acquired permanent residence, noting an absence of evidence that
    he  had  been  exercising  Treaty  rights   or   had   benefited   from
    comprehensive sickness insurance.

10. The respondent considered that the  applicant  was,  in  light  of  his
    offending, and his assessment as being at MAPPA level 1, that he  is  a
    genuine and present threat to society.  She also  considered  that  his
    deportation was, having had regard to  the  factors  set  out  in  reg.
    21(5), proportionate.   The respondent considered also that his removal
    would be proportionate having had regard to  article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal and grounds of appeal

11. On appeal, the judge found that: -

      i) The appellant had acquired permanent  residence  on  5  April  2000
         [25], on the basis that he had in the  five  years  prior  to  that
         lived  continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  [26]  as  the  child
         dependant of an EEA national (his mother) who had  been  exercising
         Treaty rights as a worker [23]  -  [25];  and,  had  been  residing
         continuously in the United Kingdom since March 1994 [28];

     ii) A decision to remove an EEA national who had resided for  a  period
         of at least 10 years may not be taken except on imperative  grounds
         of public security [29], this regulation to be taken  into  account
         in assessing the evidence;

    iii) Having had regard to the OASys report and NOMS report, as  well  as
         the  judge's  sentencing  remarks  [31-  [38],  his   most   recent
         conviction [39] and other  matters,  that  the  appellant  did  not
         represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the
         fundamental interest of society [53], there being [54], no evidence
         or submissions that there were imperative public  security  grounds
         justifying the appellant's removal

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge erred:

      i) In finding that the appellant had acquired the permanent  right  of
         residence, there being insufficient evidence to that effect;

     ii) In failing to consider whether the appellant's imprisonment had, in
         the light of MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12 deprived him of the right  to
         the highest level of protection set out in reg. 21 (4), this  being
         material as there were serious grounds of public policy  justifying
         his deportation;

    iii) In concluding that the appellant was not  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat, given that in assessing this, she  had
         wrongly applied a threshold higher than that to which the appellant
         was entitled, and she failed properly to take into account that  he
         had been assessed as a medium risk.

13. On 8 December 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission on all
    grounds.

    The Hearings before the Upper Tribunal

14. The appeal first came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer  on  25
    February 2016 who subsequently became seriously ill and was  unable  to
    produce a decision. For that reason, a transfer order was made, and the
    matter came before me on 29 September 2016.

15. I heard submissions from both parties. I deal with the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1:

16. The Secretary  of  State  appears  from  the  refusal  letter  to  have
    misunderstood the basis on which it was said  that  the  appellant  had
    acquired permanent residence.  Until the age of  21  he  was,  for  the
    purposes of the EEA Regulations a family member of the EEA national  as
    his mother is an EEA national (see reg. 7 (i) (b)(i)).  The  issue  was
    therefore whether his  mother  had  been  a  qualified  person  and  so
    lawfully resident for a period of five years. The fact  that  this  was
    acquired prior to the entry into force of the EEA  Regulations  or  the
    Citizenship Directive 2004/38/EC is not relevant -  see  Lassal  [2010]
    EUECJ C-162/09

17. There was, as the judge noted [23] - [26] substantial evidence that the
    mother had been employed, and  this  was  adequate  and  sufficient  to
    justify her conclusion. The submission to the contrary is in reality an
    argument about weight, or an unfounded submission that the  finding  of
    fact was perverse.   Accordingly, I conclude that  ground  1  does  not
    demonstrate an error of law.

    Ground 2

18. It does not appear from the decision that the judge directed herself to
    the principles set out in MG which is binding.  Of particular  note  is
    what was said at [37] - [38]:

         "37  Lastly, as regards the  implications  of  the  fact  that  the
         person concerned has resided in the host Member State during the 10
         years prior to imprisonment, it should be borne in mind that,  even
         though - as has been stated in paragraphs 24 and 25 above - the 10-
         year period of residence necessary for the grant  of  the  enhanced
         protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38
         must be calculated by counting back from the date of  the  decision
         ordering that person's expulsion, the  fact  that  the  calculation
         carried out under that provision is different from the  calculation
         for the purposes of the grant of a  right  of  permanent  residence
         means that the fact that the person concerned resided in  the  host
         Member State during the 10 years prior to imprisonment may be taken
         into consideration as part of the overall assessment referred to in
         paragraph 36 above.

         38   In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Questions 1 and 4
         is that Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted
         as meaning that a period of imprisonment is, in principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
         thereunder, even where the person concerned  resided  in  the  host
         Member State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment.  However,  the
         fact that that person resided in the host Member State for  the  10
         years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration as part
         of the overall assessment required in order  to  determine  whether
         the integrating links previously forged with the host Member  State
         have been broken."

19. How a judge is to assess whether the period of imprisonment does  break
    continuity of residence such as to remove the benefit  of  the  highest
    level of protection against deportation was addressed  in  MG  (prison-
    Article 28(3) (a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC)
    to which the judge does not refer.

20. Despite Mr Solomon's submissions to the contrary, I consider that there
    is no indication in the decision that the judge took into  account  the
    possibility of the imprisonment breaking the continuity of the 10 years
    prior to the date of decision, or that  she  considered  in  sufficient
    detail whether the integrating links had been broken.  While  I  accept
    that the judge does make findings as to  family  links  to  the  United
    Kingdom at [58] and [59] in particular, that is done in the context  of
    the proportionality of deportation, not in the context of whether those
    integrating links remain such that the benefit of the highest level  of
    protection is preserved.  This is, I consider, an error of law.

21. Whether or not this error is material, in light of the finding at [53],
    is in part bound up with ground 3.

22. Mr Kotas submitted that the error is material,  given  that  the  judge
    appears first to have applied the highest threshold  in  assessing  the
    threat  at  [29],  [39],  and  also  to  have   reached   contradictory
    conclusions  at  [45].  On  that  basis,  the  findings  at  [53]   are
    unsustainable. Mr Solomon submitted to the contrary.

23. As noted above the judge's conclusion that the appellant is entitled to
    the highest level of protection is unsustainable.  I consider that this
    error has affected the judge's approach to the finding at [53] that the
    applicant did not present a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat. That test requires an evaluation of  seriousness;  clearly  not
    all threats reach the threshold.    As Mr Kotas submitted, at [29]  the
    judge, before setting out the evidence of the appellant's offending and
    the assessment of risk, expressly directed herself  at  [29]  that  she
    would bear in mind that "a decision [to deport] may not be taken except
    on imperative grounds of public security" in  assessing  the  evidence.
    Further, at [39] when discussing the more recent conviction for  theft,
    noted that she took that offending into consideration  "in  determining
    whether  there  are  any  imperative  grounds  for  the   [appellant's]
    deportation."

24. It is also, I consider, difficult  to  reconcile  the  assessment  that
    there is a propensity on the part of the  appellant  to  reoffend  [45]
    with a conclusion properly reached,  applying  the  lowest  test,  that
    there is no "genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    fundamental interests of society".  This, and the judge's finding  also
    at [45] that "I do not  accept  that  the  [appellant]  represents  and
    actual and compelling risk to public security" indicates that the judge
    was, in reaching the conclusion at [53] applying the  higher  threshold
    in assessing the threat. Thus, that conclusion is affected by the error
    of law identified at [19] above.

25. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law, and I set it aside.

Remaking the decision

26. At the resumed  hearing  I  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  the
    appellant's  mother,  the  appellant's  partner  and  the   appellant's
    partner's   stepfather.    I   also   heard   submissions   from   both
    representatives.

The Law

27. It was accepted by both representatives that, given  the  date  of  the
    decision in this case and when the appeal was commenced, that it is the
    2006 Regulations which apply to this appeal.

28. Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations provided as follows

         '21. - Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public
         health grounds


         (1)  In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
             necessary in his  best  interests,  as  provided  for  in  the
             Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by  the  General
             Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 19891.

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.

         ...'

29. In B and Vomero [2018] EUECJ C-316/16 the Court of Justice held:

         "1.  Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
         Parliament and of the Council of 29 April  2004  on  the  right  of
         citizens of the Union and their family members to move  and  reside
         freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Member   States   amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and  repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
         68/360/EEC,   72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,    75/34/EEC,    75/35/EEC,
         90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC must be interpreted as meaning
         that it is a prerequisite of eligibility for the protection against
         expulsion provided for in that provision that the person  concerned
         must have a right of permanent  residence  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 16 and Article 28(2) of that directive.

         2.   Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
         meaning that, in the case of a  Union  citizen  who  is  serving  a
         custodial sentence  and  against  whom  an  expulsion  decision  is
         adopted, the condition of having 'resided in the host Member  State
         for the previous ten years' laid down  in  that  provision  may  be
         satisfied where an overall assessment of  the  person's  situation,
         taking  into  account  all  the  relevant  aspects,  leads  to  the
         conclusion that, notwithstanding that  detention,  the  integrative
         links between the person concerned and the host Member  State  have
         not been broken. Those aspects include, inter alia, the strength of
         the integrative links forged with the host Member State before  the
         detention of the person concerned, the nature of the  offence  that
         resulted in the period of detention imposed, the  circumstances  in
         which that offence was committed and  the  conduct  of  the  person
         concerned throughout the period of detention.

         3.   Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
         meaning that the question whether a person satisfies the  condition
         of having 'resided in the host Member State for  the  previous  ten
         years', within the meaning of that provision, must be  assessed  at
         the date on which the initial expulsion decision is adopted."

30. It is clear from B that  in  order  to  obtain  the  highest  level  of
    protection the  person  concerned  must  have  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence within the meaning the Regulations.

31. It is also clear that the requirement to have  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the previous ten years may  be  satisfied  for  an  overall
    assessment of the person's  situation,  taking  into  account  all  the
    relevant  aspects,  leaves  the  conclusion  that  notwithstanding  the
    contention the integrative links between the person concerned  and  the
    host member may not have been  broken.   These  aspects  include  inter
    alia, the strength of the integrative links forged with the host Member
    State before the detention of the person concerned, the nature  of  the
    offence  that  resulted  in  the  period  of  detention  imposed,   the
    circumstances in which the offence was committed and the conduct of the
    person concerned throughout the period of detention.

32. In reaching my conclusions, I have  applied  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
    Regulations which provides as follows, so far as is relevant:

         '2.  An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links  with  persons  of  the  same
         nationality or language does  not  amount  to  integration  in  the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a  person  may  be  regarded  as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the  United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at  or  around
         the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
             society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
             in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for  example,  through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.

         ...

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
             immigration  laws,   and   maintaining   the   integrity   and
             effectiveness of the  immigration  control  system  (including
             under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,
             public offence)  and  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
             an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but
             where there is wider societal harm (such as  offences  related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border  dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
             of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
             (particularly in relation  to  offences,  which  if  taken  in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the  requirements
             of regulation 27);

             ...

             (j)  protecting the public;'

33. I was not addressed on any of these factors specifically.

34. It is to be noted from SSHD v Straszewski [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1245  that
    Moor-Bick LJ observed at [13]:

         "13. Given the fundamental difference between the  position  of  an
         alien  and  that  of  an  EEA  national,  one  would  expect   that
         interference with the permanent right of residence would be subject
         to  more  stringent  restrictions  than  those  which  govern   the
         deportation of nationals of other states. Moreover, since the right
         of free movement  is  regarded  as  a  fundamental  aspect  of  the
         European Union, it is not surprising that the Court of  Justice  of
         the European Union ("CJEU") has held that exceptions to that  right
         based on public policy are to be construed restrictively: see,  for
         example Van Duyn v Home Office (Case C-41/71)  [1975]  Ch  358  and
         Bonsignore v Oberstadirektor der Stadt Koln (Case  C-67/74)  [1975]
         ECR 297."

35. Commenting on that, the Inner  House  Court  of  Session  in  Goralczyk
    [2018] CSIH 60 at [22]:

         22.  Moore-Bick LJ's expectation that  there  should  be  stringent
         restrictions on a Member State's ability to remove an EEA national,
         including a "foreign criminal",  who  has  acquired  the  right  to
         reside in the United Kingdom is borne out by the terms of the  2006
         Regulations. In particular, a decision to deport  an  EEA  national
         with a permanent right of residence may  not  be  taken  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy  or  public  security:  regulation
         21(3) . Regard has to be had to the word "serious", a point made by
         Mr Caskie when explaining the effect of  the  2006  Regulations  as
         being to establish three levels of rights and consequent degrees of
         protection against removal. A decision to remove a person  who  has
         resided in the United Kingdom for less than five years may be taken
         "on grounds of public policy" but a decision to remove a person who
         has resided in the United Kingdom for more than five  years  cannot
         be taken "except on serious grounds of public policy".  It  follows
         that  "serious  grounds"  of  public  policy  must  mean  something
         different from "grounds" of public policy, and it follows from that
         that the  decision-maker  must  identify  just  what  the  relevant
         grounds are  and  then  evaluate  them  as  to  their  seriousness.
         Moreover, a relevant decision must be taken in accordance with  the
         principles set out in regulation  21(5)  .  Finally,  in  terms  of
         regulation 21(6) , before taking such a decision the decision-maker
         must take into account considerations such as  the  age,  state  of
         health, family and economic situation of the person, his length  of
         residence in the United Kingdom and the extent of  his  links  with
         his country of origin

36. In assessing first whether the appellant is  entitled  to  the  highest
    level of protection the starting point is to consider first whether  he
    had obtained permanent residence.  As found by the First-tier Tribunal,
    that finding being preserved, he did  so  in  2000.   It  is  therefore
    necessary to undertake the exercise to consider next  which  period  of
    ten years is to be considered.  In this case it is that the  ten  years
    flowing backwards from the date of the deportation decision, that is 11
    February 2015.  It is observed first that on that basis  the  appellant
    had indeed spent at least ten years resident in the United Kingdom  (it
    is nearly fourteen years) before he committed the crime  for  which  he
    was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment.  It  is  also  necessary  to
    bear in mind what was said in Vomero

37. I accept that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  1994  at
    the age of 8 and entered education here.  He  attended  primary  school
    and then secondary school although he appears to have ceased  attending
    on a regular basis in year ten.  He took some casual employment and  in
    2004  began  a  relationship  with  Miss  [H]  who  is  mother  of  the
    appellant's oldest son born  in  2005.   The  appellant  and  Miss  [H]
    together with her twin children from another early relationship,  lived
    together but the relationship came to an end whilst he was in prison.

38. Since he was released from imprisonment in 2012, the appellant  has  in
    2013 began another  relationship  with  Miss  [JM].   They  have  lived
    together and the couple have since had a child.  The appellant  is  now
    also working full-time.  It is clear from the evidence of Miss  [M]  as
    well as Miss [H] and  the  appellant  that  he  can  maintain  a  close
    relationship with his son K, and takes him football training  on  every
    Saturday.  In addition, he stays every weekend and  during  the  summer
    holidays.

39. In assessing the appellant's position whilst in prison, I note that  he
    was able to maintain contact with his son, his former partner and  also
    with family.  In addition, it is evident that he was able to  obtain  a
    number of qualifications whilst at HMP Canterbury.

40. That is confirmed by the behaviour report from the wing officer as well
    as cleaning officer dated 15 April 2012 which also confirm that  he  is
    hard working and is trusted with a good attitude.

41. In considering the OASys Report which was completed on 16 May 2012 that
    he was assessed at low risk of general offending,  that  is  4%  within
    twelve months and 8% within twenty-four months.  It  is  also  observed
    [2.13] that he  is  making  steps  in  the  right  direction  regarding
    addressing his offending behaviour and also at [4.7]  that  losing  his
    last job had contributed to him carrying out the index offence.  He was
    confident that should he be able get employment pretty quickly  and  is
    motivated to address his offending behaviour.  It is also  noted  [6.9]
    that the relationship with his mother has got better and  that  he  has
    started a new relationship.  Equally at [7.2] it is observed  that  the
    appellant works in a privileged area of the prison stores,  is  gaining
    qualifications and he is considered to be  at  low  risk  of  harm  and
    reconviction.  It is  also  noted  [10.8]  that  he  had  been  granted
    category D status  but  prevented  from  open  conditions  due  to  his
    immigration status.  Also, at [11.9] it is recorded

         "Previous OASys noted that Mr [A] did not lose  his  temper  easily
         and did not get violent, he does however admit  that  he  sometimes
         does things without thinking about the consequences.

         Since this statement of Mr [A] has been assessed as unsuitable  for
         the TSP and CALM courses, this assessment was  based  on  his  OGRS
         score being too low.  Mr  [A]  appears  to  listen  to  others  but
         actually taking on board and putting into practice the advice  that
         others give him appears to be something he needs to work  on,  this
         may become easier, as Mr [A] has informed me that  prison  has  had
         impact on him, and the way he will go about dealing with situations
         in the future.  It is also recorded that he displays no obvious pro-
         criminal attitudes, has no issues with people in authority."

42. The summary sheet assessing risk of serious harm  records  low  in  all
    areas with the except of risk in the  community  to  the  public  being
    medium.  But whilst the OGRS 3 scores are very low, OGP is at 5% to 9%,
    OVP at 9% and 15% in the first and second years.

43. Although there appear to have been a few adjudications earlier  in  the
    appellant's time in prison, these are of a relatively minor nature  and
    early on in his imprisonment.

44. The appellant's explanation for  him  pleading  guilty  to  the  second
    offence is that he believed that this would result  in  a  considerably
    shorter sentence than if he were to be recalled from  license  as  even
    were he found not guilty, there was a chance  that  he  would  have  to
    serve a greater part of his first sentence.  I note Mr Kotas  submitted
    that the thought process shown is not logical,  I  can  understand  how
    someone in the appellant's position, being on license,  might  wish  to
    make a guilty plea  to  avoid  less  time  in  jail.   That  said,  the
    appellant's testimony to whether he was in fact guilty, is equivocal as
    he did not appear to be  denying  the  circumstances  of  the  offence.
    Worryingly, it appears to be  another  example  of  the  appellant  not
    thinking through the consequences of his actions.  The  same  could  be
    said about the circumstances in which he found himself in a house which
    was raided by the police where firearms were found.   Although  he  was
    found not guilty of that offence, and there are no substantial  details
    about the crime such that would allow me to make any relevant findings,
    it would appear that he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.

45. I accept the appellant's evidence that he has few relatives in Portugal
    and none with whom he has contact.  I note that his  mother  said  that
    she had last been to Portugal some three to  four  years  ago  and  had
    stayed in a hotel and that of her siblings two of her sisters  were  in
    America and her brother was living in Angola and she was not in contact
    with them. There is a difference in the testimony  between  the  mother
    and the appellant as to the number of siblings she has, but that  is  I
    conclude not material given the lack of closeness between her and them,
    and by extension the appellant.

46. I accept on the oral evidence from the appellant and Miss [M] that they
    are in a subsisting and stable relationship and  I  note  her  evidence
    that the appellant has grown up a lot and now  that  he  is  in  stable
    employment he wants things to get better.

47. Viewing the evidence as a whole, I consider that certainly at the point
    of his imprisonment in 2008, having spent his life since at the age  of
    8 in the United Kingdom and having formed a family here, and bearing in
    mind that prior to that he had no criminal history, that the  appellant
    did have integrative links to United Kingdom.  I consider also that the
    appellant has shown to the balance of probabilities that in the unusual
    circumstances of this case, those integrative links were not broken  by
    custody.  I reach that conclusion on the basis that the  appellant  was
    able to maintain his strong family ties to his son and with  the  wider
    family despite the fact that the relationship with Miss [H] broke  down
    and also that he was in  prison  making  good  use  of  his  time.   He
    continued in education and appears certainly from the  evidence  before
    me to have shown a proper attitude.

48. The question then arises as to whether the second sentence,  albeit  it
    was short period, had the effect of breaking the integrative links.   I
    do not consider that the short level of imprisonment did so  given  the
    short duration of the sentence that this is so and the fact that he has
    now formed a  stable  relationship  and  is  in  stable  employment  is
    indicative that the links were not so broken.

49. I note the observation by the appellant's  probation  officer  in  2015
    that his risk profile  had  risen  (see  bundle  at  K2)  which  states
    "Currently I would assess Mr [A] as a medium risk of harm and my review
    will reflect this."  Medium risk of harm means there  are  identifiable
    indicators of a risk of serious harm.  It then has a potential to cause
    serious harm but it is unlikely to do so unless there are a  change  of
    circumstances,  for  example,  failure  to  take  medication,  loss  of
    accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug and alcohol misuse.

50. It is, however, unclear whether any formal  review  was  undertaken  or
    what was said in that document.  The letter is, understandably,  framed
    in less than definite terms.

51. Pausing there to take stock, I note that the initial decision to deport
    the appellant was withdrawn  by  the  respondent.   I  accept  that  he
    committed a further crime for which he was sentenced  to  a  relatively
    short period of imprisonment.  Taking into account the length  of  time
    he had spent here, the family and other links he had developed and  the
    fact that he had by 2015 (as is later shown  by  additional  evidence),
    formed a stable relationship and has since this incident  in  2015  not
    committed any further crime, I conclude that as at the date of decision
    in this case, unusually on the facts, the appellant's integrative links
    were such that they were not broken by the  term  of  imprisonment  and
    that accordingly, the appellant is entitled  to  the  higher  level  of
    protection.

52. Given that the appellant has not reoffended in a violent  manner  since
    his conviction in 2018 for a single  incident  of  armed  robbery,  and
    given that there is no indication  that  he  has  been  guilty  of  any
    further crime since 2015, I conclude that there is no basis of which he
    could be said to pose an imperative threat to the United Kingdom.

53. However, even if I am wrong on that, and the appellant is only entitled
    to the medium level of protection, I conclude that there are at present
    for the same reasons, insufficent evidence to show that there at as  at
    the date of hearing, given the lack  of  offending,  and  the  lack  of
    serious offending in the nature of his conviction  for  armed  robbery,
    that the appellant is now, given that he is settled within a family and
    with stable employment, a sufficiently serious threat.

54. Accordingly, for these reasons,  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

Notice of Decision

1    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.

2     I  remake  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under   the   EEA
    Regulations.

3    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5 April 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
