

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00385/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Victoria Law Courts                |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 10th July 2013                           |On : 22nd July 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                    e. k.
                         (anonymity order continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kahiye Alim of Stepstones Visas Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Mansoor Hussain, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is now 27 years old, is  of  Russian  ethnicity  but
    hails from Uzbekistan, where her  mother,  daughter  and  sister  still
    live.  She has resided in the United Kingdom since  entering  illegally
    in April 2007, although she went back to Uzbekistan for four  weeks  in
    the summer of 2007, and was back there again between October  2009  and
    May 2010.  Early in 2011 Miss EK was charged with trafficking offences,
    but these were  dropped  when  she  pleaded  guilty  in  June  2011  to
    conspiracy to control prostitution for gain and also to several charges
    arising from the use of false identity documents.   A  sentence  of  30
    months' imprisonment led to an 'automatic'  deportation  order  on  7th
    June 2012, and an asylum claim which had had been lodged shortly  after
    her conviction was refused on 11th June 2012.   Separately  from  these
    decisions, the 'Competent Authority' had on 6th February 2012  rejected
    the appellant's claim to have been a victim of trafficking herself.

2.    An appeal was  lodged  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  on  19th
    February 2013 it was listed before a panel comprising Judge  Astle  and
    Mr G.H. Getlevog.  My determination can be much shorter than  it  might
    otherwise have been, because the material relevant to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal has been carefully and lucidly set out at paragraphs 7-32 of
    the First-tier  determination,  under  the  headings  'The  Appellant's
    History', 'The Appellant's Case', 'The Respondent's Case', 'The Remarks
    of the Sentencing Judge' and 'The Report of Rano  Turavea-Hoehne  (sic,
    it should be Turaeva-Hoehne)'.  There is no need for  me  to  summarise
    those paragraphs, but I shall refer to their contents when dealing with
    the question whether the panel made an error of law.

3.   What is now challenged is paragraphs 33-46 of the determination,  under
    the heading 'Our Findings'.  The panel first considered  the  Secretary
    of State's certificate under section 72(2) of the 2002 Act,  as  indeed
    they were obliged to do under section 72(10).  They recognised that the
    presumption raised by  that  section  is  rebuttable,  and  having  run
    through the salient points for and against Miss  EK  at  paragraph  37,
    they upheld the certificate and dismissed  her  claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  But that did not affect her claim to  face  a
    real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment on  return  to  Uzbekistan,
    contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR, and to  that  claim  the  panel  now
    turned.

4.   At paragraph 39 the panel explained why they were prepared  to  accept,
    despite the negative assessment by the Competent Authority,  that  Miss
    EK was initially trafficked into the United Kingdom in April 2007.  But
    that situation changed over time, and she became part of  a  team  with
    Sergey Konart.  As explained at paragraph 40, Miss EK no longer had  to
    work as a prostitute  herself,  and  enjoyed  considerable  freedom  of
    movement, being able to spend over six months in Tashkent on  her  last
    visit.  At paragraphs 41-42 the panel give reasons why there is no real
    risk to the appellant from Sergey Konart, who  is  serving  a  ten-year
    prison sentence here, or from Diana, the lady who arranged for Miss  EK
    to come here in the first place.  In  reaching  these  conclusions  the
    panel say at paragraph 43 that they have taken account  of  the  expert
    report by Dr Turaeva-Hoehne, which is summarised at  paragraphs  30-32,
    but "we stand by our findings."

5.   The panel now turn to the  third  element  in  the  appellant's  claim,
    namely risk from the Uzbek authorities.  They explain why they  do  not
    think those authorities will be aware of the appellant's conviction, or
    that they would wish to re-prosecute her if they  knew.   Finally,  the
    panel consider the possibility that Miss EK will be re-trafficked,  and
    give their reasons for discounting this possibility.

6.   In seeking permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Alim,  who
    also appeared below, took issue with each and every one of the findings
    and   conclusions   summarised   above,   accusing   the    panel    of
    "recharacterisation of the evidence" - an obscure phrase whose  meaning
    is still, after hearing Mr Alim's submissions, opaque to me.  Mr Alim's
    grounds were very thoroughly  considered  by  Judge  Mailer,  who  gave
    detailed reasons for refusing permission on 5th April 2013.  Undaunted,
    Mr Alim renewed his application, with the same grounds, directly to the
    Upper Tribunal, and this time he fared  better.   "Without  wishing  to
    unduly  raise  the  Appellant's  hopes",  Judge  Goldstein  was   "just
    persuaded" that there might be something in those grounds.

7.   With great respect to my brother, when a judge  is  working  through  a
    pile of 'leave applications' and is confronted with one that carries on
    for several pages in great detail, it is tempting  to  grant  leave  ex
    abundantia cautelae, just in case there is something in it,  especially
    as the refusal of leave by the Upper Tribunal is usually the end of the
    road.  Experience tells, however, that the longer and more detailed the
    grounds of appeal, the less likely  it  is  that  close  scrutiny  will
    reveal anything of real substance in them.  So it has turned out in the
    instant case.  Mr Alim took me through his  grounds  one  by  one,  and
    expanded upon them with great enthusiasm and great persistence.  But in
    truth they amount to a series of strongly expressed disagreements  with
    findings which the panel were  rationally  entitled  to  make,  on  the
    evidence before them and for the reasons they gave.

8.   There is no need to address all of  Mr  Alim's  points  seriatim.   His
    strongest point seemed to me the suggestion that at  paragraph  43  the
    panel were too dismissive of Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's expertise, and gave no
    reasons why they stood by their findings despite her  report.   But  in
    this paragraph the panel are only referring to their  findings  on  the
    risk from Sergey and Diana.  Most of the  expert  report  is  concerned
    with corruption and human rights  abuses  on  the  part  of  the  state
    authorities - the police, the judiciary, border guards  and  so  forth.
    Dr Turaeva-Hoehne does advert to the likelihood of someone  like  Diana
    being able to keep tabs on a woman like EK, through knowing her  family
    and having good contacts with the security forces.  But the point  made
    by the panel at paragraph 42 is that Diana herself has not kept tabs on
    Miss EK, who was able to go back to Uzbekistan twice, the  second  time
    for over six months, without Diana causing any trouble  or  even  being
    aware she was back.

9.   Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's report is more relevant to the issue considered  by
    the panel at paragraph 44, but for the reasons they gave the panel were
    entitled to find that the police were not likely to  be  aware  of  the
    appellant's conviction in this country, far less that  she  would  face
    'double jeopardy' on account of it.  In my view, the same can  be  said
    about the panel's other findings, namely that these were findings which
    the panel reached  without  making  errors  of  law,  such  that  their
    determination should be set aside.

     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.

     The direction for  anonymity,  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    maintained.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              19th July 2013
