
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00871/2012
                                                               DA/00872/2012
                                                               DA/00873/2012
                                                               DA/00874/2012
                                                               DA/00875/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 19th August 2013                           |On 22nd August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     O M
                                     S M
                                    DGTM
                                     SMM
                                     DTM
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Spence - Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents: Mr Selway of Halliday Reeves Law Firm.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly and Mr  M
        L James (hereinafter referred to as 'the Panel')  who  allowed  the
        appeals of the first  and  second  respondents  under  the  Refugee
        Convention and the third, fourth,  and  fifth  respondent's,  their
        children, under Article 8 ECHR in line.


     2. The Secretary of State alleges the Panel legally erred in attaching
        weight to  documents  that  had  not  been  fully  translated  into
        English,  misunderstanding  the  relevant  country  guidance   case
        regarding the risk at the point  of  return  to  Zimbabwe,  and  in
        failing to determine the appeal by reference to the correct country
        guidance case, CM (Zimbabwe),  which  was  published  the  day  the
        determination was promulgated.


     3. As advised in court, I accept the Panel erred in law  in  that  the
        correct country guidance case applicable to assessing the  risk  of
        return to Zimbabwe is CM [2013] UKUT  00059.  In  relation  to  any
        suggestion that because it  was  only  published  on  the  day  the
        determination was promulgated there is no legal error, I  refer  to
        the case of OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT  00077
        in which the Tribunal said that country guidance stands until it is
        replaced or found to be wrong in law. Where a country guidance case
        is replaced  because  of  changed  country  conditions  or  because
        further evidence has emerged, that will not mean  that  it  was  an
        error of law for an immigration judge to have  followed  it  up  to
        that point. Where, however, a country guidance case is found to  be
        legally flawed the reasons for so finding will  have  existed  both
        before  and  after  its  notification.  It   is   a   determination
        inconsistent with other authority that is binding on the  Tribunal.
        In those circumstances, which will be encountered only rarely,  any
        determination of an appeal decided substantially on  the  basis  of
        that country guidance will be legally flawed also and cannot stand.


     4. I find the reliance by the Panel upon the previous country guidance
        case of RN [2008] UKAIT 00083 [44] was therefore an error of law.


     5. I also advised the parties that,  notwithstanding  the  above,  any
        error is not material. Mr Selway indicated that this was  also  his
        position as the respondents' home area was one under the control of
        Zanu-PF which created a recognised risk as  per  CM,  although  the
        question of internal flight would have to be  examined  before  any
        findings were made on this  particular  submission,  which  is  not
        necessary for the reasons set out below.


     6. The application for permission  to  appeal  challenges  the  weight
        placed upon a document by the Panel and mentions paragraphs  36  to
        40 of the determination. The Panel in paragraph 36  recognise  they
        were handicapped in  the  assessment  of  the  reliability  of  the
        document as a result of an incomplete translation into English, but
        it is clear from reading the determination  that  the  matters  the
        Secretary of State relies upon as the basis for claiming the  Panel
        should not have attached the weight they did to this document  were
        properly considered by them.  The Panel recognised the  limitations
        and problems the document created for them as  a  result  of  their
        approaching the evidence with the degree of  care  required  in  an
        appeal of this nature.  They gave adequate  reasons  for  why  they
        consider they were able to attach the  degree  of  weight  to  this
        document they did [41]. They found the document was  likely  to  be
        genuine notwithstanding the evidential problems. The weight  to  be
        attached to this evidence was a matter for the Panel and it has not
        been proved that they made  any  legal  error  by  approaching  the
        matter in the way they did.


     7. The reason the reliance on RN is not material  is  because  of  the
        Panel's findings in paragraph 47 of the determination.  They  found
        there was a real risk  that  the  authorities  would  consider  the
        purpose of the return of the second respondent to Zimbabwe  was  to
        continue enquiries referred to in the determination, which  it  was
        found could lead to her facing consequences  no  less  severe  than
        those  which  were  likely   to   have   followed   her   brother's
        disappearance in mysterious circumstances in 2008; which will  also
        place the first appellant at risk by association with her.


     8. The Panel identified a real risk of serious harm at  the  point  of
        return at the airport. In HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG
        [2007] UKAIT 00094 the Tribunal found that the process of screening
        returning passengers is an intelligence led  process  and  the  CIO
        will generally have  identified  from  the  passenger  manifest  in
        advance, based upon such intelligence,  those  passengers  in  whom
        there is any possible interest. The fact of having made  an  asylum
        claim abroad is not something that in  itself  will  give  rise  to
        adverse interest on return. In paragraphs 264 and 266 the  tribunal
        said: "The CIO has taken over responsibility for the  operation  of
        immigration control at Harare airport and immigration officers  are
        being replaced by CIO officers. We accept  also  that  one  of  the
        purposes of the CIO in monitoring arrivals at  the  airport  is  to
        identify those who are thought to be, for whatever reason,  enemies
        of the regime. The aim is to detect those of interest because of an
        adverse military  or  criminal  profile.  The  main  focus  of  the
        operation to identify those who may be of adverse interest  remains
        those who are perceived to be politically active in support of  the
        opposition. But anyone perceived to be a threat to or a  critic  of
        the regime will attract interest also  ...  We  have  set  out  the
        evidence that indicates in whom the CIO has an interest. This  will
        be those in respect of whom there  is  any  reason  to  suspect  an
        adverse  political,  criminal  or  military  profile  of  the  type
        identified in AA(2). In addition, those perceived to be  associated
        with what have come to be identified as civil society organisations
        may attract adverse interest as critics of  the  regime"  (and  see
        paragraph 282). At  paragraph  102  the  tribunal  had  said:  "The
        evidence concerning the CIO establishes  clearly  that  anyone  who
        comes to the attention of the CIO and is perceived to be  an  enemy
        of the regime faces a very real risk of being subjected to physical
        ill-treatment". In CM the Tribunal held  that  the  fresh  evidence
        regarding the position at the point of return does not indicate any
        increase in risk since the Country Guidance was given in HS.


     9. The Panel found that as a result of the matters referred to in  the
        above quoted paragraphs the second respondent has a  profile  which
        would lead to her being perceived as a threat to, or a  critic  of,
        the regime and a person against whom there was reason to suspect an
        adverse political role.  The  finding  therefore  that  the  second
        respondent would come to the attention of the CIO and face  a  very
        real risk of being subjected to physical ill-treatment is a finding
        that was available to the  Panel  as  being  within  the  range  of
        permissible findings on the evidence. Such treatment would be as  a
        result of a perceived/imputed adverse political opinion.   As  such
        it has not been shown that the decision set out in paragraph 49  of
        the determination is legally wrong.


Decision

    10. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


          I continue that  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th August 2013












