
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 December 2014                              |On 10 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                            mr raimodas budraitis
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, HOPO
For Mr Budraitis:      No representation
For the Respondent:    No representation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    ("the Secretary of State").  Mr Budraitis'  appeal  was  allowed  in  a
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Malone and Mrs Hewitt),
    promulgated on 8 July 2014.  We have been assisted  by  Mr  Jarvis  who
    appears for the Secretary of  State.   Mr  Budraitis  has  appeared  in
    person and had the benefit of assistance from a Lithuanian  interpreter
    throughout the course of these proceedings.

 2. The facts can be shortly stated for present purposes.  Mr Budraitis  is
    a citizen of Lithuania, born on 23 November 1982 and  so  now  some  32
    years old.  He is not a permanent resident of the United Kingdom but he
    is a citizen of the European  Economic  Area.   He  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom in about 2005 and has returned since then  to  Lithuania
    from time to time.  He stayed for some six months before returning  for
    a holiday.  On re-entering the United Kingdom he remained  for  another
    four years at the end of which he  again  returned  to  Lithuania.   He
    appears to have found it difficult to settle there and he returned back
    to the United Kingdom after about another six months.

 3. He has been the subject of a number of convictions both in this country
    and in Lithuania.  He was first convicted in the United Kingdom  on  14
    August 2008 for the  offence  of  burglary  for  which  he  received  a
    suspended sentence of four months  with  conditions.   He  committed  a
    second offence for which he was convicted in 2009, again for  burglary,
    this time receiving a sentence of twelve months'  custody.   Thereafter
    he went on  to  commit  further  offences  most  of  which  related  to
    shoplifting.  In total he has  some  eleven  convictions  for  some  23
    offences.  His last and most recent conviction was on 29 November  2013
    when he received a sentence  of  twelve  weeks'  custody.   As  already
    indicated he has also been convicted abroad, in particular convicted of
    theft in Vilnius on 25 January 2011, 22 February 2011 and 28 May  2012.
    The sentence on his last conviction  here  was  completed  in  February
    2014.  All his offences in the United Kingdom have been dealt  with  in
    the Magistrates' Court apart from one burglary offence  which  was  the
    only offence to which he pleaded not guilty, and which was  dealt  with
    in the Crown Court.

 4. In the meantime, on 31 December 2013, the Secretary of State  wrote  to
    Mr Budraitis requiring him to set out reasons  why  he  should  not  be
    deported.  To that request he did not reply.  He was in custody at  the
    time.

 5. On 18 January 2014 the Secretary of  State  wrote  giving  reasons  for
    deportation.  In summary, his presence in this  country  would  not  be
    conducive to the public good.

 6. On 25 January 2014 the Secretary of State notified Mr Budraitis of  her
    decision to remove him in accordance  with  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations")  and  signed  a
    deportation order pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971
    on 17 February 2014.  As a result, on the day of Mr Budraitis'  release
    from custody for the conviction  on  29  November  2013  he  was  taken
    immediately into immigration detention.

 7. On 5 March 2014 Mr Budraitis lodged Notice of Appeal  resulting  on  19
    March 2014 in the Secretary of State revoking her deportation order.

 8. We turn to consider the hearing and the ruling below.

 9. Mr Budraitis gave evidence before the Tribunal below.  He  was  married
    in Lithuania but later divorced.  He had two children with his ex-wife.
     They now live in Peterborough, but he has recently ceased contact with
    his children there.  He is now with a new partner,  also  a  Lithuanian
    citizen, living in Stratford in London.  She has two sons of  her  own,
    aged 14 and 7.  In addition to that  his  blood  brother,  sisters  and
    mother all live in London and have done  so  for  some  years,  ten  or
    eleven years in the case of his brother and sisters, two years  in  the
    case of his mother.  His mother is about 61 and has recently suffered a
    stroke.

10. Mr Budraitis told the Tribunal below that his offences  were  committed
    as a result of his alcohol habit.  He had  never  taken  drugs.   Since
    being in custody in November 2003 he had  been  off  alcohol.   He  had
    also, whilst in prison, completed an alcohol abuse course lasting  some
    three weeks.  He told the Tribunal that before his drinking he had been
    a  painter  and  a  decorator  for  which  purpose  he   had   relevant
    qualifications.  A back injury a year ago  or  so  meant  that  he  was
    unable to work.  He told the Tribunal that if he were to be deported he
    would in essence lose all his family.   He  firmly  believed  that  his
    brother would keep him on the straight and narrow.  He  wanted  to  re-
    engage in painting and decorating.

11. He had the support of his partner  who  appeared  before  the  Tribunal
    below and who has also attended the hearing  today.   She  works  as  a
    nurse in the NHS and speaks fluent English.   In  short,  he  told  the
    Tribunal there was nothing for him in Lithuania and everything for  him
    here.  Not only did his partner attend the  hearing  below  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, so did his brother.  There were letters of support
    to the Tribunal  indicating  for  example  the  closeness  between  his
    current partner and Mr Budraitis, his partner  visiting  him  with  her
    children once a week or so whilst he  was  in  custody.   He  expressed
    great remorse for his criminal conduct.

12. The Tribunal found amongst other things that  Mr  Budraitis's  criminal
    conduct was caused by his alcohol dependence.  They noted that  he  had
    been off alcohol whilst in custody.  They were unable to say whether he
    would be able to stay off alcohol but they accepted as a matter of fact
    his declared intention to do so.  They  found  that  he  had  the  full
    support of his brother and partner and recorded the  fact  in  evidence
    that Mr Budraitis had been advised that his chances of  survival,  were
    he to resume drinking were only 50:50.  The Tribunal said in terms that
    they were unable to accept Mr Budraitis as a  hardened  criminal.   The
    two offences of burglary of dwelling houses  were  of  course  serious.
    Thereafter, Mr Budraitis  had  been  convicted  of  mainly  shoplifting
    offences which  the  Tribunal  accepted  were  the  result  of  alcohol
    consumption.  They accepted as a matter of fact that Mr  Budraitis  had
    previously worked as a painter and decorator.

13. This appeal brought by the Secretary of State is essentially  based  on
    Mr Budraitis's profile.  It is said that his persistent offending  does
    reach the level of serious threat.  It is said that the  Tribunal  made
    an error of law in failing to find him to have  persistent  criminality
    that constituted the necessary serious threat  justifying  deportation.
    Mr Budraitis was a convicted criminal in his homeland and had continued
    to be a persistent offender for the whole time  of  his  existence  and
    residence in the United Kingdom.  There was no evidence  to  show  that
    his pattern of behaviour was likely to change and it was wrong  in  law
    not to equate persistent  and  unremitting  offending  with  a  serious
    threat to the fundamentals of society, namely the right of a person  to
    live in a crime-free and peaceable society  that  is  not  persistently
    interrupted by alcohol-induced criminality.

14. Mr Jarvis in oral submissions has ably expanded  on  those  grounds  of
    appeal.  He submits that it is unclear  in  terms  precisely  what  the
    Tribunal found  so  far  as  the  threat  posed  by  Mr  Budraitis  was
    concerned.  It is said that the Tribunal addressed itself to the  wrong
    test in law, namely did not assess and apply itself to  the  particular
    question of genuine,  real  and  sufficient  threat  to  a  fundamental
    interest of society.  It is submitted that Mr Budraitis had produced no
    independent evidence of his engagement in prison and reference is  made
    to two cases in particular.

15. Firstly the case of AR (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ 816.  There, at paragraph 21, the  Court  of
    Appeal emphasised the cost of providing resources by way of prosecution
    costs for the conviction  of  offenders,  their  punishment  and  their
    rehabilitation.  That paragraph also refers to the importance of taking
    into account, for example,  behaviour  ignoring  warnings.   Mr  Jarvis
    points to the fact that Mr Budraitis has a history of ignoring warnings
    in the past, a  factor  of  which  he  submits  the  Tribunal  did  not
    sufficiently take account.

16. He also referred to the case of Nerijus  Jarusevicius  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2012] UKUT 00120 (IAC) at  paragraph  63
    and 63(2) in particular.  Mr Jarvis relies on the fact that  the  Upper
    Tribunal indicated that previous convictions of a completely  different
    nature might nevertheless be relied on as evidence of unwillingness  to
    abide by the criminal laws.  So he says the fact that Mr Budraitis  has
    been guilty of different  types  of  offending  should  be  taken  into
    account and should  have  been  taken  into  account  as  demonstrating
    unwillingness on his part to abide by the criminal laws.  Reliance  was
    also placed on paragraph 63(4).  The Upper Tribunal Judge there  relied
    on the fact that the appellant  in  that  case  had  not  produced  any
    positive evidence of insight.

17. Before turning to give our substantive  ruling  we  pause  to  identify
    factual errors in  the  submissions  made  so  far  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.  First of all,  as  a  matter  of  fact  there  was
    evidence to show a likely change in pattern of behaviour on the part of
    Mr Budraitis by reference to his conduct in prison since November 2003.
     (We are not persuaded that the absence of any independent evidence  in
    that regard is of any significance in circumstances where the Secretary
    of State would herself have had access to any relevant information  and
    where Mr Budraitis was acting in person below.)

18. The second area of factual error is that there was evidence before  the
    Tribunal in relation to the question of insight.  As  we  have  already
    recorded, he expressed great remorse for his criminal  conduct  in  the
    past.

19. For his part, Mr Budraitis has rehearsed his background and  sought  to
    emphasise to us his commitment to not  offend  in  the  future  and  to
    attempts to start his life again with a clean slate.  He  has  been  on
    immigration bail pending appeal and he tells us that he  has  not  been
    arrested or charged for any offence since September 2014.

20. We turn then to a substantive consideration of  the  considerations  of
    the relevant law. The EEA Regulations provide so  far  as  material  as
    follows:

         "19(3) subject to subparagraphs 4 and 5 an  EEA  national  who  has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a  national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if...

         (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's  removal
             is justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or
             public health in accordance with Regulation 21."

    Regulation 21 then goes on to provide so far as material:

         "(1) In this Regulation a relevant decision means an  EEA  decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends."

    Regulation 21(5) goes on to provide:

         "(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding paragraphs of this Regulation be taken in accordance
             with the following principles -

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision."

    Finally, Regulation 21(6) provides :

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

21. An appeal to this Tribunal only lies on the basis of an error of law  -
    see Section 11 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  In R
    (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982
    the Court of Appeal  gave  general  guidance  on  the  most  frequently
    encountered errors of law which it  categorised  as  including  "making
    perverse or irrational findings  on  a  matter  or  matters  that  were
    material to the outcome".

22. In our judgment there was no material error of law  in  the  Tribunal's
    ruling.  This is in reality a challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings of fact which cannot be said to be perverse or irrational.

23. The Tribunal correctly identified the law and the standard of proof, in
    particular at paragraphs 11 and 12 and  paragraphs  35  to  37  of  its
    ruling.  Having correctly identified the  law  the  Tribunal  found  in
    terms that although Mr Budraitis had been a persistent offender he fell
    into a category that could not  be  said  to  be  that  of  a  hardened
    criminal.  The fact that he had support  available  justified  them  in
    having some hope that he would mend his ways.  They came to the "clear"
    conclusion  that  he  did  not  represent  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of our society.  His criminal convictions did not justify the Secretary
    of State's decision to deport him.

24. For the avoidance of doubt, we reject in terms the submission  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that the Tribunal did  not  carry  out
    the necessary assessment by reference to the relevant test.   It  seems
    to us that in paragraph 42  of  their  judgment  that  it  carried  out
    precisely the right exercise.

25. The Tribunal bore in mind Mr Budraitis' evidence which it accepted.  It
    considered his age, the support of his partner who attended  court  and
    her correspondence.  That correspondence reflected her commitment to Mr
    Budraitis whom she praised as a wonderful stepfather.  She was  visibly
    upset in court.  It had regard to Mr Budraitis' past alcohol dependence
    and it had regard to the lack of family links in Lithuania.

26. We are satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  below  was  fully  aware  of  Mr
    Budraitis' criminal record including, for example, the warning letters.
     It reiterated that, being fully aware of that record, it  nevertheless
    found Mr Budraitis to be a persistent but not hardened criminal.  Thus,
    the clear conclusion of the Tribunal on the totality  of  the  evidence
    was  that  the  Secretary   of   State's   decision   to   deport   was
    disproportionate and Mr Budraitis did not pose a threat  affecting  one
    of the fundamental interests of society let alone  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat.  It bore in mind  his  contrition  and
    past punishment.

27.  We  remind  ourselves  that  the  test  is  one   of   perversity   or
    irrationality.  The Tribunal had the benefit of a full oral hearing  at
    which Mr Budraitis gave evidence.  As we have  indicated  the  Tribunal
    was aware of his criminal record.   Its  finding  that  he  was  not  a
    hardened criminal was one open to it as was its conclusion  that  there
    was every prospect that he would not re-offend, that  conclusion  being
    reached in the light of the  evidence,  his  time  in  prison  and  the
    support of his family and partner.  It was a clear conclusion.  It  was
    not the result of an error of law but of  the  findings  of  fact  made
    after a full hearing, which we have not been able to find  perverse  or
    irrational.  It was not a decision with which we can interfere.

28. For all these reasons we dismiss the appeal and uphold the decision  of
    the First-Tier  Tribunal.   We  do  not  do  so  without  reminding  Mr
    Budraitis of the closing remarks of the First Tier Tribunal relating to
    the consequences that any future offending would have on  his  position
    in this country and more generally.




Signed:       Dated: 9 December 2014

Mrs Justice Carr


