
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:

                                                           DA/00040/2020 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 February 2021                |On 25 February 2021                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     T R

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS



      Representation by way of written submissions:


      For the Appellant:     Mr M Poulter, Solicitor, Turpin and Miller
      Solicitors
      For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
      Officer


Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer  on  13  January  2021  in
           respect the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Athwal,
           promulgated  on  17  December  2020  following  a   hearing   at
           Birmingham on 21 October 2020.

        2. The appellant is a Polish national born on 27 November 1988.  He
           appeals against the deportation order made by the  Secretary  of
           State on 15 January 2020 following a criminal conviction  on  12
           October 2018 for two offences for which  he  received  custodial
           sentences of three years and one year to be served concurrently.



        3. The parties were issued directions by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
           on 26 January 2021.

              Discussion and Conclusions

        4. By the time the matter came before me, the parties  had  reached
           an agreement on the disposal of the appeal and I have considered
           the submissions made.

        5. I concur with the  view  of  the  parties  that  the  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge erred in law in finding that  the  appellant  had
           not acquired a permanent right of residence under reg. 15 of the
           EEA Regulations  of  2016.  The  respondent  concedes  that  the
           appellant has indeed  acquired  such  a  right,  having  resided
           lawfully in the UK for at least ten  years.  The  appellant  has
           also sought to dispute other findings of fact made by the  judge
           and the respondent has not sought to disagree with  the  matters
           raised in the grounds of appeal when reaching agreement over the
           disposal of this appeal.

        6. That  being  the  case,  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal cannot stand and it is set aside in its entirety except
           as a Record of Proceedings. Both parties agree that  the  matter
           is best  determined  before  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal as fresh findings of fact shall have to be made.

        7. The issues to be determined as agreed by the parties are :

           (i) whether the appellant is entitled to enhanced protection  on
           imperative grounds pursuant to reg. 27(4);

           (ii) whether he presents  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
           serious threat to one of the fundamental  interests  of  society
           pursuant to reg. 27(5): and

           (iii) whether his deportation is proportionate having regard  to
           all the factors under  reg. 27.

      8.    There is some  disagreement  over  whether  this  should  be  an
           entirely remote, a hybrid or a fully face to  face  hearing  The
           appellant's objection to a remote  hearing  appears  to  be  his
           domestic circumstances but that may be overcome if he is able to
           attend a location arranged by his solicitors where he  may  give
           video evidence without interruption from his child.  However,  I
           leave that decision for the First-tier Tribunal which will issue
           its own directions in due course.




      Decision

      9.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
           which requires that it be set aside. The appeal  is  allowed  to
           the extent that it is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
           Birmingham for a fresh decision to be made on all  matters.  The
           matter shall be heard by any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  except
           Judge Athwal.

      10.   Directions shall be issued by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  due
           course.

      Anonymity

      11.   I continue the  order  for  anonymity  made  by  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.




      Signed


      R. Keki?


      Upper Tribunal Judge


      Date: 10 February 2021


