
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00563/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2019                          |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr arnus adomavicius
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Ms J Rothwell of Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant, born on 15th August 1994, is a citizen of Lithuania.

2.   On 7th August 2018 the Secretary of State made a deportation  order  in
    respect of the claimant on the basis  that  it  was  justified  on  the
    grounds of  public  security  because  of  his  criminal  history,  the
    decision being taken under Regulation 21 of the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Detailed reasons for  the  making  of
    such an order are set out in that decision.

3.   The claimant has a record of criminality,  commencing  with  possession
    of cannabis in 2009 culminating  in  a  fourteen  months'  imprisonment
    imposed for an offence of actual bodily  harm  on  11th  January  2018.
    Such an offence was committed against his partner a  restraining  order
    had been in place.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin the  hearing  on  5th  October
    2018.

5.   The Judge proceeded to consider  the  matter  on  the  basis  that  the
    claimant having resided in the United Kingdom for more than  ten  years
    enjoyed the protection that he could only be removed on  the  basis  of
    imperative grounds of public security.  The Judge did not find that the
    offending met that high threshold.

6.   Little reason or  justification  is  given  in  the  determination  for
    coming to that conclusion, other than the suggestion in paragraph 23 of
    the determination, that Mr Bassi, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,
    confirmed that the relevant test was one relating to imperative grounds
    of public security.  The appeal was allowed.

7.   The Secretary of State sought to challenge that decision on  the  basis
    that the relevant test was not one relating to imperative  grounds  and
    that no concession on that matter  had  been  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer.  Reliance as  placed  indeed  upon  the  Presenting  Officer's
    minute attached  to  the  grounds.   The  grounds  contended  that  the
    claimant had the lowest level of protection afforded to him  by  virtue
    of Regulation 21, namely he could only be removed  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health but  he  did  not  have
    permanent residence such as to bring him  into  the  area  of  "serious
    grounds of  public  policy  or  public  security"  let  alone  that  of
    imperative grounds.  It is contended therefore that the very  basis  of
    consideration was flawed.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on that  basis  and  thus  the  matter
    comes before me to determine the issue.

9.   I have regard to the Presenting Officer's  note  of  the  hearing,  the
    relevant paragraph being as follows:

         "The Judge raised the point that as the A had been in the UK  since
         1996 and for more than ten years before the decision to deport  was
         made he needs to consider whether  the  A  should  be  deported  on
         imperative grounds.  The PO replied on the  comprehensive  RFRL  in
         its entirety and submitted that the Home  Office  case  is  that  A
         should be deported on grounds of public policy,  that  reasons  for
         that had been given in the RFRL at paragraphs  8  to  33.   PO  was
         asked in any case to make submissions  on  the  imperative  grounds
         test in the alternative.  The Judge finds the Home Office had  made
         an error that the test is on grounds of public policy."

10.  As I indicated the  decision  letter  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    detailed in its response to the issues.  It noted that the claimant had
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th  December  1996  and  had  claimed
    asylum as the dependant of his mother [D].  The application was refused
    on 11th July 1998 and a subsequent appeal  dismissed.   The  claimant's
    mother was removed to Lithuania on 20th February  1998  but  re-entered
    the United Kingdom on 20th March 1998.  She applied for asylum but that
    was dismissed on 19th March 1999.

11.  In November 2004 the claimant was included  as  a  dependent  upon  his
    mother's application for family ILR on 21 March 2005  and  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

12.  It was not accepted, however, that the claimant had  been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations.   He  has
    provided no evidence of residence or of exercising  treaty  rights.  It
    was not considered that the fact that he had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  could  be  accepted  as
    evidence that he had acquired a permanent right  to  reside  under  the
    2016 EEA Regulations.

13.  It was noted that Lithuania acceded to the EU on  1st  May  2004.    It
    was contended that the  claimant  had  failed  to  provide  documentary
    evidence that his parents were exercising treaty rights from  2004.   A
    letter from his  mother  dated  10th  August  2018  was  that  she  was
    receiving State benefits as she was raising her children and  had  only
    registered her business on 24th January 2014.

14.  The claimant provided payslips for work as  from  2017.   The  decision
    states in terms therefore, "it is therefore not accepted that you  have
    acquired a permanent right to reside under the 2016 EEA Regulations".

15.  As Mr Melvin submitted that if the mother  was  not  exercising  treaty
    rights it is difficult to imagine that the claimant was.  It is  to  be
    noted that he seemed to have been a student for some time  during  that
    period but there was no indication of his having comprehensive sickness
    insurance at the time.

16.  Ms Rothwell does not concede the point that the claimant does not  fall
    to have that protection but accepts that the Judge has proceeded on  an
    incorrect assumption that that matter was conceded by the Secretary  of
    State.  Accordingly there has been little analysis  of  that  issue  or
    findings made on the substantive  consideration.   She  indicates  that
    further documentation may clarify that issue.

17.  In all the circumstances I find that the Judge  proceeded  to  consider
    the matter on the misunderstanding of fact namely whether a  concession
    had been made in relation to imperative grounds of public security.   I
    find that no concession had been made.

18.  In that situation the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed  to
    the extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to
    be remade.

19.  Having regard to the Senior President's Practice Direction  I  consider
    that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing to be conducted.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal before the Upper tribunal  is  allowed.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal shall be set aside to be remade by  that
Tribunal on a fresh hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 18 Feb 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD



