

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00564/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House           |                     Decision and Reasons|
|                               |Promulgated                              |
|On 8 April 2015                |                      On 2 June 2015     |
|                               |                                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                           CARLOS CARDONA-VASQUEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V. Lovejoy, Counsel, instructed by Leonard & Co.,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISIONS AND REASONS

   Introduction

      The history of this appeal has been set out  in  the  reasons  already
        provided to the parties for the Upper Tribunal's finding  (Davis  J
        and Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan) that the First-tier Tribunal panel
        erred in law.   I  repeat  it  now,  adopting  the  same  paragraph
        numbering:


   The decision as to the error of law


     1. "The Appellant is a citizen of Colombia.  He was born in 1975.   In
        1997 he came to the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.   His  claim
        was based on his assertion that he was  a  leading  member  in  the
        Liberal Party in Columbia  and  that  attempts  had  been  made  by
        political opponents  to  kill  him  in  the  period  prior  to  his
        departure from Columbia.  He claimed that  he  had  a  well-founded
        fear of persecution by reason of his political opinion.

     2. His claim for asylum was rejected by the Secretary of State for the
        Home Department ("SSHD") who  refused  him  entry  clearance.   The
        Appellant appealed against that decision.  In 2001 his  appeal  was
        allowed.  The tribunal found that he had fled Columbia in  fear  of
        being murdered by political opponents and, as such, he had  a  well
        founded fear of persecution due to his political opinion.  Part  of
        the decision read as follows:

           I had the advantage of  having  the  appellant  giving  evidence
           before me and I was impressed by his forthrightness and apparent
           honesty and I have no reason to doubt that  he  was  telling  me
           anything but the truth.  I have already indicated  that  I  find
           the various documents submitted in support of his  claim  to  be
           genuine.  It is  abundantly  clear  that  this  young  man  left
           Columbia in fear of his life....

     3. In consequence of his successful appeal, the Appellant in 2002  was
        granted indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  By  that
        time he was already in  a  settled  relationship  with  a  lady  of
        Columbian nationality who also  had  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
        They had had a son born in 1999.  They married in 2003.

     4. In July 2009 the Appellant  was  convicted  after  a  trial  of  an
        offence of possession of cocaine with intent  to  supply.   He  was
        sentenced to a term of eight  years'  imprisonment.   As  early  as
        February 2010 the SSHD wrote to the Appellant inviting him to  give
        reasons why he should not be deported at  the  conclusion  of  that
        part of his sentence which he had  to  serve.   The  Appellant  was
        liable to deportation under Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
        2007 unless he fell within the exception under Section 33(2) of the
        same Act i.e. his removal would breach his convention rights or the
        obligations of the United Kingdom under the Refugee Convention.

     5. On the 4th February 2014 the SSHD  served  her  decision  that  the
        Appellant's removal would not breach his convention rights and  her
        decision to cease  the  Appellant's  refugee  status.   The  latter
        decision meant that his removal prima facie would  not  breach  the
        United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention.   The
        consequent deportation order was served on the same day.

     6. The Appellant exercised his  in-country  right  of  appeal.   By  a
        decision promulgated on the 21st May 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal
        dismissed his appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the  SSHD.   The
        Appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
        by leave of Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan.  Leave was  given  on  all
        grounds although it was indicated that  the  arguable  issues  were
        likely to be  restricted  to  those  relating  to  the  Appellant's
        refugee status.

     7.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  of  the  appeal,   the   SSHD's
        representative raised a jurisdictional issue.  He argued that there
        was no right of appeal to the tribunal against the SSHD's  decision
        to cease the Appellant's refugee status.  Rather, any challenge  to
        the cessation letter should have been by way  of  judicial  review,
        the cessation letter itself making it clear that there was no right
        of appeal against the decision to cease refugee status.   The  only
        appeal was against the consequent deportation decision.  Ms Lovejoy
        on behalf of the Appellant objected to  the  proposition  that  the
        tribunal could not consider the decision to cease  refugee  status.
        She pointed out that this argument had not been raised in the First-
        tier Tribunal which had considered the cessation  decision  on  its
        merits.  She relied also on the fact that the point had been raised
        only on the day of the hearing before us without any prior  notice.
        We consider that the SSHD's argument is sterile.  Even if there was
        no right of appeal against the cessation decision  per  se,  proper
        consideration of the deportation decision was bound to  require  an
        assessment of the merits of the cessation decision.  If a  tribunal
        were to conclude that, on the facts  of  the  case,  removal  of  a
        foreign criminal would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
        under the Refugee Convention, it would be bound to allow any appeal
        against the  deportation  decision.   The  tribunal  would  not  be
        prevented from reaching such a conclusion simply because  the  SSHD
        had made a particular decision to cease refugee status.


     8. The SSHD's representative made a further submission allied  to  the
        jurisdictional issue, namely that the burden of proof  was  on  the
        Appellant to show that his  removal  would  breach  his  convention
        rights and/or any obligation under the Refugee Convention.   Again,
        that is not an approach taken by the  SSHD  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  We consider that the SSHD adopted the  correct  approach
        at the first appeal.  The burden of proof is on the  SSHD  to  show
        that the Appellant no longer should have refugee status,  per  Lord
        Brown at [66] in Hoxha & Anor v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2005] UKHL 19  with  whom  the  other  members  of  the
        Committee agreed.


     9.  We  note  that  the  SSHD  in  her  decision  letter  ceasing  the
        Appellant's refugee status appeared to adopt the wrong approach  to
        the burden of proof.  At paragraphs 13 and 14  of  the  letter  she
        used this phrase: "...you have adduced no  credible  evidence  that
        you remain in genuine need of international protection due to  your
        alleged fear of persecution in Columbia".  This  is  suggestive  of
        requiring the Appellant to prove that  he  still  warrants  refugee
        status.  Whilst of academic interest only,  this  could  well  have
        been a proper basis for a judicial review of the decision.

    10. If the Appellant ought to have retained his refugee  status,  there
        could be no proper basis for his deportation under Section 32(5) of
        the UK Borders Act 2007.  He had the benefit of a clear finding  on
        appeal in 2001.  The issue for the First-tier Tribunal was  whether
        proper application of Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Refugee  Convention
        meant that the Appellant no  longer  should  have  refugee  status.
        Article 1C(5) [which is incorporated in the  Immigration  Rules  at
        Paragraph 339A] is in these terms:


           [The person with refugee status]  can  no  longer,  because  the
           circumstances in connexion with which he has been recognized  as
           a refugee have ceased to exist,  continue  to  refuse  to  avail
           himself of the protection of the country of his nationality


        The  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  "the  circumstances  in
        connexion with which he has  been  recognized  as  a  refugee"  had
        ceased to exist.  The Tribunal reviewed  a  substantial  amount  of
        objective material concerning  the  current  political  and  social
        situation in Columbia.  It also considered the Appellant's personal
        position.  It is the latter issue to which the  appeal  principally
        has been directed and  where  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal fell into error.


    11. The first ground of appeal invites consideration of whether Article
        1C(5) and Paragraph 339A of the  Immigration  Rules  are  concerned
        only with a change in the country situation  or  whether  they  may
        also  be  concerned  with  the  circumstances  of  the   individual
        refugees, the implicit argument being that they should be concerned
        only with the former.  This ground was not pursued with  particular
        vigour in the course of the hearing.  We consider that, insofar  as
        this implied a concession that an  individual's  circumstances  may
        fall  within  the  "circumstances"  in  the  Convention   and   the
        Immigration Rules, this was a realistic concession.   The  ordinary
        and natural meaning of the words means that they could refer to the
        relevant circumstances of the individual having  ceased  to  exist.
        Clearly it may  be  more  difficult  to  prove  such  a  change  in
        circumstances of an individual than a change in country  situation.
        The latter generally will involve  clear  objective  evidence  from
        independent  sources  whereas  evidence  as  to   an   individual's
        circumstances is likely to be more contentious.  However, those are
        evidential issues.   In  principle,  it  may  be  the  individual's
        circumstances which change so  that  the  basis  on  which  he  was
        granted refugee status has ceased to exist.

    12. The second ground of appeal is of more significance.  Accepting (as
        we do) that the circumstances of the appellant were  relevant,  did
        the First-tier Tribunal err in its approach to those circumstances?
         The Appellant argues that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  apply
        the principles in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 702 properly or at
        all.  In particular, the First-tier Tribunal did not take the  2001
        determination as the  starting  point  in  any  true  sense.   That
        determination is referred to by the tribunal in the decision  which
        is the subject of this appeal but only in  terms  of  the  outcome.
        Nothing is rehearsed as to the findings of the  2001  determination
        in relation to the Appellant's activity in Columbia and the dangers
        which led him to flee the country.  The First-tier Tribunal recited
        the Appellant's evidence put before the adjudicator in 2001 but not
        the adjudicator's view of that evidence.  This  would  be  of  less
        importance in a case where the change in circumstances  related  to
        the country situation.  Here the change in  country  situation  was
        not such as to render the Appellant's return objectively safe.   In
        any event the First-tier Tribunal did not base its decision on  any
        change in country situation.  Rather, the decision was based on  an
        assessment of the Appellant's likely activity in Columbia  were  he
        to return and on his credibility vis-�-vis his declaration that  he
        would not return to political activity through  fear.   The  First-
        tier Tribunal was entitled to consider facts  occurring  since  the
        2001 determination.  That is one of the principles  in  Devaseelan.
        However, it should have done so from the starting point of the 2001
        determination  i.e.  the  basis  for  and  reasoning  behind   that
        determination.  In our judgment  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal on its face does not do so.  That was  an  error  of  law.
        Given that error of law the decision  on  the  appeal  against  the
        deportation order must be re-made.  The proper forum for  that  re-
        making of the decision is the Upper Tribunal.

    13. The third (and allied) ground  of  appeal  is  that  no  reasonable
        tribunal could have  concluded  that  the  evidence  permitted  the
        finding that the Appellant would  not  have  engaged  in  political
        activity in Columbia for some reason other than fear i.e.  lack  of
        interest and inclination.  The evidential basis relied  on  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal was the lack of any political activity  on  the
        part of the Appellant during his residence in the  United  Kingdom.
        This was arguably a tenuous basis although it  was  linked  to  the
        apparent contradiction between what he said at the  appeal  hearing
        in 2001 and what had transpired in  fact  between  then  and  2014.
        Whilst this may not be a matter on which the Appellant  would  have
        succeeded in this appeal had it stood alone, the issue will have to
        be re-visited at  the  re-making  of  the  decision  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal.

    14. The final issue relating to refugee status concerns the view  taken
        by the First-tier Tribunal of expert evidence adduced on behalf  of
        the Appellant.  The tribunal accepted this evidence  including  the
        assertion that anyone in Columbia with an adverse interest  in  the
        Appellant could probably track him down if the  Appellant  returned
        and such return became known.  However, the tribunal concluded that
        it was "bordering on the absurd" to believe that there could be any
        residual adverse interest in the  Appellant.   When  re-making  the
        decision the Upper Tribunal will have to  consider  the  extent  to
        which the evidence supports an inference of the kind reached by the
        First-tier Tribunal.

    15. In our view the remaining grounds of appeal  have  no  merit.   The
        refusal to grant an adjournment as a ground of  appeal  falls  away
        now that the decision on the appeal against the  deportation  order
        is to be re-made.   Our  directions  in  relation  to  the  further
        hearing that will be required will allow the Appellant to  do  that
        which he wished to do over the period of any adjournment.  The free-
        standing Article 8 claim in respect  of  the  Appellant's  supposed
        relationship  with  his  son  is  without  merit.   The  First-tier
        Tribunal concluded that the evidence demonstrated that, at least on
        balance, the best interests of the  son  would  not  be  served  by
        retaining the  relationship  with  the  Appellant.   The  available
        evidence was sufficient  to  justify  a  finding.   The  First-tier
        Tribunal concluded in the alternative that  the  son  (by  now  15)
        could move  to  Columbia  in  the  unlikely  event  that  his  best
        interests would be served by close contact with his father.   There
        was ample evidence to justify that alternative conclusion."

The remaking of the decision

    16. It was for the above reasons that the Upper Tribunal concluded  the
        First-tier Tribunal was in error.  It is now left to me to  re-make
        the decision.  Before doing so, however, it is necessary to sound a
        note of caution.

    17. When I granted permission, I cautioned myself against allowing  any
        justifiable  revulsion  the  Tribunal  might  feel   against   this
        appellant as a result of his conviction and eight-year sentence for
        cocaine smuggling clouding a proper evaluation of  the  appellant's
        successful asylum  claim  and  the  application  of  the  cessation
        provisions. I repeated the caution similarly felt by UNHCR, recited
        by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel  in  paragraph   32   of   its
        determination: "... they are right to be concerned  that  cessation
        of refugee status should not be triggered by a country's desire  to
        rid itself of a particular refugee however odious the crime."

    18. It only needs be said that had the appellant not been convicted  of
        so serious a crime, there would have been no reason to re-visit the
        First-tier Tribunal's finding that he was entitled  to  asylum  and
        the respondent's recognition of that fact by the grant of leave  in
        the appellant's favour.  However,  the  appellant's  conviction  is
        entirely immaterial to the issue of  whether  the  appellant  is  a
        refugee and the associated consideration of whether  the  cessation
        provisions have come into  effect.  Exactly  the  same  process  of
        evaluation would be required if no offence had been  committed  and
        this appellant is entitled to the same evaluation  as  if  no  such
        offence  had  been  committed.  Adopting  this  approach,   it   is
        impermissible to apply  the  cessation  provisions  differently  by
        reason of his conviction.

    19. Nevertheless, it is inevitable that the appellant's  conviction  of
        so serious an offence would trigger the respondent's  consideration
        of whether the cessation provisions might apply.   Indeed,  bearing
        in mind the  respondent's  statutory  obligations  in  relation  to
        foreign criminals, it would have been surprising had she  not  done
        so.  Ms  Lovejoy  accepted  that  the  respondent  was  not  acting
        unlawfully in making the decision to consider  the  application  of
        the cessation provisions.

    20. The decision to consider  the  application  of  Article  1C(5)  is,
        however, quite distinct from the respondent's substantive  decision
        in which she  concluded  the  provisions  applied,  permitting  the
        respondent to take steps to remove the appellant.  It is the latter
        decision that is challenged in this appeal.

    21. As the application of the cessation provisions  is  independent  of
        the conviction, the re-evaluation must, in particular, exclude  the
        fact of his conviction as  a  reason  for  undermining  sustainable
        positive  findings  of  fact.  The  subsequent  conviction's   only
        relevance  is  in  relation  to  further  evidence   requiring   my
        assessment. In that case, I am permitted to assess that evidence on
        the basis that the appellant does not come before me as  a  man  of
        with an unblemished record. The appellant does not, therefore, have
        the benefit of an assessment of any later  evidence  on  the  basis
        that he is a man of good character. Subject to that limitation, his
        conviction has no part to play in the evaluation of  the  cessation
        provisions.

    22. As one who has  been  acknowledged  as  a  refugee,  the  appellant
        benefits from the finding that he was at risk of serious harm for a
        Convention reason.  That finding remains unless  displaced  by  the
        consideration of material that requires it to be re-evaluated.


   Article 1C(5)


    23. As the panel noted in paragraph 10 above, the issue  before  me  is
        whether the appellant can no longer, because the  circumstances  in
        connection with which he has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  have
        ceased to exist,  continue  to  refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
        protection of the country  of  his  nationality.   It  is  for  the
        respondent to establish that the present situation amounts  to  the
        relevant circumstances.  In effect, the burden is placed  upon  the
        respondent to establish the appellant is not at  risk.   Given  the
        low standard of proof that the appellant has to establish in  order
        to make out an asylum claim, the respondent has to establish  that,
        even to that lower standard, the circumstances are  now  such  that
        the appellant is not at risk.


    24. The approach, therefore, is different from an  appeal  against  the
        original determination which stands as the lawful determination  of
        the position as it  stood  when  the  respondent  acknowledged  the
        appellant was entitled  to  protection  by  the  grant  of  refugee
        status.  By its very nature, if the appellant was properly regarded
        as a refugee, the circumstances must have changed if the respondent
        is to make out a case that the appellant is no  longer  a  refugee,
        hence the use of the  words,  'the  circumstances  have  ceased  to
        exist'.

    25. As we found when we  set  aside  the  determination  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal, the circumstances are not limited to a change in  country
        conditions,  that  is,  the  background  information  or  what   is
        sometimes called the 'objective' matter.  Rather  the  Tribunal  is
        permitted to consider the circumstances in the round, including the
        circumstances as they affect the individual.


    26. The change however must not merely amount to a temporary change but
        an enduring one. Whilst no one is in a position  to  guarantee  the
        future, within this limitation, it must be viewed as likely  to  be
        permanent.  Ms Lovejoy rightly points out in her skeleton argument,
        the UNHCR 'Guidelines on  International  Protection:  Cessation  of
        Refugee Status under Article 1C(5) and (6) of the  1951  Convention
        relating to the Status  of  Refugees  (the  "Ceased  Circumstances"
        Clauses)' which provides guidance on Article 1(C)5:


           ...  cessation  practices  should  be  developed  in  a   manner
           consistent with the goal of durable solutions. ... It should not
           result either in persons being compelled to return to a volatile
           situation... Acknowledging these considerations ensures refugees
           do not face involuntary return to situations  that  might  again
           produce flight and  a  need  for  refugee  status...  conditions
           within the country of origin must have changed in a profound and
           enduring manner before cessation can be applied. [para. 6]
           ...
            [clauses should be interpreted strictly][para. 7]
           ...
           A]n essential element  in  such  assessment  by  States  is  the
           fundamental, stable and durable character of the changes, making
           use of appropriate information available in this respect,  inter
           alia, from relevant specialized bodies,  including  particularly
           UNHCR.

   The determination of the asylum claim in 2001


    27. A primary step is to assess the basis upon  which  the  adjudicator
        allowed the appellant's asylum appeal. The source of  this  is  now
        limited to the determination itself, promulgated on 26 April  2001.
        Documents relied upon by the appellant are no longer available.

    28. The appellant born on 29 December 1975 left school in 1990  at  the
        age of 14 or 15. Subsequently he worked as a driver for 4  �  years
        but the job finished in 1995 when he was  aged  19  or  20  and  he
        commenced poorly paid work in a materials company  before  starting
        as a garage mechanic.

    29. The appellant had received 7 or 8 anonymous letters at least one of
        which consisted of words cut out of newspapers. The first  one  was
        received on 7 August 1996, now nearly 19 years ago. The adjudicator
        recorded in paragraph 5 of his determination  that  it  was  posted
        through his door, i.e. was delivered by hand, possibly or  probably
        by the person who wrote it.  It told him to get out of the city and
        that if he did not he would pay the consequences. The next one  was
        received on 15 September 1996 and said "you are a  problem  and  we
        don't agree with you." He told the adjudicator that he did not know
        why the letters were sent to him but  he  had  joined  the  Liberal
        party in December 1995, some eight months before.

    30. He then spoke of the murder of his cousin on 9 November  1996.   It
        was at this point that the appellant decided to resign his position
        in  the  Liberal  party.  According   to   paragraph   5   of   the
        determination, this suggests an involvement between  December  1995
        and November 1996.  Although the paragraph later states that he met
        the president when he handed in his resignation on 17  March  2000,
        the year '2000' must be an error as the  adjudicator  repeated  the
        date as 17 March 1997 in paragraph 9, which makes  better  internal
        sense since he arrived in the UK  on  1  April  1997.   Hence,  the
        appellant's involvement with the Liberal Party lasted, at most, for
        a period between December 1995 and March 1997, a period of some  15
        months. When asked, he was  unable  to  name  the  vice  president,
        secretary and treasurer of the Liberal party.

    31. The appellant stated that there were seven in the group in which he
        was involved and he described the  room  that  his  group  operated
        from.

    32. The work that the appellant  performed  was  in  a  drug  addiction
        campaign in which he met with a group of addicts. This was not full-
        time work.  In paragraph 2 of a statement he made (undated) at pp 3-
        10 of the appellant's bundle, he said:

      "We used to  speak  to  homeless  people  and  drug  users  and  offer
           support. I was heavily involved in all matters and used to chair
           meetings. We used to support poor and homeless people and assist
           them in rebuilding their houses."

    33. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the Secretary of State, made submissions on
        the basis that this was paid employment but it is not clear  to  me
        whether this  was  paid  or  voluntary  work.   The  issue  remains
        unresolved.


    34. The appellant did not know who murdered his  brother;  he  provided
        only limited information about the circumstances of his  death.  In
        paragraph 6 of the determination, it is recorded that the appellant
        did not know who had murdered his brother but it  could  have  been
        the delinquents, as he termed them, who had  sent  the  letters  to
        him. He described them as "going about looking for people  who  are
        involved in politics." In paragraph 7 he said  the  appellant  said
        that he assumed his cousin was killed because he  belonged  to  the
        Liberal Party. After he had  moved  address  he  received  a  third
        letter and it was at this point that he resolved  to  come  to  the
        United Kingdom.

    35. He told the adjudicator that he had  reported  the  matter  to  the
        police who had done nothing but, given the paucity of the  material
        that was available to them,  that  is  not  altogether  surprising.
        They had no means of identifying the sender.

    36. At paragraph 10 of the adjudicator's determination, it is  recorded
        that, after his arrival in the United Kingdom, he was  informed  by
        his elder sister that his younger  sister,  Maria,  was  killed  in
        Pereira on 10 December 1998. The adjudicator noted "He says that he
        believes she was killed because the family were  strong  supporters
        of the party." However the adjudicator and also went on to say that
        the appellant had no idea who shot her. However,  in  paragraph  12
        the appellant is recorded as saying that there were "many people in
        Colombia who did not want the Liberals  in  power."  In  answer  to
        questions provided in cross  examination,  he  confirmed  that  his
        family was not involved in politics, apart from his cousin who  was
        killed in 1995.

    37. On the basis of this material, the adjudicator concluded:

      I had the advantage of having the appellant give  evidence  before  me
           and I was impressed by his forthrightness and  apparent  honesty
           and I have no reason to doubt that he was  telling  me  anything
           but the truth. I have already indicated that I find the  various
           documents lodged in support of his claim to be  genuine.  It  is
           abundantly clear that this young man left Columbia  in  fear  of
           his life. He had received seven or so  death  threats,  some  of
           which (but not all) referred to  his  political  activities  and
           made it clear that he should desist from them and  should  leave
           the country. He reported this matter to the police  who  advised
           him that he should leave for his own safety and after  agonising
           over it and discussing the matter with  his  father  he  decided
           that he had no alternative but to go.  It  is  a  fact  that  he
           cannot say for certain who sent his  death  threats,  but  I  am
           satisfied that the appropriate standard that those threats  were
           sent by persons who were opposed to  his  political  stance  and
           political activities.

      I have considered with care the objective and material put  before  me
           and it is clear that the situation in Colombia is volatile, that
           crime is  rife  and  the  murder  is  common,  particularly  for
           political reasons. The government may be doing the best that  it
           can but  in  my  view  it  is  not  sufficient  to  protect  the
           appellant.

      I accept that  the  appellant  fled  in  fear  of  being  murdered  by
           political opponents. He did not receive protection sufficient to
           allow him to remain in hand, for all the reasons set out  above,
           I am satisfied that he has a well founded  fear  of  persecution
           for eight Convention reason and  accordingly  I  find  that  the
           United Kingdom would be in breach of its obligations  under  the
           Refugee Convention were he to be  returned  and  I  allowed  its
           appeal.

    38. This was a ringing endorsement of the appellant's  credibility  and
        his claim to be in fear of persecution in April  2001.  Neither  of
        these matters is now capable of being reopened. Nor should they be.
        As I have stated, his subsequent conviction  cannot  undermine  the
        positive credibility finding made  in  his  favour.  Thus,  in  the
        application of the cessation provisions, the determination  of  the
        adjudicator stands as the authoritative assessment of his case some
        13 years ago.


   A summary of key findings


    39. There are, however, certain key facts which can are properly  taken
        into account in assessing the current  situation  and  whether  the
        situation has now changed:

        a) there was no evidence as to the identity of the writer or sender
           of the threatening letters;
        b) nothing within them identified the writer or sender;
        c) those letters which  told  him  to  distance  himself  from  the
           Liberal Party were clearly related  to  his  work  in  providing
           support and help to the local community;
        d) the letters were hand-delivered by a person or persons who lived
           locally;
        e) there was no satisfactory evidence as to  the  circumstances  of
           his cousin's murder which the appellant assumed was  because  he
           belonged to the Liberal Party although there was no evidence  of
           the role he played in it;
        f) there was no satisfactory evidence that the death of his younger
           sister Maria was as a result of political activities carried out
           by her, far less that this was a revenge killing  where  he  was
           the intended victim; whilst in paragraph 10 of the determination
           he stated he believed that she was  killed  because  the  family
           were strong supporters of the Liberal  Party,  he  confirmed  in
           paragraph 13 that his family was not involved in politics, apart
           from his cousin;
        g) the appellant himself is poorly educated and this  is  reflected
           in the work that he performed in Colombia as well  as  the  fact
           that he was working as a cleaner in the United  Kingdom  at  the
           time of the adjudicator's determination;
        h) the appellant cannot properly be regarded as a politician in the
           sense  of  having  espoused  well-developed  ideas   about   the
           political future of  his  country  or  having  the  capacity  to
           express them;
        i) his work in Pereira was local  community  work  conducted  by  a
           small group, part-time, from a room in Pereira offering help  to
           those in the area who were homeless or drug addicts;
        j) although  you  adjudicator  described  this  as  his  "political
           activities" it was political only in the sense that  the  scheme
           was supported by the Liberal Party;
        k) whilst the appellant reported  the  threats  to  the  police  in
           December 1996, there was little in  reality  they  could  do  on
           material that was placed on before them;
        l) the high  levels  of  crime  in  Colombia,  and  in  Pereira  in
           particular, place those persons who  are  at  risk  of  targeted
           assassination without a sufficiency of protection;
        m) the Liberal party  was  (and  remains)  the  dominant  party  in
           Colombia;
        n) no consideration was given as  to  the  potential  for  internal
           relocation.


    40. These considerations do not detract from the adjudicator's ultimate
        conclusion that the appellant left Columbia in April 1997  in  fear
        of his life and was, therefore, entitled to be recognised then as a
        refugee.


   The appellant's expert evidence -
   Professor Aguilar's first report


    41. The appellant had adduced expert evidence from Professor Aguilar in
        relation to whether circumstances have changed  in  Colombia  since
        the adjudicator made his decision.    The first report is  dated  6
        May 2014. This material was placed before the First-tier  Tribunal.
        Professor Aguilar is director  of  the  Centre  for  the  Study  of
        Religion and Politics at the University of St  Andrews  and,  since
        1996, has been  involved  in  the  coordination  of  the  Scotland-
        Colombia  link.  He  has  visited  and  lectured  in  Colombia  and
        published a large number of books  on  Latin  America  including  a
        history of Colombia.


    42. In paragraph 10 of his first report, Professor  Aguilar  refers  to
        the 2013 Amnesty International Report which  spoke  of  the  formal
        peace talks between the government and FARC, the first  such  talks
        in a decade. Nevertheless, all parties to the long-running conflict
        continue to be responsible for serious human rights abuses. This is
        amply supported by newspaper reports in which, for example, a newly
        elected senator had been threatened with death along  with  members
        of the Justice and Peace Commission. There are reports of  violence
        from armed gangs and kidnapping.  In  Pereira,  statistics  show  a
        higher rate  of  violent  deaths  than  the  national  average  for
        Colombia. The figure for Pereira was 82 deaths per 100,000 people.


    43. In paragraph 16 of his report, Professor Aguilar stated that it was
        his opinion that those who killed members of the appellant's family
        would be  able  to  ascertain  the  whereabouts  of  the  appellant
        wherever he might relocate and then kill him.  This presupposes the
        ability to identify those who killed members of  his  family.   The
        reason he gave for this sweeping assessment was that residence in a
        particular area of Colombia requires registration in order to  have
        access to housing or health care and those wishing to  find  others
        "could bribe administrative personnel in order to find  details  of
        residence of another person if they want  to  do  so."  Inevitably,
        this would require an investigator to know that the  appellant  has
        returned to Colombia and then to approach every  registration  area
        or district and pay a separate bribe to each official. Accordingly,
        Professor Aguilar's broad assertion that anybody can be located  in
        Colombia is not supported by the reasoning he provides.

    44. In paragraph 17, Professor Aguilar spoke of the  Liberal  Party  of
        Colombia supporting the re-election of the  current  President  who
        spearheads  the  peace  process  in  Colombia.  Not   surprisingly,
        Professor Aguilar identified  such  a  policy  as  being  unpopular
        amongst some within the paramilitary groups and the  drug  dealers.
        As a result, he concluded that  Colombia  remains  a  very  violent
        place where people are killed because of their political ideas  and
        where the past is remembered.

    45. It was on this broad basis that he concluded  the  appellant  would
        not be able to settle anywhere in Colombia and would not be able to
        avoid  those  who  wanted  to  harm  him  in  the  past.   However,
        inevitably, Professor Aguilar was hampered by the fact that no  one
        is able to identify  the  individuals  who  originally  made  death
        threats to the appellant in 2001. There is no evidence  to  suggest
        that they are  members  of  FARC  or  that  this  is  a  reasonable
        inference to be made. The appellant himself does not state that  he
        was ever involved in drug dealing in Colombia and is at  risk  from
        drug dealers by reason of  that.  Accordingly,  the  conclusion  of
        Professor Aguilar in  his  first  report  that  people  are  killed
        because of their political ideas is insufficient to establish  that
        all those who have political ideas face a reasonable likelihood  of
        assassination or that  every  facet  of  an  individual's  past  is
        "remembered". Professor Aguilar's conclusion that  it  is  an  easy
        matter for an individual to ascertain the whereabouts of another by
        bribing an official in the registration area in  which  that  other
        person lives is a wholly impractical solution unless  the  identity
        of the pursuer can be stated with some certainty and his ability to
        reach out to any part of  Colombia  is  adequately  established  by
        credible evidence.


    46. Whilst it may be open to me to consult the register of electors  in
        order to ascertain the whereabouts of all those  on  the  electoral
        roll in the United Kingdom, that is a far cry from maintaining that
        it is a practical proposition to do so or that any  individual  has
        the will and the means to do so, particularly if the information is
        only likely to be provided by bribery.  It  also  presupposes  some
        advance knowledge  of  the  appellant's  return  to  Colombia  (and
        therefore  his  registration  for   housing   and   health   care).
        Accordingly, I am satisfied so that I am sure that  the  conclusion
        of Professor Aguilar misses the mark by a wide margin. It  suggests
        to me that his report lacks common  judgment  in  relation  to  the
        reality of the risk that such individuals face. It is one thing  to
        say that there is large scale violence,  quite  another  to  assert
        that all those living in Colombia are at risk of it to such a  high
        degree as to merit international protection. No-one  suggests  that
        the situation in Colombia is one of such widespread disorder as  to
        place  the  appellant  at  risk  of  Article  15(c)  serious   harm
        sufficient to amount to 'a serious and  individual  threat  to  his
        life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations
        of international or internal armed conflict'.


    47. Similarly a policy supported by the Liberal  Party  which  advances
        the cause of peace and reconciliation may well foster animosity  on
        the part of political opponents or those,  such  as  criminals  and
        drug dealers, who benefit from the current instability. Once again,
        however, such a broad proposition does not support  the  conclusion
        that every member of that political party or those  supporting  its
        aims and objectives, faces a reasonable likelihood of persecution.


    48. Having read Professor Aguilar's first report, I am  left  with  the
        uncomfortable conclusion that, whilst he  has  reliably  identified
        relevant traits in the background material, the conclusions that he
        draws from that material lack realism.  I do  not  regard  them  as
        tenable.

Professor Aguilar's second report

    49.  Professor Aguilar's second report is dated 1 September 2014 and is
        a critique of the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  in  its
        resolution of the appellant's appeal in May 2014. He maintains  the
        validity of his conclusion in the earlier  report  which,  for  the
        reasons that I have already given, I  have  rejected.   Inevitably,
        this approach taints the reliability of  his  subsequent  evidence.
        First, he criticises the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of the
        passage of time, now some two decades, as a material consideration.
          In doing so, he relies upon an increase in murders  between  2012
        in 2013 as a result of the provincial Mafia known as the Cordillera
        taking control of the drug trade and eliminating those  who  oppose
        them. On the basis of this tangential piece of material,  Professor
        Aguilar concludes in paragraph 14 of his report  that  anybody  who
        was of interest to political and violent groups would be of adverse
        interest to the drug gang Cordillera within Pereira.

    50. This sweeping  conclusion,  which  is  a  non-sequitur,  inevitably
        presupposes that the appellant  was  of  adverse  interest  to  the
        provincial Mafia, the Cordillera. However, such a starting-point is
        entirely speculative. An individual who is  involved  in  assisting
        the homeless and drug addicts cannot, inferentially, be assumed  to
        be the target for recrimination on the part of the  Mafia  even  if
        the treatment of drug addiction may be adverse to the interests  of
        the drug barons. Such reasoning, however, does nothing to undermine
        the First-tier Tribunal's consideration arising from the passage of
        time.

    51. If (and this is entirely supposition) the threats were made by  the
        Cordillera Mafia, I find it surprising that they did  not  identify
        themselves in the threats. To have done so would have  immeasurably
        increased the threat. The most one can permissibly say is  that  an
        individual produced the various threatening letters. That does  not
        establish that individual would maintain a continuing  interest  in
        the appellant, given the passage of such a  significant  period  of
        time.

    52. Furthermore, Professor Aguilar's reasoning depends upon the  threat
        emanating from  a  highly  organised,  ruthless  and  commercially-
        motivated organisation such as the Cordillera  Mafia  treating  all
        individuals in Colombia who may be adverse to their interests in  a
        similar fashion. It is one thing for the Cordillera to sanction the
        assassination of another drug baron or a senator who is opposed  to
        their actions, quite  another  for  the  Cordillera  to  use  their
        resources to trace, hunt down and assassinate  a  community  worker
        whose activities ceased in 1997.  This is not remotely possible  or
        likely. Once again,  Professor  Aguilar  has  used  the  background
        material to support a conclusion that it cannot rationally sustain.


    53. For similar reasons, I  reject  Professor  Aguilar's  assertion  in
        paragraph  15  of  his  second  report  that,  when  it  comes   to
        relocation, drug dealers and gangs are part  of  national  networks
        able to trace  anybody  anywhere  in  Colombia.  Once  again,  this
        extraordinarily  broad  statement  of  opinion  depends  upon   the
        appellant having first established that  he  was  pursued  by  drug
        dealers who were part of a national network.  The  appellant  never
        made such a claim. If he had done so,  I  am  quite  satisfied  the
        claim had no evidential foundation. For the reasons I have  already
        given, it is simply impossible for Professor Aguilar to state  with
        confidence that even  a  well-financed  organisation  such  as  the
        Cordillera has the means,  the  sophistication,  the  will  or  the
        ability to trace an individual like the appellant who for a  period
        of 15 months 20  years  ago  was  performing  community  work.  The
        conclusion leaves reality far behind it. His reasoning  to  support
        this claim is that the appellant has relatives in Pereira who would
        eventually know if he is back in the  country.  With  the  greatest
        respect to this argument, it simply holds no persuasive  effect  at
        all.


    54. Finally, Professor Aguilar speaks of whether there is a sufficiency
        of police protection. I entirely agree that the background material
        demonstrates the police were unable to protect  the  7474  murdered
        victims who died between January and April 2013. However, this case
        does not revolve around the adequacy of protection  for  those  who
        have been targeted by an identifiable organisation  with  the  will
        and the opportunity to carry out its threats.  The  issue  in  this
        case is whether such a risk now exists.

Professor Aguilar's third report

    55. Professor Aguilar has written a third report, this  dated  6  April
        2015.  In paragraph 11 he records that Colombia is a large  country
        but the network of drugs, violent cartels and information shared by
        criminal gangs makes it a small country where  it  is  possible  to
        locate people very easily. Once again, he makes a fundamental error
        of asserting that  the  appellant  established  his  pursuers  were
        criminal gangs  and  part  of  a  network  of  drug  dealers  whose
        organisation is so extensive as to permit  information  sharing  at
        such a level that a person of the appellant's profile, derived from
        events that took place long ago, will readily  be  ascertained.  He
        extends the extraordinary  but  unsupported  ability  of  the  drug
        cartels to target individuals as including all those who have spent
        time abroad and are on a wanted list by these criminal networks. No
        prior material has been provided that such  a  wanted  list  is  in
        existence or  that  the  list  would  include  a  person  like  the
        appellant. Nevertheless, on  this  slim  basis,  Professor  Aguilar
        permits himself to conclude that it is very likely the  appellant's
        return to Colombia will become known to his past persecutors.


    56. This is a wholly illusory. His reason  for  doing  so  is  that  an
        individual who has  previously  been  persecuted  would  remain  of
        residual adverse interest because his persecutors have not  changed
        their criminal interests or their location in Colombia. Once again,
        this is a non sequitur. Just because a criminal gang  continues  to
        operate cannot be used, inferentially, as a reason  for  concluding
        that the gang maintains the same level of interest in an individual
        threatened many years ago.


    57. On the basis of this reason reasoning, Professor  Aguilar  provides
        his opinion that because those who  persecuted  the  appellant  are
        still operating in Pereira, regardless of the passing of time,  the
        appellant would be "of considerable interest to them and that there
        would be a residual adverse interest on him." In my  judgment  this
        is perverse. His conclusion, therefore, that any Colombian  citizen
        who has been marked by criminal networks  and  persecuted  is  most
        likely to be in danger of violence and  kidnapping  in  the  future
        regardless of the  passing  of  time.  I  see  no  basis  on  which
        Professor Aguilar could properly  reach  that  conclusion.  In  any
        event, his entire thesis  rests  upon  the  appellant  having  been
        marked out by  a  well-organised  criminal  gang  as  a  result  of
        activities such as to merit a continuing interest in him.  That  is
        far from the reality as we know it to be.


    58. For these reasons none of the three reports provided  by  Professor
        Aguilar offer a persuasive body of  evidence  which  establishes  a
        continuing interest by the person or persons who wrote a number  of
        threatening letters in 1996.

   Analysis - general principles

    59. I begin my  analysis  by  reminding  myself  of  the  very  limited
        circumstances in which it is permissible  for  the  State  (or  the
        Tribunal in an appeal from one of its decisions) from invoking  the
        cessation provisions. The  recognition  that  an  individual  is  a
        refugee is a significant factor in  the  process  of  permitting  a
        victim of persecution to re-settle in a secure environment  without
        the risk that the state will reverse its decision at some point  in
        the future. Such  a  victim  needs  stability  and  the  reasonable
        assurance that he will be permitted to put down his  roots  in  his
        new home. However, these  principles  have  their  limitations.  In
        particular, I am satisfied where the host state  becomes  aware  of
        serious criminal wrongdoing, it is not only permissible but  proper
        that an individual's refugee status should  be  reconsidered.  Such
        cases will happen only very rarely and do  not  endanger  the  vast
        majority of those who have been acknowledged to  be  refugees.  The
        insecurity which this engenders to the individual  and  his  family
        has to be balanced against the seriousness of the offending and the
        fact that the individual alone is responsible for the  position  in
        which he finds himself.


    60. These considerations are voiced by the UNHCR in its  guidelines  on
        international protection and the cessation provisions. Paragraph 10
        speaks of the fundamental character of change. Paragraph 11 states:


      Where indeed a "particular cause of  fear  of  persecution"  has  been
           identified, the elimination of that cause  carries  more  weight
           than a change in other factors. Often, however, circumstances in
           a  country  are  inter-linked,  BD's  armed  conflict,   serious
           violations  of  human  rights,  severe  discrimination   against
           minorities, or the absence of good governance, with  the  result
           that the resolution of that one will tend to lead to improved an
           improvement  in  others.  An  end  to  hostilities,  a  complete
           political  change  and  return  to  a  situation  of  peace  and
           stability remain the most typical situation in which Article 1 C
           (5) ... applies.


    61. It is clear from  this  passage  that  the  UNHCR  was  principally
        considering  a  fundamental  change  in  the  country   conditions.
        Inevitably, where this  has  occurred,  through  no  fault  of  the
        refugee himself, there is a tension between the principle that  the
        refugees should not have  his  status  periodically  reviewed  with
        every change in the circumstances of the country from which he fled
        and  the  justification  for  the  host  state  reconsidering   the
        individual's  refugee  status  when  he  is  no  longer  at   risk.
        Nevertheless,  the  principle  remains  that  if  the  host   state
        establishes there has been a change in circumstances  so  that  the
        erstwhile  refugee  is  no  longer  at  risk,  his  removal  cannot
        constitute a violation of his Convention rights.


   Article 8


    62. The appellant's conviction  and  sentence  demonstrates  a  heinous
        crime which amply supports the respondent's decision to remove him,
        notwithstanding  a  claim  that  his  Article  8  rights  would  be
        violated. The appellant's submissions that it  is  disproportionate
        to remove him bearing in mind the period of time he has been in the
        United Kingdom and the existence  of  family  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom when weighed against the compelling and almost overwhelming
        public interest in his removal do not merit  further  scrutiny.  To
        adopt the parlance of section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration
        and Asylum Act, 2002 as inserted by section 19 of  the  Immigration
        Act 2014, it would not be unduly harsh to remove the appellant.






   The respondent's claim that the appellant is no longer at risk


    63. This leaves only the issue of whether the respondent  has  properly
        established the appellant is no longer at risk in Colombia.

    64. We have already established that, in  principle,  the  individual's
        circumstances may have changed so that the basis on  which  he  was
        granted refugee status  has  ceased  to  exist.  The  adjudicator's
        decision was based on  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's  likely
        activity in Columbia were he to return and upon the truthfulness of
        his declaration that he would  not  return  to  political  activity
        through fear.  I am entitled to consider the facts occurring  since
        the 2001 determination using the  adjudicator's  reasoning  as  the
        starting point.

    65. I approach the assessment on the  basis  that  the  appellant  will
        engage in the same activities  as  he  did  before,  namely,  local
        community work in helping the homeless and drug addicts in  schemes
        organised or supported by the Liberal Party.  Indeed, as the  party
        in power (or sharing power) it would be surprising if such  schemes
        were not funded  or  supported  by  government.   I  disregard  the
        tenuous  basis  on  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the
        likelihood of his further engagement in such activities  by  reason
        of his not having engaged with political  activity  on  the  United
        Kingdom.  There is no reason for him to become politically involved
        in supporting the Liberal Party in the United Kingdom,  indeed,  no
        evidence of its having any profile in the United Kingdom; it is not
        a party  in  opposition  where  sur  place  claims  may  have  some
        relevance.

    66. Whilst the adjudicator found in  2001  the  appellant  discontinued
        that activity through fear, rather  than  a  lack  of  interest  or
        inclination, the issue before me is whether that fear is  currently
        and objectively well-founded.  I  disregard  for  present  purposes
        whether the Liberal Party or any  other  local  organisation  would
        want to use a convicted drug-dealer to man their community schemes.
         I will assume they will because he is a person more than any other
        who could help drug addicts and the vulnerable.

    67. Having considered the basis upon which the  decision  was  made  in
        2001 to acknowledge the appellant as a refugee, I am satisfied  the
        respondent has discharged the burden of establishing the  appellant
        is no longer at risk.  Whilst the appellant has  sought  to  resist
        the respondent's case by adducing evidence from  Professor  Aguilar
        that the appellant continues to be at risk, I reject that  evidence
        for the reasons I have given, namely, that it fails to have  proper
        regard to the evidence that was before the adjudicator and  reaches
        conclusions which are not properly  supported  either  by  relevant
        evidence or adequate reasoning.


    68. The appellant did not give evidence before me in the course of  the
        re-making of the decision, relying instead upon the  burden  placed
        upon the respondent to establish the changed circumstances. Clearly
        the passage of time, in itself, does  not  negative  a  sustainable
        finding that an appellant was at risk of persecution on a  previous
        occasion. If the country conditions have not substantially changed,
        the passage of time may have little or  no  impact  upon  the  risk
        faced by an appellant. However, these cases are fact sensitive. The
        leader of an opposition group who was well known within the country
        of his nationality for his anti-regime  views  is  unlikely  to  be
        viewed any differently when he returns many years later than at the
        time of his departure if conditions  have  not  otherwise  changed.
        However, in the case of an individual who establishes only a  minor
        involvement in politics at a local level, the Secretary of State or
        the Tribunal is entitled to ask itself  the  question  whether  the
        circumstances that prompted his departure many years ago  establish
        a reasonable likelihood that he will  be  at  risk  on  return  two
        decades later.


    69. The appellant was involved in community work, albeit community work
        described by the adjudicator as amounting to political  activities,
        for about 15 months.  He was threatened by a  local  individual  in
        circumstances where it cannot be inferred  this  individual  was  a
        member of a well-organised group whose profile establishes  violent
        opposition to such activities.   There  is  no  credible  evidence,
        notwithstanding Professor Aguilar's claim that  such  people  'have
        memories',  that  whoever  then  targeted  the  appellant  has   an
        individual or collective memory, recorded and engrained,  that  now
        places him at risk.  For this reason, time is a  highly  persuasive
        factor to be taken into account in considering current risk.     If
        that is correct then the appellant is no different from  any  other
        person doing community work on behalf  of,  or  supported  by,  the
        Liberal Party.  There is no evidence  that  these  individuals  are
        currently at risk such as to merit international protection.

    70. The background  evidence  establishes  that  notwithstanding  talks
        between the government and FARC,  all  sides  are  responsible  for
        serious human rights abuses. But the evidence of violence shows, in
        many cases, a targeted approach.  Thus, a senator or members of the
        Justice and Peace Commission may face a risk but that should not be
        equated  with  a  generalised  level  of  risk  for  much   broader
        categories of Colombian citizens. Violence and kidnapping occur but
        even a higher death rate in Pereira (82 deaths per 100,000  people)
        does not show a generalised risk.  There is evidence of an increase
        in murders between 2012 in 2013  as  a  result  of  the  Cordillera
        taking control of the drug trade  and  eliminating  its  opponents.
        That does not establish the appellant, with his profile as we  know
        it to be, is at risk.  It is impossible to  elevate  the  level  of
        risk (notwithstanding the peace process, those opposed  to  it  and
        the violence that exists in Colombia) to  such  a  degree  that  it
        poses a risk to all those who involve themselves  in,  or  support,
        the Liberal Party to whatever extent and at whatever  level  either
        in the present or in the past, especially the long-distant past.

    71. Registration as  a  prerequisite  for  residence  in  any  part  of
        Colombia and the risk that this information may become available on
        payment of a bribe fails to establish that a returnee's presence in
        Colombia will become known  or  that  anybody  can  be  located  in
        Colombia. Certain drug dealers and gangs, doubtless, may form  part
        of a national network which will be able to reach out in a way that
        a lone criminal will not but not all those who  have  any  dealings
        with them, in however tangential a way, will be at risk.   As  part
        of this assessment, the Tribunal is permitted to take into  account
        the formidable  logistical  problems  that  would  inevitably  face
        criminals in maintaining a data-base (a) of those  of  interest  to
        them, (b) making it available across the  country,  (c)  monitoring
        all those who return to the country and (d) recording how long they
        have been absent and  (e)  then  distinguishing  between  those  of
        interest to them and those not.  The appellant's  claim  to  be  at
        risk is  unsupported  by  any  persuasive  evidence  that  such  an
        information-gathering system exists capable of creating a data-base
        or that the information  is  disseminated.   Such  a  structure  is
        speculative enough but it goes beyond mere speculation  to  suggest
        that there is a reasonable  likelihood  that  the  appellant  would
        become a victim of the system such as to put his life or welfare at
        risk.


    72. I am completely persuaded that, were the  appellant  to  return  to
        Colombia, he would not be at risk were he to resume  activities  at
        the former level. The only conceivable way in which this  appellant
        might be at risk is if the unidentified writer of  the  threatening
        letters becomes aware of the appellant's  return  to  Colombia  and
        maintains an adverse interest in the appellant which would  be,  on
        its face, inexplicable. Even adopting the lower standard  of  proof
        it is simply speculation  to  infer  that  there  is  a  reasonable
        likelihood of history repeating itself.

   Internal relocation


    73. When the appellant's appeal was determined in 2001, the adjudicator
        made no findings in relation to the appellant locating  himself  in
        another part  of  Colombia.  It  was  an  issue  which  would  have
        benefitted from his consideration.  On the evidence before him,  it
        could not be inferred that the writer of  the  threatening  letters
        was part of a complex web of individuals opposed to  persons,  like
        the appellant, who acting on  behalf  of  the  Liberal  party  were
        performing community work.  Unless  there  was  evidence  that  the
        reach of the person or persons  targeting  the  appellant  extended
        throughout Colombia, internal relocation  was  a  potential  issue.
        There was no express reference to it  being  unreasonable  for  the
        appellant to re-locate to another large urban centre and nor can it
        be inferred.


    74. The UNHCR Guidelines on the "Ceased Circumstances" Clauses notes:

      Refugee Status can only come to an end if the basis for persecution is
           removed without the precondition that the refugee has to  return
           to specific safe parts of the country in order to be  free  from
           persecution.  [17].


    75.  On  its  face,  this  is  a  somewhat  surprising  provision.   It
        contemplates  the  situation  where  a  person  who  was   formerly
        recognised  as  a  refugee  nevertheless  remains  entitled  to  be
        recognised as a refugee  even  though  he  no  longer  fulfils  the
        requirements for recognition as one by reason  only  of  his  being
        able to return in safety to a place in his  own  country  where  it
        would  be  reasonable  for   him   to   relocate.   Doubtless   the
        justification  for  this  is  the  recognition  (touched  upon   in
        paragraph 58 above)  that  an  individual  who  is  a  refugee  and
        entitled to re-settle in a secure environment should not  face  the
        risk that he  will  be  required  to  re-settle  once  again  in  a
        different location (a second re-settlement) at some  point  in  the
        future.  In essence it operates as a  conclusive  finding  that  it
        would not be reasonable for him to re-locate  for  a  second  time.
        This is to be contrasted with the situation where the  danger  that
        caused him to flee no  longer  applies  in  any  part  of  his  own
        country.  In such a case, he  can  return  to  his  home,  a  place
        familiar to him, unlike a place where it is possible for him to re-
        locate.


    76. Thus, although I would  have  found  that  internal  relocation  is
        available to this appellant and that it would be reasonable for him
        to avail himself of it (not  unduly  harsh)  that  outcome  is  not
        permissible under the Guidelines.  No argument was addressed to  me
        as to the whether I am bound by the Guidelines as a matter of  law.
         (I think not: a 'Guideline' is just  that:  a  guide  but  not  an
        obligation).   However, they are plainly of persuasive effect and I
        would not depart from them unless satisfied that there are  serious
        reasons for doing so.  In the circumstances of this  case,  if  the
        respondent had wished to raise  an  alternative  flight  option  he
        might have done so in 2001 and the absence of consideration of  the
        point in the 2001 determination suggests that it  was  not  raised.
        Further, whilst there may be cases where it would be reasonable  to
        raise an internal flight argument in a cessation case,  such  cases
        will be rare and the absolute bar  upon  raising  it  suggested  by
        UNHCR may represent a  reasonable  and  proportionate  response  to
        striking the balance between affording a  person  recognised  as  a
        refugee  with  appropriate  stability   and   an   (over-)rigorous,
        periodic, re-assessment of risk.


    77. For these reasons, the appellant's relocation to a  different  part
        of Colombia does not form part of my consideration in the re-making
        of this decision.






Conclusion

    78. I am satisfied that the respondent has  discharged  the  burden  of
        establishing that  there  is  no  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
        appellant is currently at risk of serious harm were he to return to
        his home, notwithstanding the findings made by the  adjudicator  in
        2001 on the basis of which the respondent recognised the  appellant
        as a refugee.  Accordingly, he no longer establishes he is entitled
        to asylum or humanitarian  protection  or  protection  pursuant  to
        Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.  Absent such a risk, the  interference
        he and his family will face with their private and family life will
        be justified on an assessment of  its  proportionality  bearing  in
        mind  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending   and   the
        respondent's justifiable reliance upon the strength of  the  public
        interest in his removal.


   DECISION

      The First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  I
           substitute a determination dismissing  the  appeal  on  all  the
           grounds advanced.






                                                              ANDREW JORDAN,
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                               17 April 2015
