
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00058/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 April 2019                             |On 3 May 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  PEDRO [J]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Khan, of Susan Paul Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (hereafter  SSHD)
         appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  C
         Bennett (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated  on  25  January
         2019, allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Pedro  [J]  (hereafter  claimant)
         against the SSHD's decision of 18 December 2017 refusing to  revoke
         a  deportation  order  made  against  him  on  4  August  2015  and
         implemented on 27 August 2015. The claimant had a right  of  appeal
         against the  SSHD's  decision  by  virtue  of  regulations  36  and
         37(1)(d) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2016 (the 2016 Regulations).


Background

      2. I summarise the salient features of this appeal. The claimant is  a
         national of Portugal who was born in 1996. He  entered  the  UK  in
         2005 when he was 9 years old accompanying his parents and  attended
         school. His mother died in childbirth in 2011 (and his brother  was
         stillborn) because of medical negligence.


      3. The claimant was convicted on 2  counts  of  robbery  committed  in
         November 2014 when he was 18 years old and a first-year  university
         student and he received concurrent sentences of 28 months detention
         in a Young Offenders Institution on 4 February  2015.  On  21  July
         2015 the SSHD decided to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
         claimant. Although representations had been made on his behalf  and
         an appeal lodged against  the  decision  to  make  the  deportation
         order, the claimant withdrew his appeal on 13 August  2015  and  he
         was removed to Portugal on 27 August 2015.

      4.  On  6  April  2017  the  appellant's   current   solicitors   made
         representations on his behalf seeking revocation of the deportation
         order. The representations set out how the claimant had  been  very
         traumatised by his mother's and brother's death in  2011,  set  out
         the claimant's  circumstances  in  Portugal,  and  noted  that  the
         claimant was now married to [CJ] (a Portuguese national  exercising
         treaty rights in the UK). On 30 November 2017 the  claimant's  wife
         gave birth to a son in the UK. The  claimant's  wife  also  resides
         with her daughter from a previous relationship. The wife's daughter
         has no contact with her biological father.

      5. In refusing to revoke the deportation order the SSHD noted that the
         claimant had been encountered at Paris  Immigration  Control  on  5
         November 2016 attempting to board a train  for  the  UK.  The  SSHD
         accepted that the claimant had not been  involved  in  any  further
         criminal activity but was not satisfied that  sufficient  time  had
         passed to show that he no longer posed a risk of further offending.
         There was to be no evidence that he had  adequately  addressed  the
         reasons for his offending behaviour or had undertaken any course or
         program. The SSHD was not satisfied there  had  been  any  material
         change in the claimant's circumstances.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge considered a witness  statement  and  an  undated  letter
         written by the claimant as well as written and oral  evidence  from
         the claimant's wife, father and  brother.  The  judge  additionally
         considered a  bundle  of  documentary  evidence  including  a  pre-
         sentence report prepared on 12 January 2015 and psychiatric reports
         prepared in 2013 and  2015,  details  relating  to  travel  between
         Portugal and the UK by the claimant's wife, and other letters  from
         family friends.


      7. The judge set out the circumstances of the robbery convictions  and
         the relevant legislative framework,  and  summarised  the  concerns
         identified by the SSHD  in  the  December  2017  decision  and  the
         evidence from the witnesses. From [30] onwards the  judge  set  out
         his findings of fact and his reasons in support of those  findings.
         The judge reminded himself of the serious nature of the  claimant's
         offending but concluded that he no longer  represented  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  the  fundamental
         interests of society, and that there had been a material change  in
         the claimant's circumstances since the making  of  the  deportation
         order. The judge found that the refusal to revoke  the  deportation
         order did not comply with the principle of proportionality and gave
         detailed reasons for this finding. The judge  consequently  allowed
         the appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

      8. The grounds are twofold. The 1st ground  contends  that  the  judge
         materially misdirected himself in law. The particularisation of the
         1st ground essentially contends that the  claimant  had  not  taken
         responsibility for his actions and had blamed his offending on  the
         death of his mother, and that the judge erred in finding  that  the
         claimant did  not  present  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat to the fundamental interests of  society.  Reference
         was made to the absence of any courses undertaken by  the  claimant
         and the inadequacy of the claimant's income in Portugal, suggesting
         that he may reoffend for financial gain. The Grounds  contend  that
         there was no updated  medical  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
         claimant had dealt with his mental health  problems  and  that  the
         judge failed to adequately consider an attempt by the  claimant  to
         re-enter the UK in November 2016. The SSHD additionally  relied  on
         further alleged attempts by the claimant to enter the UK after  the
         promulgation of the judge's decision.


      9. The 2nd ground contends that the judge  failed  "to  give  adequate
         findings on a material matter." This ground asserts that the  judge
         was not entitled to find that there  was  a  parental  relationship
         between the claimant and his son because, in an undated letter, the
         claimant admitted to only being with his son on 3 or  4  occasions.
         The SSHD criticises the judge's finding that it  would  be  in  the
         best interests of the claimant's son and stepdaughter (the daughter
         of his wife) to remain in the UK to have regular contact with their
         close relatives.  The  grounds  then  contended  that  the  judge's
         proportionality  assessment  contained  legal  errors  because  the
         claimant spoke Portuguese and was familiar with Portuguese  culture
         because the inevitable consequence of deportation was separation of
         families. In support of  this  latter  proposition  that  the  SSHD
         relied on Court of Appeal decisions relating to non-EEA deportation
         cases.

     10. Although permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by
         the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  granted
         permission on 26 March 2019 stating that there was  arguable  merit
         in the assertion that the judge's conclusion that there had been  a
         material change in the claimant's circumstances,  was  inconsistent
         with findings that he had otherwise made and was not  supported  by
         the evidence. Judge Kebede also found  there  was  "some"  arguable
         merit in the 2nd ground.

     11. In her oral submissions and the 'error of  law'  hearing  Ms  Jones
         relied on the grounds and submitted that the judge was not entitled
         to find that the claimant had a genuine parental relationship  with
         his son and that the judge gave in at good reasons.

Discussion

     12. There is no merit whatsoever in  the  SSHD's  submission  that  the
         judge materially misdirected himself  in  law.  Having  invited  Ms
         Jones to draw my attention  to  the  alleged  misdirection  in  the
         determination she was unable to do  so.  To  her  credit  Ms  Jones
         accepted that she could not identify any misdirection in law as  to
         the applicable legal test. In his decision the judge  set  out  the
         relevant legal provisions in a comprehensive manner ([10] to  [15])
         and correctly directed himself as to  the  burden  and  balance  of
         proof [17]. The judge set out the provisions of Reg 34  noting  the
         need to be satisfied that  there  was  a  material  change  in  the
         claimant's  circumstances  that  justified  the   making   of   the
         deportation order, and that the claimant needed to demonstrate that
         the criteria for making the deportation order as  set  out  in  Reg
         23(6) and Reg 27 were no longer satisfied. The  judge  was  acutely
         aware of the need to show  that  the  claimant's  personal  conduct
         represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
         affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, and that the
         maintenance of the deportation decision  had  to  comply  with  the
         principle of  proportionality.  The  judge  set  out  the  relevant
         provisions in  Schedule  1  to  the  2016  Regulations  identifying
         factors relevant to "the  fundamental  interests  of  society"  and
         noted the need to take into account the best interests of children.
         Then at [37] and [38] the judge again reminded himself of the  need
         to be satisfied of a material change in circumstances and  set  out
         in considerable detail the numerous reasons why  he  was  satisfied
         the  claimant  no  longer  represented  a  genuine,   present   and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  any  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society. These included, inter alia,  the  conclusions
         of the Probation Officer that the claimant was at low risk  of  re-
         offending, that a supervision requirement was  not  appropriate  as
         they had been no previous  offending  and  his  offending  was  not
         associated with drug or alcohol  dependency,  the  opinion  of  the
         Probation Officer that the claimant bitterly regretted what he  had
         done and found his experience of prison to be salutary, that he had
         not committed any subsequent offences, that the offending had to be
         considered in the context of his mental health,  that  it  was  now
         over 7 years since the death of his mother and over 4  years  since
         his offending, and that he now had stability through  his  marriage
         and the birth of his son. The judge found  that  the  claimant  had
         learned from his period of imprisonment  and  his  deportation  and
         that he was highly sensitive to the  consequences  of  any  further
         criminal behaviour.  These were conclusions rationally open to  the
         judge on the evidence before him.

     13. The grounds are simply wrong in so far as  they  suggest  that  the
         claimant  sought  to  deflect  responsibility  for  his   offending
         behaviour and attribute it to the death of  his  mother.  When  one
         fully  considers  the  claimant's  witness  statement  it   becomes
         apparent that the claimant was setting out the context in which his
         offending occurred. At paragraph 5 he stated, "I am not  trying  to
         justify what I did. I deeply regret and am  remorseful  as  regards
         the issue  concerning  my  conviction  in  2014."  The  judge  gave
         detailed consideration to the  conclusions  contained  in  the  two
         Consultant Psychiatrist reports and the Probation Officer's  report
         which indicated that, at the time he committed the  robberies,  the
         claimant was suffering from a moderately severe depressive  episode
         and a prolonged grief reaction. The judge was  unarguably  entitled
         to consider the circumstances surrounding the claimant's  offending
         when  determining  whether  he  still  constituted  a  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat.

     14. The judge  adequately  addressed  the  absence  of  any  course  or
         programme undertaken by the claimant to address his offending.  The
         judge was demonstrably aware of the absence of such evidence  (see,
         for example, [20],  [22  (d)],  [33],  [37]).  At  [25]  the  judge
         recorded the view of the  Probation  Officer  that  the  claimant's
         offending was not related to alcohol or drug misuse but  rather  to
         his unresolved grief issues relating to his mother's death, and the
         Probation Officer's opinion that a supervision requirement was  not
         appropriate. At [37(e)] the judge accepted that  the  claimant  had
         not undertaken any courses with a view to  addressing  the  reasons
         for his offending behaviour but was satisfied that the  passage  of
         time and the claimant having formed the relationship with his  wife
         and having become a father and a substitute father had given him  a
         focus to his life such that he no longer needed  to  undertake  any
         course or "rehabilitative work." In so concluding  the  judge  took
         into account relevant considerations and made a finding  rationally
         open  to  him  on  the  evidence.  The  grounds  contend  that  the
         claimant's  income  from  his  part-time  work   in   Portugal   is
         inadequate, but the Probation Offices  report  concluded  that  the
         claimant's offending was not financially motivated. The  judge,  in
         any  event,  took  full  account  of   the   claimant's   financial
         circumstances.

     15. The grounds content that the judge erred in finding that there  had
         been a material  change  in  circumstances  because  there  was  no
         medical evidence that the claimant had dealt with his mental health
         problems.  The  judge  however  considered  the  medical   evidence
         relating to the moderately severe depressive episode and  prolonged
         grief  reaction  suffered  by  the  claimant  (at  [25]  and  [26])
         following the death of his mother,  noted  the  conclusion  of  one
         Consultant Psychiatrist  that  the  offending  was  "truly  out  of
         character", and concluded that the claimant no longer suffered from
         either a grief reaction or a depressive episode given the length of
         time since the death of his  mother  and  given  that  he  was  now
         married and had become a father and  a  substitute  father  to  his
         wife's daughter. At [37(d)] the judge  stated,  "common  sense  and
         experience tell that, over time, young men and young women get over
         the  deaths  of  their  parents,  even  though,  in  the  immediate
         aftermath of the death, they may suffer from substantial depression
         will stop in these circumstances, I  am  not  satisfied  that  [the
         claimant] continues to suffer from either a  grief  reaction  or  a
         depressive  episode,  let  alone  a  moderately  severe  depressive
         episode or a prolonged grief reaction." The judge  provided  cogent
         reasons in support of his conclusion and was rationally entitled to
         his conclusion.

     16. Nor is there any merit in the  SSHD's  contention  that  the  judge
         failed to attach appropriate weight to the claimant's attempt to re-
         enter the UK in November 2016, or that the judge's findings were in
         any way inconsistent. The judge considered this incident in  detail
         at [32]. At [37(h)] the judge properly found that  the  failure  by
         the claimant to explain or express regret in respect of his attempt
         to enter the UK was a significant negative  factor,  but  he  noted
         that the incident occurred over 2 years previously and  before  the
         claimant's son was born. The judge properly noted that there was no
         evidence of any subsequent attempt to breach the deportation order.
         The judge attached appropriate weight to  the  Paris  incident  and
         balanced that against his other findings and gave adequate  reasons
         for concluding that  the  incident  did  not  undermine  the  other
         evidence advanced on behalf of the  claimant.  The  allegations  of
         further attempts by the claimant to enter the United Kingdom  after
         the promulgation of the judge's decision are clearly immaterial  in
         determining whether the judge's decision contains  an  error  on  a
         point of law.

     17. There is no merit in the submission that the claimant did not enjoy
         a parental relationship with his son. The author of the Grounds  of
         Appeal appears to misinterpret the claimant's evidence, as recorded
         by the judge. The Grounds content that the judge was  not  entitled
         to conclude that there was a genuine parental relationship  because
         the claimant admitted he had only 'been with' his son  on  3  or  4
         occasions. This  reference  was  contained  in  an  undated  letter
         written by the claimant. The Grounds do not refer to  the  evidence
         recorded by the judge at [21] and [29]  from  the  claimant's  wife
         relating to her  visits  to  Portugal  with  her  son  to  see  the
         claimant. These visits varied in duration from 3 days to one  month
         and were confirmed by documents relating to the travel. Nor do  the
         grounds refer to  the  evidence  of  the  interaction  between  the
         claimant and his son, or the interaction between the  claimant  and
         his wife's daughter [21(d)]. Having regard to the  decision  in  SR
         (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018]  UKUT
         00334 (IAC) I have no doubt that the judge was rationally  entitled
         to conclude that the claimant did have a parental relationship with
         his son.

     18. At [36] the judge set out detailed reasons for concluding that  the
         best interests of the claimant's child and his  partner's  daughter
         were that they live with both the claimant and  their  mother.  The
         grounds content that there was no basis in law  for  the  judge  to
         conclude that it was in the best interests of  the  claimant's  son
         and his wife's daughter to remain in  regular  contact  with  their
         close relatives in the UK. This is a  somewhat  bizarre  assertion.
         The best interest assessment is a factual one that takes account of
         all relevant considerations. At [36(c)] the judge accepted that the
         immediate family of the claimant's wife lived in the  UK  and  that
         his son's paternal relatives also lived in the  UK  and  rationally
         concluded that, if the claimant's family lived together in the  UK,
         there was a greater chance that the claimant  and  his  wife  would
         have the assistance of other members of their  respective  families
         and bringing up  and  looking  after  the  children  and  that  the
         children would see their grandparents and other  members  of  their
         immediate families. This was an entirely logical conclusion.


     19. In actuality the  grounds  are  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
         conclusion that the claimant did not constitute a genuine,  present
         and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society and that there had been a material  change  in
         his circumstances. The judge  however  gave  detailed  and  legally
         sustainable reasons for his findings. The Grounds do  not  disclose
         any error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal does not contain any error of law.
The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]                               1 May 2019
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
