
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    DA/00604/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 9 September 2020                  |on 11 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                 ANDRZEJ [F]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Rea, of Rea Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 4 December 2019, the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016.    FtT  Judge
    David C Clapham, SSC, dismissed his appeal by a decision promulgated on
    17 April 2020.  On 20 May 2020, the FtT granted permission to appeal to
    the UT, on the view that the judge arguably did not deal with the  wide
    range of considerations in regulation 27 (5).

 2. The hearing on 9 September 2020 was clerked from the tribunal  hearings
    centre at George House, Edinburgh.  I conducted it from a hearing  room
    at the tribunals hearing centre,  Aberdeen.   Representatives  attended
    remotely. No members of  the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely.

 3. (The ground of appeal is as set out in regulation 36, not in section 82
    of the 2002 Act, as stated by the FtT.)

 4. Mr Howells conceded that the  FtT  erred  by  referring  to  Goralczyk,
    [2018] CSIH 60, [2018] SLT 1183, but failing to apply it; by failing to
    address proportionality in terms of regulation 27;  by  addressing  the
    best interests of the appellant's three children in cursory terms;  and
    by failing to consider whether the appellant's rehabilitation was  more
    likely in the UK or in Poland.

 5. Parties agreed that the outcome should be as follows.

 6. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  Under section 12 of the  2007  Act,  and
    under Practice Statement 7.2, the case is remitted to  the  FtT  for  a
    fresh hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Judge Clapham.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

     [pic]

     9 September 2020
     UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

