
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/00975/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |            Decision & Reasons          |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On 7 June 2017                      |            On 20 June 2017             |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the DRC and his date of birth is  8  June
    1956.

2.   There is a protracted history which I will attempt  to  summarise.  The
    Appellant arrived in the UK on 6 December 1994 and he  claimed  asylum.
    This application was refused on  18  April  1995  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by an Adjudicator on 27 August 1996. His  evidence,  at  that
    time, was that he had worked under General Beoko in Zaire and  was  the
    manager of the General's wife's coffee business and her  bodyguard.  He
    gave an account of how a road traffic accident caused  the  General  to
    turn against him. This account was  rejected  by  the  Adjudicator  who
    found the Appellant not credible.

3.   The Appellant made a fresh claim and he was  granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain as a refugee on 28 November 2002.  This was  granted  on  the
    basis of the  Appellant  having  been  a  member  of  the  Presidential
    Security Division (DSP).  In 1999 he  was  convicted  on  two  separate
    occasions of common assault. Both assaults were  on  women  whilst  the
    Appellant was working as a taxi driver.  On 11 December  2002,  he  was
    convicted, following a trial, of rape and sentenced to eight years. The
    victim of the rape was a  stranger  to  the  Appellant  and  vulnerable
    because she had been drinking. He did not use his job as a taxi  driver
    to lure her into the car, but he took her to an area where she did  not
    want to go, raped her using violence and threw her  on  a  rubbish  tip
    after he had finished with her. He was in custody either on  remand  or
    as a  serving  prisoner  between  2002  and  2007.   Cessation  of  the
    Appellant's refugee status was confirmed on 10 June 2008.

4.   On 27 June 2008 a deportation order was made.  The Appellant requested
    this to be revoked on the grounds that he  has  an  EEA  partner.   The
    Respondent refused this on 7 November 2008 and the on 3 April 2009 the
    Appellant appealed.  Removal directions were cancelled and the decision
    of 7 November 2008 was withdrawn.  A new decision was  served  refusing
    to  revoke  the  deportation  order  and  certifying  the   Appellant's
    application which gave him an out of country right of  appeal.  Removal
    directions were then cancelled on a number of occasions  following  the
    issue of proceedings for judicial review.

5.   The Appellant made an application on 9 October  2009  for  a  residence
    certificate under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006  EEA  Regulations")  but  this  was  rejected,  and  an
    application to the Court of Appeal was  refused  on  5  November  2009.
    Further removal directions were cancelled.

6.   A series of applications were made by the Appellant in relation to  his
    relationship with an EEA national and a number of attempts were made by
    the Respondent to deport the Appellant, which were cancelled  following
    applications for judicial review resulting in a stay on removal  on  29
    March 2010 to enable him to marry his now wife on 15 April 2010.

7.   On 17 April 2010 he was notified of liability to deport him  under  the
    2006 EEA Regulations and a new decision to deport him was  made  on  27
    September 2010.  The Appellant appealed. His appeal was dismissed by  a
    panel ("the first panel") on 24 March 2011.  The  evidence  before  the
    first panel was that he worked for the DSP during the Mbutu regime, but
    the first panel noted that the Appellant advanced  this  claim  in  his
    second witness statement after the commencement of his evidence and did
    not give oral evidence about this.  The first panel concluded that  the
    Appellant had not established risk on return and dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Refugee Convention and Article 3.  The first panel  dismissed
    the appeal under Article 8 and the 2006 EEA Regulations.  The Appellant
    became appeal rights exhausted on 15 May  2011,  permission  to  appeal
    having been refused by the FtT and the UT.  He made an  application  to
    judicially review the decision of the first panel and this was  refused
    on 12 September 2012 and certified as totally without merit.

8.   A further deportation order was made on 26 March 2012.   The  Appellant
    then made a fresh claim for asylum which was refused in a  decision  of
    24 October 2012.  The  Respondent  certified  the  asylum  claim  under
    Section 72 of the 2002 Act, concluded that the Appellant  was  excluded
    from  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to  paragraph  339D  of   the
    Immigration Rules, refused the Appellant's asylum claim, rejecting that
    he would be at risk  on  return  and  concluded  that  deportation  was
    justified  and  proportionate  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security and public health under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

9.   The Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 3 following a hearing before a panel ("the second
    panel") at Taylor House on 30, 31 October and 13  November  2013.   The
    Appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed. The second panel rejected  the
    evidence about his political activities and that he would be at risk as
    a failed asylum seeker but found that he would be at risk on return  as
    a deportee.  However, this decision was subsequently set  aside  as  it
    was found by the Upper Tribunal that the second  panel  had  materially
    erred.  The appeal then came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Miller ("the judge").

10.  The judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal in  a  decision  promulgated
    on 15 February 2017, following a hearing at Hendon  Magistrates'  Court
    on 24, 25 and 26 January  2017.   In  a  30-page  decision,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.  The  Appellant  was  granted
    permission, by Upper Tribunal Perkins, on 11  April  2017.  The  matter
    came before me on 7 June 2017 to determine whether  or  not  the  judge
    erred.

The Appellant's Evidence Before Judge Miller

11.  The Appellant's claim before the judge, in  a  nutshell,  was  that  he
    became a member of the Congolese  Resistance  High  Council  (HCRC)  in
    2010. In  2014  the  HCRC  joined  several  other  diaspora  resistance
    movements and formed the Alliance Des Forces Congolaises  (AFC).  Since
    2012 his role has been that of propaganda officer.  He  plays  a  major
    role in the  organisation.  He  mobilises  Congolese  nationals  during
    demonstrations and  despatches  newsletters  relating  to  issues  that
    affect the DRC which he distributes these in Congolese churches,  clubs
    and shops.  His evidence was  that  his  activities  had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities as a result of videos on the internet  and
    demonstrations outside the DRC Embassy in London. The evidence was that
    the vice president of the AFC was a mole acting on behalf of the Kabila
    regime and feeding back information to the Kabila regime.

12.  The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's claim. He had  originally
    claimed asylum, on different grounds, asserting that as a member of the
    PSD and had been suspected of disloyalty by the Kabila regime  and  was
    wanted.  The Respondent referred to the findings of the first panel  in
    2011.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant did  not  raise  at  the
    hearing before the first panel that he was involved  in  any  political
    organisation here in the UK or  that  he  was  involved  in  sur  place
    activities.  The Respondent accepted that  it  may  be  true  that  the
    Appellant joined the organisation in 2011 and engaged in some political
    activities, but that he had exaggerated the significance  of  his  role
    and that he would not, as a result such limited activities, come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities.

13.  The Appellant is married to an EEA national and he has  adult  children
    here. He has a daughter, J, who was born 10 October 2001. She was  aged
    15 at the hearing before the judge.

The Decision of Judge Miller

14.  The judge heard evidence from  the  Appellant,  Mr  Fuamba  (the  AFC's
    president), Lisi Kutabikia (executive member of the AFC), a friend, LM,
    the Appellant's wife, BK and his  daughter  AS.   The  judge  also  had
    before her the expert evidence of Catherine Ramos and Mr Ntung  and  an
    Appellant's bundle of 859 pages.  There was a skeleton argument  before
    the judge prepared by Mr Bundock who represented the Appellant  at  the
    hearing before the judge.

15.  It is necessary for the purposes of this decision, in the light of  the
    grounds of appeal, to go through the findings  of  the  judge  in  some
    detail.  The judge did not find that the  Appellant  was  credible  for
    many reasons.   The  judge  found  it  difficult  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant was not fluent in English considering the period of time  and
    that has been here and that he had previously stated that his  children
    are English speaking and do not speak any other language and  following
    this the judge concluded as follows;


         "I find it very difficult to accept that he is not, in 2017, fluent
         in English.  I further conclude,  particularly  having  regard  to
         other  findings  regarding  his  credibility,   that   his   likely
         motivation in giving his evidence in Lingala was to afford him more
         opportunity  to  consider  what  answer  he  would  give   to   the
         questions".

16.  The judge attached significance to the finding of the first panel  that
    the  Appellant  was  not  credible,  in  the  light  of  the   numerous
    discrepancies in his evidence, as found by the first panel.  The  basis
    of the Appellant's asylum claim before the judge was different to  that
    he relied on before the first panel and which had been wholly rejected.
     The judge referred to  the  Appellant's  sixth  witness  statement  of
    2 November 2016.  She stated that he became a member of HCRC in  2010;
    however, the judge noted that there was no mention  of  any  sur  place
    activities in his first witness  statement  of  12  November  2010,  or
    second of 18 February 2011 or any indication that he was opposed to the
    DRC authorities at that time.

17.  The judge attached significance to the  findings  of  the  first  panel
    that the Appellant has never  been  part  of  any  group  which  is  in
    opposition to the Kabila  regime  and  that  he  would  not  have  been
    perceived as such on return.   The judge attached weight to the failure
    of the Appellant to advance a case before the first panel  relating  to
    sur place activities and concluded that he only dated his activity back
    to 2010 as a response to the decision of the first panel.

18.  The judge concluded that the Appellant sought to  mislead  the  medical
    profession, having advanced evidence in 2013 before  the  second  panel
    that he could only give limited information about  the  change  in  his
    account as a result of the psychological effects suffered as  a  result
    of his experiences in the DRC.  The judge noted that the Appellant told
    the second panel in  2013  that  he  started  his  involvement  in  DRC
    politics in 2006/2007, but this had not been raised  before  the  first
    panel in 2011 and there was no evidence to support this.

19.  The judge found that there were many different examples of  conflicting
    accounts that the Appellant has given at various times.  The judge made
    reference  to  the  report  of  Dr  A  Basu,  a   consultant   forensic
    psychiatrist. Dr Basu examined  the  Appellant  and  concluded  in  his
    report of 4 January 2011, that the Appellant had told him that  he  had
    completed the sex  offender  treatment  programme  whilst  in  custody,
    however, the judge noted that in the Appellant's witness  statement  of
    25 October 2013, his evidence was that he had not undertaken the course
    and the judge found it particularly disturbing that the Appellant  told
    Dr Basu something which was untrue and likely to affect the  assessment
    of whether or not he poses a risk.

20.  In relation to sur place  activities  the  judge  stated  at  paragraph
    104(ix) as follows

         "With regard to the evidence of sur place activities, most  of  the
         evidence submitted, in the form of videos, was before the  Tribunal
         which heard his appeal in 2013.  The  other  material  dating  from
         2016, was not long before the hearing was listed in December  2016.
         I find there is force in the submission which was made on behalf of
         the respondent, namely that it is only when  the  appellant  has  a
         hearing coming up, that he engages in activities, or causes himself
         to be filmed, and that the absence of evidence  relating  to  other
         periods  indicates  that  his  prime  motivation  is  in  obtaining
         evidence which might stop his removal, rather than because  he  has
         any degree of political commitment or involvement"

21.  The judge commented on the evidence that the Appellant gave in  respect
    of his son, C, and why he was in prison, noting that  he  gave  several
    replies and that his interest was in assisting  his  (the  Appellant's)
    position, rather than giving a truthful account.

22.  The judge was not impressed with the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his
    wife.  When he was asked whether she received housing, child benefit or
    tax credits, he replied that his wife did not receive benefits and then
    he stated that maybe she received child benefit.  The  judge  found  as
    follows

          "I would have expected  him  to  have  been  fully  aware  of  the
         benefits received.  I was left in doubt as to whether the Appellant
         does live full-time with his wife, and whether the relationship  is
         as close as presented".

23.  The  judge  had  considerable  concerns  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    attitude, recording his evidence as follows;

         "I apologise to all the  parties -  my  family,  the  judge.   The
         apology comes from my heart. Also to the victim".

    But the judge concluded that the Appellant's concern for the victim was
    an afterthought.

24.  The judge did not find Mr Fuamba to be an impressive  witness  and  the
    reasons for this are contained in paragraph 114.  Likewise, she did not
    attach significant weight to the evidence of Miss Kutabikia or  LM  for
    reasons that can be found at paragraphs 115  and,  116.      The  judge
    acknowledged, at paragraph 105  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  now
    principally based on sur place activities in the UK and  he  considered
    the expert evidence before him.  She found  that  the  evidence  of  Ms
    Ramos had, to a large extent been overtaken by the country guidance  of
    BM and Others (returnees) - criminal and non-criminal)) DRC CG  [2005]
    00293.  In relation to Mr Ntung's report the judge found  that  despite
    having made "somewhat  bold  statements,"  Mr  Ntung  did  not  provide
    references for his assertions and his views would appear  to  stand  in
    isolation from  other  evidence,  including  the  COIS  Report  and  he
    attached limited weight to it.  The judge found at [114] that Mr Fuamba
    and the organisation AFC  are  not  as  significant  as  suggested  and
    remarked on  the  lack  of  background  evidence  which  would  suggest
    otherwise.  The judge went onto conclude  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence relating to the group which the judge found remarkable if they
    were of any significance as far as  the  authorities  in  the  DRC  are
    concerned.

25.  The Appellant submitted 7 pieces of what  is  referred  to  as  "video"
    evidence. Video 1 purports to show a meeting outside the South  African
    Embassy in London in 2012.  Video 2 purports to show a panel discussion
    at the Selby Centre and  is  said  to  show  the  Appellant.   Video  3
    purports to show the Appellant protesting outside the French Embassy in
    London in  2013  or  14  in  military  fatigues  demonstrating  against
    Francois Hollande and during this  video  he  gives  a  speech  to  the
    camera.  Video  4  purports  to  show  the  Appellant   at   a   public
    demonstration outside the DRC Embassy in London in 2016  and  September
    or October 2016.  Video 5 is a CD purporting  to  show  a  panel  group
    discussion and offices at the offices of the AFC  which  is  an  online
    broadcast.  Video 6 is a reference to an internet recording in  October
    2016.  Video 7 purports  to  shows  a  demonstration  outside  the  DRC
    Embassy in London in November 2016.  The judge found as follows;


         "117     With regard to the videos, most  had  been  shown  at  the
             hearing in 2013 before Judge Scott-Baker [ the second  panel].
             With regard to the first one, taken at what I accept  was  the
             South African Embassy, it did  not  show  the  actual  meeting
             which took place, whether this was with the Ambassador, or one
             of his staff.  The appellant, somewhat surprisingly, moreover,
             stated that he did not know whether a South  African  official
             who was shown was the Ambassador or simply  a  representative.
             If they were introduced to the  Ambassador  and/or  had  talks
             with him, I am satisfied that he would have known who it  was.
             The film did not, in any event, appear to show anything  which
             would damage the appellant, were it to come into the hands  of
             the DRC  authorities.  In  any  event,  I  find  it  extremely
             unlikely that the video would be seen by them,  since  it  was
             presumably taken by an organisation the appellant supports.


         118. Only two of the videos shown were  taken  in  2016.  -  They
             showed the appellant, I accept, at  demonstrations.   However,
             he did not appear to show any signs of wishing to disguise his
             identity, and he did not say  anything  which  might  indicate
             that  he  would  use  or  advocate  force  against   the   DRC
             authorities.  I received no evidence which suggested that  any
             of the material would ever  reach  the  Kabila  government  or
             security  forces   in   Congo,   and   I   do   not   believe,
             notwithstanding the wholly  confusing  evidence  regarding  Mr
             Rukengwa, that any of the material has come into the  regime's
             possession.


         119. I would add that the appellant in this case  is  somebody  who
             has come close, on a number of occasions, to being  put  on  a
             plane to the DRC. - The fact that he has shown no  signs  of
             anxiety regarding being filmed, and that he has been unable to
             explain how material would reach the  authorities,  let  alone
             show that they are in  possession  of  any  adverse  material,
             leads me to the view that he is unknown and is, and would  be,
             of no interest to the DRC government whatsoever."

26.  In relation to sur  place  activities  generally  the  judge  found  as
    follows

    104. (xiii)   With regard to his sur place  activities,  he  was  asked
             about videos taken between 2012 and 2016.  He  confirmed  that
             there were other ones, but stated: "This is  a  selection". -
             Given that he has been at all times represented by experienced
             firms of solicitors, and that he, himself, is now  experienced
             in  Court  hearings  relating  to  either  asylum  claims   or
             deportation  orders,  I  am  satisfied  that  he   knows   the
             importance of  such  evidence,  and  would  not  have  omitted
             anything material to his case if it was likely to assist  him.




         (xiv)    Finally, the appellant was asked about the  fact  that  he
             had allowed himself to be filmed notwithstanding the fact that
             he was claiming that the authorities in the DRC were likely to
             see the evidence.  He was asked whether it was not foolish  to
             allow this to happen.   His  response  was  that:  "I  am  re-
             claiming our right.  The current government is not  doing  its
             job properly". - He appeared to  be  either  uninterested  or
             oblivious to the fact that he was placing himself  in  obvious
             danger (on his own account).  When it was put to him  that  he
             had stated that he was "ready to die for my  people",  and  he
             was asked why therefore he did not go back to fight for  them,
             he simply replied: "Political speech".

27.  The judge concluded that the Appellant is not  and  has  never  been  a
    member or supporter of APARECO and  did  not  have  a  significant  and
    visible profile within that organisation.  The  judge  noted  that  his
    evidence is not that he has ever  been  associated  with  APARECO,  but
    instead the Appellant's evidence is that he has a role within the  AFC.
     The judge concluded that  there  is  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
    conclusions of BM.  The judge found that the Appellant would not be  at
    risk on return to DRC.

28.  In  relation  to  deportation,  the  judge  considered  the  sentencing
    comments made by the sentencing judge on 11 December 2002.  The  judge
    stated as follows


         "Your victim is a stranger to you, she was a vulnerable  woman,  in
         that she had been drinking, she was on her own in the  early  hours
         of the morning.  While I accept that you did not use your job as a
         minicab driver to lure her into the car, you did nevertheless, take
         her to an area in which she did not want to go.  You then used some
         violence upon her, in order to have sexual  intercourse  with  her.
         That rape was, of course, an appalling  physical  invasion  of  her
         privacy.  You added to that, the degradation of throwing her  on  a
         rubbish tip once you had finished with her".

29.  The judge took into account that the Appellant pleaded not  guilty  and
    material that was before  him  relating  to  risk  on  return  and  the
    Appellant's attitude  and  rehabilitation.   In  2002  the  Appellant's
    situation was reviewed whilst he  was  in  prison  and  a  board  which
    included the governor of his prison stated;


         "Earlier this year both the parole board and the seconded probation
         officer felt that you still present a serious risk  to  the  public
         and  whilst  we  understand  that  there  have  been   difficulties
         associated with whether or not you are in denial  of  your  offence
         and suiting you to  a  sex  offenders'  treatment  programme,  your
         solicitors have stated  that  you  are  now  willing  to  undertake
         adapted  SOTP  which  will  provide  a  good  basement   for   risk
         assessment".

30.  The judge attached significance to the conclusions of the board  and  a
    NOMS report which was completed on 24 May 2009 in which  the  following
    was stated

         "[AS] has committed three offences against women (two  violent  and
         one sexual).  At no time has he ever accepted culpability  for  his
         offending or shown any remorse for his actions.  It is my view that
         [the Appellant] poses an ongoing risk to  any  females  that  enter
         into disagreement with him or refuse him what he would perceive  as
         his sexual entitlement".

31.  The report states further as follows;


         "[The  Appellant]  has  never  accepted  his  guilt  and  has   not
         undertaken any offence focussed work whilst in custody.   The  fact
         that he has two previous offences of violence against  women  would
         indicate a generally detrimental view towards women and a level  of
         misogynistic attitudes".

32.  The judge attached weight to the report  prepared  by  the  Appellant's
    offender manager, Anthony Halls, on 23 June 2010 who stated;


         "On the occasions that I have  met  with  [the  Appellant]  he  has
         continued with  his  assertion  that  the  victim  was  in  fact  a
         prostitute and that she fabricated the rape allegations as a way of
         exacting revenge for his nonpayment of her fees.   During  previous
         conversations [the Appellant] has exhibited a generally detrimental
         view of women as exampled by his two previous offences of  assault,
         which were both perpetrated against female passengers in his taxi".



33.   The  judge  attached  weight  to  the  evidence  of   the   consultant
    psychiatrist Dr Basu (report dated 4 January 2011). The Appellant  gave
    a different account of his experiences  in  the  DRC  to  Dr  Basu.  In
    relation to his first conviction for common assault he denied  that  an
    assault had taken place and in respect of  the  second  conviction  the
    Appellant told him that he had been advised to plead guilty despite his
    innocence.  With respect to the trigger offence the Appellant stated to
    Dr Basu that "temptation was human" and he rationalised the incident by
    telling himself that it was simply "quick business" and that he had  no
    intention of pursuing it  in  order  for  it  to  become  a  consistent
    relationship.  The Appellant told Dr Basu that the victim had made many
    such rape allegations in court but he also stated that he  had  a  "bad
    conscience"  after  the  incident.   The  judge  noted  that  what  the
    Appellant told Dr Basu about the rape was  not  a  reflection  of  what
    happened, in particular, he said that he and the victim had gone  their
    separate ways after the ordeal, whilst in fact the Appellant had thrown
    the victim on a rubbish dump. The Appellant told Dr Basu  that  he  had
    completed the sex offender treatment programme whilst this was not  the
    case.

34.  The judge made reference to the decision of the  first  panel  in  2011
    which found concerns about the Appellant's attitude  and  rejected  the
    submissions then made in 2011, on behalf of the Appellant that he was a
    "changed man".  The first panel rejected this  and  concluded  at  that
    time that the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interest of society which is the protection of lone females from sexual
    assault or rape and it is clear that the judge attached significance to
    this.

35.  The judge found that there was nothing in the  evidence  that  she  had
    seen or heard to lead her to depart from the view of the  first  judge.
    She did not accept that the Appellant had changed, particularly in  the
    light  of  the  lack  of  expert  evidence  from  a   psychiatrist   or
    psychologist since the decision of the first  judge.   The  judge  took
    into account the evidence that was before the  Tribunal  in  2013.  The
    Appellant's evidence was that he  regretted  the  pain  caused  to  the
    victim and that he was sorry he had caused her so much  suffering.  His
    evidence was that he had  accepted  responsibility  and  had  become  a
    better man.  However, the judge had regard to the  oral  evidence  that
    the Appellant gave at the hearing  in  2013  which  indicated  that  he
    persisted to deny the offence, particularly that recorded at  paragraph
    93 of the decision of the second panel which was as follows;


         "He had told Dr Basu that he had not raped the woman and there  had
         been consensual sex with a disagreement over the fee.  He  said  at
         the hearing that there had been a misunderstanding over money.   He
         said that he had asked what had happened and he had told  him  what
         had taken place.  He said that he had not left  her  on  a  rubbish
         tip".

36.  The judge attached weight to the evidence of Lisi Kutabikia  and  found
    that it was clear from her oral evidence that she did not believe  that
    the Appellant had committed the rape. The judge attached  weight  to  a
    petition from the local church petitioning for  the  Appellant's  early
    release.  In that document the following is stated "we believe that  he
    has served enough time for the alleged  committed  crime".   The  judge
    found that the Appellant had not been  open  even  with  those  in  the
    church about his behaviour.

37.  The judge attached significance, to the fact that the Appellant was  at
    the hearing before her aged 60 and that he was aged 46  when  convicted
    of the rape and that he had not been  convicted  of  any  other  matter
    since 2002. Fourteen years had passed since the  conviction.   However,
    the judge took into account that he has spent  much  of  that  time  in
    prison and stated at para 124;

         "... that, since his release there has been an ongoing 'battle'  in
         which he and the Respondent have been engaged, with regard  to  his
         proposed deportation.  He has accordingly had every  reason  to  be
         extremely careful in his behaviour".

38.  The judge attached weight to the Appellant's marriage to BK  but  noted
    that he was in a relationship with her at the time  that  he  committed
    the offence and that this was not a sufficiently "inhibitive factor" to
    prevent his behaviour.  The judge attached weight  to  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his children including  J,  but  noted  that  he  had
    children in 2002 but this did not stop him from offending.

39.  The judge reached the following conclusions;

          "126.   Having considered all the evidence in this case, I am more
                than satisfied that the appellant's  personal  conduct  does
                still represent "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of
                society", that being the protection of  women.   I  find  no
                evidence that he has changed  his  attitudes  towards  women
                generally, or that he has any regret about  the  offence  he
                committed, save for the problems it has caused him  and  his
                family.  Although the precise level of risk may be difficult
                to quantity, I find that it is still significant,  and  that
                the consequences of his re-offending are likely  to  have  a
                very serious impact on any victim.  I find, moreover,  as  I
                have indicated above, that he is  someone  who  is  not  un-
                intelligent, but who is prepared to tell untruths, adapt his
                evidence, and employ every tactical means to persuade  those
                responsible in assessing him that he has changed.   However,
                I find that he cannot be trusted."

40.  The judge went on to consider proportionality, taking into account  the
    Appellant's age and health and a report from the Appellant's GP  of  20
    August 2013.  The judge concluded that if he had any significant health
    problems whether physical or  psychological  there  would  be  evidence
    before him.  The judge did not attach weight to the evidence of Dr Basu
    because he did not accept that the Appellant gave an honest account  to
    Dr Basu or the other experts he has seen.

41.  In relation to the impact on the  Appellant's  family  the  judge  made
    findings at paragraph 127(ii);

         "With regard to the appellant's family and  economic  situation,  I
         accept that removal would have an impact on his family.  -  None of
         them have indicated that they would wish to go to the DRC with him.
          However, I do not accept his daughter, [AS] assertion  that,  even
         if the Kabila government were no longer in office, she would not go
         to see him in the DRC.  If this is indeed her position,  I  suspect
         that it is because the bonds between her and him are not  as  great
         as have been presented.  In this regard, I refer to the appellant's
         relationships with his sons, M (C) (P89), S (P93), and G (P96).  -
           None of them have updated the statements they  prepared  over  5
         years ago.  All of them, at that time, referred  to  needing  their
         father and to his support and guidance.  It only became apparent at
         the hearing that all 3 have been  convicted  of  serious  offences,
         which have resulted in their being further separated from him.   In
         addition, [C] is due to be deported to the DRC himself.  I do  not
         accept that the appellant, or his wife, were in ignorance as to the
         proposed deportation of [C], unless again, the  links  between  the
         family members are not as close as they have  maintained.  However,
         if the appellant is deported, he will, at least, have  the  company
         of one of his siblings.  With regard to  the  appellant's  wife,  I
         find it difficult to assess how she would react to the  appellant's
         removal. - She has, in any event, been deprived of the appellant's
         presence for very many years, as a result of his  own  criminality.
         As I have stated, it is not clear whether their relationship is  as
         close as both have stated.  She, in  any  event,  comes  originally
         from the DRC.  Should she wish to visit the appellant, or even live
         there with him, I see no significant obstacle to this happening.  I
         am, of course, aware of the position of [J].  She  is  someone  who
         has sadly already suffered disruption in her life  because  of  the
         absence of the appellant.  She has also suffered from her  brothers
         being imprisoned.  However, although I accept that she is likely to
         miss him, she would, of course, be able to visit  him  in  the  DRC
         with other family members, and having  regard  to  everything  else
         that I have stated, I do not consider that either on its own, or in
         conjunction with other points which might mitigate in favour of the
         appellant being allowed to remain in this country, it would  render
         his removal disproportionate".

42.  The judge took into account the length of  residence  here  and  social
    and cultural integration.  She attached weight to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for over 22 years  and  acknowledged  that
    this was a lengthy period, but he concluded that  the  Appellant  would
    not have difficulties in readjusting.  Having found the  Appellant  not
    credible, the judge was not satisfied that he does not  have  relatives
    or friends there and the fact that he chose to give evidence in Lingala
    suggests that despite the length of stay here he retains strong  social
    and cultural links with DRC.  The judge attached a significance to  the
    Appellant having not worked here since 2002 and he  concluded  that  it
    was unlikely that he would work again given his age and the  fact  that
    he would not be able to be employed as a cabdriver or where women might
    be exposed to risk.  The judge concluded that in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence it was difficult to envisage how he would manage in  the  DRC,
    particularly with regard to employment. However,  the  judge  concluded
    that he has friends who all appeared to be from the DRC they  would  be
    able to provide some assistance with finding employment.

43.  The judge concluded that his presence in the UK continued to  represent
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  fundamental
    interests of society which is  the  protection  of  women  from  sexual
    assault or rape.

The Grounds of Appeal

44.  There are five grounds of  appeal.   Grounds  1  to  3  relate  to  the
    decision under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  Grounds 4 and 5 relate to the
    decision of the judge in relation to the Appellant's asylum  claim.   I
    will deal with ground 3 first.

Ground 3

45.  It is argued that the judge erred in assessing  risk  and  whether  the
    Appellant continues to constitute a present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat, because at para 124 the judge failed to consider that  even  if
    the appeal was successful the Appellant would continue  to  have  every
    reason to be careful.  The  judge  also  ignored  the  fact  that  many
    offenders are unable to  control  offending  and  that  the  fact  this
    Appellant can is evidence that he is of low risk of offending.   It  is
    also asserted that the judge failed to consider  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence.

46.  Mr Bundock in his skeleton argument before the judge  argued  that  the
    Appellant has permanent residence. However, this was  not  accepted  by
    the judge and this  is  not  challenged  in  the  grounds.   The  judge
    proceeded on the basis that the  Appellant  has  the  lowest  level  of
    protection afforded to him  under  Regulation  21,  that  the  relevant
    decision was on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
    health and that it was not taken to serve economic means. This  is  not
    challenged in the grounds before me.

47.  Like the first panel  in  2011,  the  judge  found  that  the  personal
    conduct  of  the  Appellant  represented   a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society; namely, the protection of  women  from  sexual  assault  or
    rape.

48.  It is unarguable that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's evidence which she records at para 46, the thrust of  which
    is that the Appellant now understands that a woman can change her mind.
    However, she was entitled to reject this in the light of the  extensive
    and persuasive evidence which supported a finding that there  had  been
    no change in the Appellant's attitude.  I refer  specifically  to  para
    123 of the decision.

49.  The judge was entitled to attach weight to  the  Board  Recommendations
    dated 17 October 2006, the NOMS report of 24  May  2009,  the  Offender
    Manager report of 23 June 2010, what the  Appellant  told  Dr  Basu  in
    December 2010, the findings of the first panel in 2011, the Appellant's
    evidence before  the  second  panel  in  2013,  the  evidence  of  Lisi
    Kutabikja and the church petition. This evidence did  not  support  the
    Appellant's evidence of a  change  in  attitude.  Whilst  the  material
    relied on was historic (this was not a point raised in the grounds), as
    properly recorded by the judge there was  no  up  to  date  independent
    assessment of risk or  expert  psychiatric  evidence  produced  by  the
    Appellant in support of his case.  There is no challenge to the judge's
    reliance on this evidence.

50.  The evidence before the judge unequivocally pointed  to  the  Appellant
    continuing to deny that he  had  committed  an  extremely  serious  and
    violent rape on a stranger. Not only did the evidence support  a  total
    failure to take responsibility for the offence, but it pointed  towards
    a pernicious attitude  towards  the  victim.    At  various  times,  he
    suggested that she was a prostitute and that sex was consensual. It  is
    worth noting the lawful and sustainable findings of the first panel  in
    respect of risk in 2011, after the Appellant had served  his  sentence,
    and his own evidence as recently as 2013 before the second panel.    It
    is without doubt that there was  no  rehabilitation  of  the  Appellant
    whilst in prison and he failed to explain what  had  given  rise  to  a
    complete turnaround in his attitude since 2013. There was  no  evidence
    of counselling, psychotherapy or psychiatric treatment.

51.  In support his assertion that he had changed, the Appellant  relied  on
    his own evidence and that of his family and that he had remained out of
    trouble for what is, by any account,  a  considerable  period.  He  was
    released from serving an eight-year sentence in 2007; however,  shortly
    after that he was placed in immigration detention until 2011. The judge
    was wholly aware that he had not reoffended since his release  and  she
    attached significant and appropriate weight to this (see para 124).

52.  The Appellant's evidence  was  effectively  that  he  had  a  damascene
    conversion (which must have occurred since  he  gave  evidence  to  the
    second panel in 2013 considering his oral evidence at that  time),  and
    he now sees the error of his ways, but his evidence was weak and wholly
    unsupported. This had been wholly rejected by the first panel  in  2011
    and not supported by his damaging evidence  in  2013.   The  judge  was
    aware of the Appellant's propensity to be dishonest regarding  what  he
    told Dr Basu  in  2010.   The  judge  was  clearly  of  the  view  that
    notwithstanding the passage of time (five years), the Appellant, whilst
    in denial, could not be rehabilitated and it  followed  he  remained  a
    significant threat.

53.  The grounds challenge the finding of the judge that  the  Appellant  at
    para 124 that he," has accordingly every reason to be  careful  in  his
    behaviour because of the impending deportation" (see para  124).   This
    finding was open to the judge.  It should be considered in the  context
    of the Appellant's complex immigration history, his sheer determination
    to remain here and again the lack of remorse and his continual  denial.



54.  The grounds before me seek to distinguish  between  an  individual  who
    has no control  over  his  criminal  behaviour  and  someone  like  the
    Appellant who, Mr Bundock argued, can  clearly  control  his  behaviour
    having remained out of trouble for many years  and  as  such  does  not
    present a risk. I am not persuaded by this  argument,  particularly  in
    the absence of any up to date  expert  evidence  before  the  judge  in
    respect of this Appellant and the risk he poses  to  the  public.   The
    argument may have some force if the Appellant was found to be genuinely
    remorseful having accepted responsibility his criminal conduct, but  in
    this case the judge was wholly entitled to view the period of time  the
    Appellant had remained here  since  his  release  without  having  been
    convicted of a criminal offence with scepticism.  It  is  worth  noting
    that the Appellant came here in  1994  and  five  years  after  he  was
    convicted of two offences against women in 1999 and then again  of  the
    trigger offence in 2002.  I am not sure from the evidence when  exactly
    the offences were committed, but the proposition that he now presents a
    low risk of re-offending because  he  has  not  been  convicted  of  an
    offence since 2011, in the  context  of  the  lack  of  rehabilitation,
    remorse, independent evidence and the rough timeline,  is  an  argument
    that the judge was wholly entitled to reject.

55.  The judge, no doubt, also had in mind  the  two  previous  offences  of
    common assault which were committed  prior  to  the  rape  (perpetrated
    against women whilst the Appellant was working as a  taxi  driver)  and
    that there was an escalating pattern of offending as found by the first
    panel in 2011. In addition, Part 1 of the Sex  Offenders  Act  of  1997
    applied, given the length of sentence and the Appellant is required  to
    register  indefinitely.   The  judge  took  into   account   that   the
    Appellant's family life did not prevent the Appellant from offending in
    2002.

56.  The judge was manifestly  entitled  to  conclude  that  this  Appellant
    continues to constitute a present and sufficiently serious  threat  and
    the argument advanced in the grounds is without merit.  The judge fully
    appreciated that the risk of re-offending is key  to  appeals  of  this
    nature.

Grounds 1 and 2

57.  These grounds should be dealt with together. It is  asserted  that  the
    judge erred because she failed to make a finding in respect of J's best
    interests, failed to take into  account  evidence  relating  to  J  and
    failed to take into account material evidence relating to BK.

58.  Mr Duffy conceded at the hearing before me that the judge did not  make
    an assessment of J's best interests and I agree.  I conclude  that  the
    judge did not properly consider the position of the Appellant's wife at
    para 127 (ii) because she did not take into  account  that  she  was  a
    refugee.    In  respect  of  proportionality  the  judge   erred   when
    considering the Appellant's wife and J specifically at para 127 (ii).

59.  There is no  reference  in  the  decision  to  the  evidence  of  Peter
    Horrocks, an Independent Social Worker, dated 24 October 2013 and  that
    of Lesley Philips, a Child Protection Officer, at J's school, dated  13
    October 2016. Whilst, I accept that J's  interests  are  a  significant
    factor in the proportionality assessment, they are  not  determinative;
    however, the omission by the judge is an error of law.

60.  At the time of the hearing before the judge, J  and  her  parents  were
    living together, but this had not always been the case. Her father  was
    sentenced when she was one. When he was released in 2011 she  was  aged
    ten.  She was 15 at the date of the hearing and had  been  living  with
    him since his release. There was evidence that she would visit  him  in
    custody and there is no reason to doubt this.  According  to  the  2013
    report, she suffered sleeping and eating problems and when  her  father
    was placed in immigration detention there was a downturn in educational
    achievement. The author of the report documents the negative long  term
    effects on separated families generally and  specifically  on  J.    He
    states that a "permanent removal of her father from the UK would have a
    significant impact on [J's] already fragile emotional development, with
    likely a significant impact on both her physical  development,  if  she
    were once again to stop eating and her  educational  development"  (see
    para 4.28)

61.  The letter from Lesley Philips states she has  great  concern  for  the
    welfare of the family in the event of the Appellant's  deportation  and
    that in the past there has been  concern  about  the  J's  mother,  but
    through the "tremendous support" of the Appellant J has  done  well  at
    school has been settled and comfortable in her home  environment.   The
    author of the letter believes that without the Appellant's support  J's
    education would be affected.  There is an undated letter from J in  the
    bundle in which she expresses her desire for her father to remain.

62.  It is of course in J's best interests for her  father  to  remain  here
    with her as part of a family unit, but that  is  not  determinative  of
    proportionality. It is a significant factor in the  Appellant's  favour
    to which significant weight is to be attached.  However,  in  assessing
    proportionality a holistic assessment needs to be carried  out  and  in
    this case, I accept  Mr  Duffy's  submission  that  the  error  is  not
    material, because ultimately the decision to deport  the  Appellant  is
    proportionate.

63.  It is not a viable option  for  Appellant's  wife  or  J  to  join  the
    Appellant in the DRC.  BK is a refugee,  having  been  granted  refugee
    status in Germany,  and  her  unchallenged  evidence  is  that  she  is
    traumatised by her experiences in the DRC.  The decision to deport  the
    Appellant will separate him from his daughter and wife and wider family
    here.

64.  The Appellant did not produce up to date  evidence  in  respect  of  J,
    save the letter from the Child Protection Officer. The social  worker's
    report represents the position  in  2013  and,  in  respect  of  J,  it
    primarily focuses on the effect on her of her father being released and
    then further detained shortly after.  She was aged 12 at  the  time  of
    the report and aged 15 at the hearing.

65.  The position had changed in 2017, in so far that J was at  least  three
    years older and  a  certain  level  of  maturity  and  age  appropriate
    independence can be assumed from this, whilst she  no  doubt  has  also
    forged a closer bond with her  father.   The  evidence  of  the  social
    worker establishes that in 2013 there was a risk of reoccurrence of  an
    eating disorder and damage  to  her  education  should  her  father  be
    deported. The letter from the Child Support  Officer  establishes  that
    deportation will have, in 2017,  a  detrimental  impact  on  J  in  the
    context of her education and home life. This is hardly surprising.  The
    evidence before the judge did not establish that  in  2017  deportation
    would have a detrimental impact on her physical well-being.  There  was
    no medical evidence to support this.  However, it is beyond doubt  that
    separation from her father will be very distressing  for  her  and  her
    mother and wider family and  that  she  has  a  history  of  an  eating
    disorder.    Since the report in 2013 J has continued to live with  the
    uncertainty of her father's immigration status, but there was no up  to
    date evidence before the judge about the impact of this on her.   J has
    extended family here and, from the evidence, it is  clear  that  for  a
    period of her life she lived here with an aunt. Her mother will  remain
    here and there is extended family  here  to  support  them.   Her  best
    interests in this case do not prevail over  the  threat  posed  by  her
    father.

66.  The grounds challenge the assessment of proportionality relating  to  J
    and the Appellant's wife.   The  errors  made  by  the  judge  are  not
    material to  the  outcome.    The  judge  made  extensive  unchallenged
    findings on other matters (see para 127)  in  respect  of  integration,
    age, state of health, economic circumstances and  length  of  residence
    here. These findings are relevant to the assessment of  proportionality
    and are in favour of deportation.  The judge's findings as to risk  are
    lawful and sustainable.  The judge properly directed herself in respect
    of the 2006 EEA Regulations (see paras 94- 97) and she properly applied
    them.  The judge properly focused on the risk of  re-offending  as  the
    central element in this case.

67.  Ground 2 raises a challenge the finding of the  judge  in  respect  the
    Appellant's equivocal evidence about the welfare benefits that his wife
    receives and the conclusion (at para  127  (ii)),  in  respect  of  the
    quality of the marriage, but this amounts to a mere  disagreement  with
    the finding which is one that was open to the  judge.  However,  it  is
    immaterial to proportionality. The Appellant  poses  a  threat  in  the
    terms expressed in Regulation 21 (5) (c), and the strongest  factor  in
    his favour, when assessing proportionality is that of J,  but  this  is
    not sufficient, despite the  separation  of  the  family  and  negative
    impact on her, to outweigh the threat posed by  the  Appellant.  It  is
    unarguable that the quality of the relationship  the  Appellant  enjoys
    with his wife would make any material difference to the outcome in this
    case.

Ground 4

68.  The thrust of ground  4  is  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  risk
    independently of credibility in respect of the  Appellant's  attendance
    at demonstrations outside the DRC Embassy  in  2016  and  in  so  doing
    failed to properly consider the country guidance case of  BM  and  that
    the Appellant may have been directly seen, identified and monitored  at
    the protests which took place at the embassy's door.

69.  Mr Bundock made reference to the skeleton  argument  which  was  before
    the judge. Paragraph 87 of BM deals with those who are considered to be
    opponents of the Kabila regime by reason of their sur place  activities
    in the United Kingdom.  It reads as follows;

         "The external opposition of APARECO to the governing regime of  DRC
         is overt and visible.  Its highest  profile  activities  unfold  in
         public places, accessible to all.  Activities of  this  nature  are
         accompanied by advance publicity [...]


         In common with many comparable regimes throughout the  world,  both
         present and past, the DRC  government  has  a  strong  interest  in
         opposition organisations, including  APARECO.   Such  organisations
         are monitored and data  is  recorded.   This  includes  information
         about  the  identities  of  the  most  prominent  members  of  such
         organisations, that is to say their  leaders,  office  holders  and
         spokespersons [...]


         The monitoring of APARECO (UK), is likely to be undertaken  by  and
         on behalf of the DRC Embassy in London.  This is  the  agency  with
         the most obvious  motivation  to  carry  out  and  coordinate  such
         scrutiny.  Such scrutiny is likely to generate periodic reports  to
         the DRC, in particular its ANR and DGM agencies".


70.  Mr Bundock submitted that the Appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  had
    been involved in substantial and visible sur place political activities
    since at least 2011 and that he had participated in organised  protests
    in London which have been documented online.

71.  I conclude that there is no error of law. The ground has no  substance.
    The judge properly assessed  risk  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    attended  the  demonstrations  in  2016.  The  judge   considered   the
    Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  online  activities   and   his
    involvement with AFC.  He concluded that the AFC was not a  significant
    organisation and that the Appellant had, in any event, exaggerated  his
    activities and that there was no evidence that the video evidence would
    come to the  attention  of  the  authorities.  Moreover,  there  is  no
    specific coherent challenge to  these  conclusions  or  the  underlying
    findings of the judge in respect of the evidence of the Mr  Fuamba,  Ms
    Kutabikja or LM (save the issue raised about  the  date  of  the  fifth
    video which is raised in ground 5). In relation to the  video  evidence
    the judge found this would not put him at risk  because  there  was  no
    evidence that any of the material would reach the Kabila government  or
    security forces.  There is no challenge  to  this.  The  Appellant,  as
    found by the judge, was unable to explain how the material would  reach
    the authorities.  Significantly there is no challenge to  the  findings
    in respect of the expert evidence.  A proper reading  of  the  decision
    makes it clear that the judge concluded that the  activities  in  which
    the Appellant had taken part would not put him at risk  and  would  not
    come to the attention of the authorities. These findings  are  grounded
    in the evidence, adequately reasoned and entirely sustainable.

72.  The judge accepted the Appellant attended  two  demonstrations  outside
    the DRC Embassy in 2016, but did not accept the evidence in respect  of
    the extent of his activities.  The Appellant is not and has never  been
    affiliated  with  APARECO  or  an  opposition   organisation   of   any
    significance and it was not accepted that he is a prominent  member  of
    any organisation.  The Tribunal found in BA that monitoring of  APARECO
    (UK) is likely to be taken by and on  behalf  of  the  DRC  Embassy  in
    London, but the background evidence does  not  support  the  contention
    that someone with the Appellant's profile (as found by the judge) would
    be monitored  demonstrating  outside  the  embassy  even  when  wearing
    military fatigues.  The judge may not  have  considered  the  issue  of
    monitoring outside the embassy as a discrete issue, but no  doubt  this
    is because the background evidence does not support the assertion  that
    this Appellant would be of any interest to the authorities and that his
    activities outside the embassy would have been monitored.

Ground 5

73.  Mr Bundock conceded that ground 5 was not his strongest point  and  did
    not expand on this ground in oral submissions. There is a challenge  to
    the judge's conclusions in relation to the Appellant's choice  to  give
    evidence through an interpreter.  This finding must  be  considered  in
    the context of the findings of the judge. However, on a proper  reading
    of the decision, in the context  of  the  significant  and  sustainable
    adverse credibility findings, it was not a material finding.

74.  In relation to the 2011 determination, ground 5 argues that  there  was
    unfairness in the conclusion of the judge, at paragraph 104,  that  had
    the Appellant been involved  in  political  activity  in  2010,  as  he
    claimed he would have relied upon it at the hearing  before  the  first
    panel, because the Appellant was  not  given  the  opportunity  at  the
    hearing before the judge to explain why it was that he did not  advance
    such evidence at that time.  There  is  no  merit  in  this  ground  of
    appeal.  The grounds assert that the   appeal  in  2011  was  concerned
    with cessation, but that is not the case. The first panel did not  have
    jurisdiction to determine cessation. The issues before the first  panel
    in 2011 were the same as those before the  judge  in  2017.  It  was  a
    matter for the Appellant and his legal representative at the  time  how
    the case was to be advanced. In any event, he chose not  to  give  oral
    evidence in respect of his asylum claim (he gave live evidence  at  the
    hearing in respect of other  matters)  relying  instead  on  a  witness
    statement submitted at the eleventh hour in  which  he  relied  on  his
    account which had previously led to the grant of asylum, namely that he
    had worked for the DSP and he failed to raise sur place activities.   I
    do not accept that there is  any  unfairness  arising  from  the  judge
    attaching significance to this.  The Appellant was properly represented
    at both hearings.  It was a matter  for  him  and  his  representatives
    whether he wished to advance evidence to explain the clear and  obvious
    omission in his evidence in 2011. It is unarguable that there has  been
    any unfairness.

75.  In relation to the third issue raised in ground 5, it is asserted  that
    the judge erred in finding that the Appellant contrived to  be  engaged
    in political activity. This is based on the judge finding that most  of
    the evidence dated back to 2013, prior to his appeal before the  second
    panel and the rest of the evidence related to 2016 which was before the
    appeal before the judge.  However, this was  not  correct  because  the
    fifth video related to events in 2015.  Whilst it may be the case  that
    the judge was mistaken as to the date of the fifth video, this  has  no
    materiality, in the light of the extensive adverse  credibility  issues
    which are made.

Exclusion

76.  The judge did not make a finding in respect of section 72  (2)  of  the
    2002 Act or paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules.  The  Secretary  of
    state certified the claim, thus excluding the Appellant from protection
    under the Refugee Convention and humanitarian protection. Both  parties
    accepted the judge had erred in this  respect.   Mr  Bundock  submitted
    that it was not material, unless he was able to persuade  me  that  the
    judge materially erred in respect of consideration of  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim which he has failed to do. Whilst it may not be  material,
    in the light of my conclusions, to the  outcome  of  this  appeal,  the
    matter is outstanding and must be determined. It could have  an  impact
    on any future application the Appellant may decide to make.  The matter
    was dealt with by Mr Bundock in the skeleton argument before the  judge
    in which it is asserted that because the Appellant is at low risk of re-
    offending and does not constitute a sufficiently present or  danger  to
    the community he has rebutted the presumption. Whether or not the  test
    is more stringent than that under  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  is  not
    material.  The assertion that he is at low risk was not accepted by the
    judge and is completely undermined  by  the  findings  in  the  judge's
    conclusion that he  constitutes  a  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  It follows from the lawful  and
    sustainable findings of the judge that the   Appellant  has  failed  to
    rebut the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community  of
    the United Kingdom and is excluded from protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention and humanitarian protection  under  paragraph  339D  of  the
    Rules.


Conclusion

77.      The judge erred in respect of the  proportionality  assessment  for
    the reasons explained, but the errors are not material.  There  was  no
    error of law in respect of risk in return. Whilst the  judge  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds, there was no need to consider
    the appeal under  the  Refugee  Convention  because  the  Appellant  is
    excluded from protection. The decision of  the  judge  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under  the  2006  Regulations  and  Articles  2  and  3  of  the
    Convention is maintained.






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date: 18 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
