
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00019/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 16th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                           tHE SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR ALI SAJID AL-ABUDE
                 (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE OR REQUESTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Malik, Counsel, Westminster Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal who, in a decision promulgated on 23rd  June
    2015 allowed the Respondent's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order  under  Regulation
    24A(2) of the 2006 Regulations.

 2. Whilst the appeal is brought by the Secretary of State, I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history  can  be  stated  as  follows.  The
    Appellant is  a  national  of  the  Netherlands.   He  and  his  family
    originated from Iraq and in or about 1997 he  and  his  family  members
    were  granted  asylum  and  subsequently  Dutch  citizenship.   It  was
    thereafter in June 2006 that it is said by the Appellant's parents that
    they relocated to the United Kingdom.  There is a dispute as to when he
    first arrived in the United Kingdom.  The original  deportation  letter
    (issued on 22nd March 2012) made reference to his claim to having first
    arrived on 1st June 2007 and that he had come to the attention  of  the
    authorities  on  14th  January  2008  when  he  applied  for   an   EEA
    registration certificate which was subsequently  issued  on  5th  March
    2008.  However from the evidence that was given before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it was claimed that  he  had  first  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in June 2006.

 4. The Appellant first came to the adverse attention of the authorities in
    the UK on 31st August 2009 when he was cautioned  by  the  Metropolitan
    Police for possessing a knife/blade, sharp pointed article in a  public
    place.

 5. On 11th July 2011 he was arrested in connection with his involvement in
    an offence of burglary.  He appeared before the Central Criminal  Court
    on 19th December 2011 and pleaded guilty to an offence of burglary  for
    which he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  two  years  and
    four months.  On 8th February 2012, he was notified of his liability to
    deportation but on 16th March  2012  signed  a  disclaimer  stating  he
    wished to return to the Netherlands.  On 26th March 2012, the Secretary
    of State made a decision to make a deportation order and  gave  reasons
    for that decision which was subsequently signed  on  28th  March  2012.
    The Appellant was deported to the Netherlands on 5th April  2012  under
    the terms of the Early Removal Scheme.

 6. On 2nd February 2013, the Appellant was apprehended on entry  into  the
    UK at Holyhead.  As he had attempted to enter the UK in breach  of  the
    deportation order,  he  was  arrested  and  issued  with  a  notice  of
    liability to removal.  As he had returned to the UK before the  end  of
    his sentence (having been removed under the Early Removal Scheme),  the
    Appellant was recalled to  prison  and  served  the  remainder  of  his
    sentence.  His new release date was calculated as 19th  July  2013  and
    thus was deported on 20th July 2013 to the Netherlands.

 7. On 2nd June  2014  application  was  made  by  the  Appellant  for  his
    deportation order to be revoked and on 4th February 2015 a decision was
    taken by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order and the decision was accompanied by a decision letter of the same
    date.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision which  led  to  his  appeal  being
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hendon  Magistrate's  Court
    on 10th June 2015.  In a determination promulgated on 23rd  June  2015,
    the appeal was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  the  judge
    recorded at [93] that he  was  satisfied  the  deportation  should  not
    continue under Regulation 24A(4).

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision on six
    separate grounds which can be summarised as  follows;  that  the  judge
    failed to give reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated a material change sufficient to trigger Regulation 24A(2),
    or to identify that change.  The judge erred in treating the  Appellant
    as if he had acquired a permanent right or  residence  under  the  2006
    Regulations and thus ought not to  have  applied  the  higher  test  of
    "serious grounds of public policy"; that he  erred  in  conflating  the
    test under Regulation 21(5) of Regulation 8 as Regulation 21  does  not
    include questions about family life; that the judge failed to give  any
    or any  adequate  reason  for  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    rehabilitated and that he had made a material misdirection  in  law  in
    finding that the Appellant had re-entered the UK because  he  had  been
    given the wrong sentencing date and that the judge had failed  to  give
    any or any adequate reason for finding that the Appellant had  no  real
    ties to Holland (paragraph [75]).

10. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 23rd July 2015.

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Wilding appeared on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr Malik, of Counsel, appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant as he had before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Wilding relied upon the grounds and supplemented them  by  his  oral
    submissions.  They can be summarised as follows.

13. He made reference to Regulation 21(5) and  the  three  thresholds.   Mr
    Wilding submitted that the judge at [29] misstated the case  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State and that this had  been  wrongly  used  as  a
    starting point as to whether he had established a  right  of  permanent
    residence.   However  at  [18]  he  reached  the  opposite  conclusion.
    Consequently it was wholly unclear as to whether there was any  finding
    as to a right to permanent residence and at [79] it gave the impression
    that he was considering  a  higher  threshold  rather  than  the  lower
    threshold.  He submitted that the findings of fact  whereby  the  judge
    reached the conclusion that he had been resident between the  years  of
    2006 and 2011 was insufficient to show a permanent right  of  residence
    as there was an evidential lacuna before the judge as  to  whether  the
    Appellant was a qualified person in his own right and whether there was
    evidence of being a family member with  his  father  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

14.  He further submitted that the judge failed to give reasons or adequate
    reasons when considering the issue under Regulation 21(5) as to whether
    the Appellant represented a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society."  In this
    respect the determination was contradictory and confusing at  [53]  the
    judge found that there was -

         "... not extensive evidence of remorse before me as the Appellant's
         father appeared to dispute some of the ingredients of the sentence,
         however the Appellant himself did not  appeal  that  conviction  or
         sentence and therefore I am bound as  is  he  by  the  findings  of
         guilt"

    and did not consider the consequences of the Appellant returning  to  a
    family who did not accept his guilt.  He submitted it was not clear  as
    to the threshold that had been applied and at [70] of the determination
    the judge found that there was "very limited  evidence  of  a  material
    change of circumstances" yet at [71] gave a contrary view and  at  [77]
    the judge  made  reference  to  the  "proportionality  balance"  before
    reaching a conclusion at [81] that he did not present as a genuine  and
    sufficiently serious threat.  Consequently, he submitted that paragraph
    [78] also made reference to his conduct as "may albeit not constitute a
    material change" yet reached the conclusion at [81]  that  he  did  not
    present  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.   He
    submitted that there was a lack of structure,  that  the  determination
    was inconsistent in its contents.  He relied upon the  written  grounds
    in respect of Ground 5  and  at  Ground  3  that  the  judge  erred  by
    conflating the test under Regulation 21(5) of the Article 8  questions.
    Consequently he submitted that the determination should be set aside.

15. Mr Malik relied upon the skeleton argument that he had provided for the
    hearing and also referred to a bundle of documents that had  been  sent
    along with the skeleton argument.  Those submissions can be  summarised
    as  follows.   He  submitted  that  he  could  not  disagree  with  the
    submission made by Mr Wilding that in terms of layout and structure  it
    could have been set out in a  better  way  and  could  have  been  more
    succinct.  However, the judge did not make  a  material  error  of  law
    sufficient to set aside the appeal.   As  to  the  right  of  permanent
    residence, he referred to his skeleton argument at "submission 2".   He
    submitted that the Respondent was wrong to contend that the judge erred
    in the test that he applied and that the judge at paragraphs [6, 16 and
    18] correctly asserted that the Respondent's case was that he had first
    arrived on 1st June 2007 when the Appellant had stated he  had  arrived
    in June 2006 with his family (see paragraph [16]).  He  submitted  that
    the judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the  witnesses
    as to when the family relocated and he directed  the  Tribunal  to  the
    statements within the bundle from  the  various  family  members  which
    demonstrated that they relocated to the United Kingdom in June 2006 and
    that the judge was  entitled  to  make  a  finding  of  fact  that  the
    residence of the Appellant ran from June 2006 until  October  2011  and
    thus he had a  permanent  right  of  residence.   Mr  Malik  also  made
    reference in the skeleton argument  and  in  his  oral  submissions  to
    postdecision evidence at A4 comprising a letter from the HMRC dated 2nd
    July 2005 referring to child benefit  being  paid  from  11th  December
    2006.   He  submitted  that  this  was  support  for  the   Appellant's
    contention that he arrived in the UK in June 2006 and therefore he  did
    not err in law in this respect.  It was therefore open to the judge  to
    find that his period of residence effectively ran from June 2006  until
    October 2011 and therefore applied the correct test of "serious grounds
    of public policy" and did not err in his approach.

16. As to the test under paragraph 21(5) and his propensity  to  re-offend,
    the judge considered the evidence given by the family members including
    his mother and father which indicated that he  was  acting  in  a  very
    positive manner.  There had been  no  record  that  in  prison  he  had
    behaved in a disorderly manner and the judge therefore took all matters
    into account.  Thus he submitted that there were  letters  from  people
    who knew him at page 12, and that he had regretted his actions and  had
    been punished for his crime.  The victim had written a  letter  to  the
    court and that was  also  provided  in  the  bundle.   In  his  written
    submissions at  submission  1,  there  were  material  changes  in  his
    circumstances and that he regretted and was remorseful for his actions,
    that he was learning to become a driving instructor and was involved in
    various community and voluntary projects and that  notwithstanding  the
    paragraph identified by Mr Wilding whereby the judge stated that he had
    not made any material changes at [70], the evidence  demonstrated  that
    he had made material changes since his deportation  which  had  allowed
    him to personally develop and  make  invaluable  contributions  to  the
    community and that at [71], the judge was right to say that there was a
    change from him being released which was a material change.

17. As to the issue of conflating Article 8, Mr Malik  submitted  that  the
    judge heard evidence and had taken all matters into account.

18. I asked Mr Malik if he would deal with the point  made  by  Mr  Wilding
    relating to the Appellant's lack of remorse in the light of a  document
    within the Respondent's bundle that had been produced with the  Grounds
    of Appeal (a letter dated 20th February 2015).  Mr Malik submitted that
    the evidence given by his parents as  the  judge  noted  was  that  his
    father was critical of the court  but  it  was  accepted  that  he  had
    pleaded guilty to the offence.  The judge  did  consider  the  father's
    response but that he was now trying  to  be  a  different  person.   He
    submitted that if the Appellant was not remorseful he  would  not  have
    wanted to change his behaviour.  He reminded the court that the  victim
    himself was supportive of the Appellant (and referred to  the  letter).
    Consequently he submitted that the Appellant was not a  danger  to  the
    public and that whilst it was not written in clear terms, the  decision
    on the whole supported that view.

19. He submitted that if an error of law was  found,  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. Mr Wilding by way of reply submitted that the new evidence referred  to
    by Mr Malik could not be taken into account as it was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but even if  that  material  had  been  taken  into
    account, it did not demonstrate that he had acquired a permanent  right
    of residence and that there was an evidential gap  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant himself had any comprehensive sickness insurance  or  whether
    his father had demonstrated he was exercising treaty rights during that
    period if he was relying as a family member.

21. He further submitted it was not clear on the findings of fact and there
    was a lack of clarity generally which made the assessment  flawed.   He
    submitted there were material errors of law in the determination and it
    should be set aside.

22. At the conclusion of the submissions I indicated that I  would  reserve
    my decision.

Discussion

23. I have had the  opportunity  of  considering  the  helpful  submissions
    provided by both advocates and having  done  so,  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  that  the
    decision that was reached should be set aside.  I shall  therefore  set
    out my reasons for reaching that view.

24. Both advocates in their respective submissions have made  reference  to
    the lack of structure in the determination and lack of clarity  in  the
    findings reached and at times the contradictory nature of the  findings
    that have been made.  Those matters, as outlined and particularised  in
    the Secretary of State's grounds, led  to  the  failure  to  apply  the
    correct legal framework and analyse the evidence at each  stage  before
    reaching a decision on the material aspects of this appeal.

25. The legal framework to the appeal is set out at Regulation 24A  of  the
    2006 Regulations, which is the sole route  for  revocation  of  an  EEA
    deportation order.  By Regulation 24A(1) a deportation order remains in
    force until it is revoked and by Regulation  24A(3)  it  refers  to  an
    application which a person subject to a deportation order  is  entitled
    to make.  The application  is  described  in  the  previous  subsection
    (Regulation 24A(2) as follows:-

         "A person who is subject to a deportation or  exclusion  order  may
         apply to the Secretary of State to have it revoked  if  the  person
         considers  that  there  has  been  a  material   changes   in   the
         circumstances that justify the making of the order."

26.  At Regulation 24A(3) it states "An  application  under  paragraph  [2]
    shall set out the material change of circumstances relied upon  by  the
    applicant...".

27. By Regulation 24A(4) the Secretary of State shall revoke a  deportation
    order if she considers that the criteria for making such an order is no
    longer justified.  In making that assessment, matters that  are  raised
    in the application as showing  material  change  of  circumstances  are
    taken into account as are the principles set out in  Regulation  21(5).
    Insofar as relevant it provides as follows:-

         "21  (1) In this regulation a  'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
                decision taken on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                security or public health.

         ...

            (5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
                with the preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken
                in accordance with the following principles -

                 a)  the  decision  with  comply  with  the   principle   of
                    proportionality;

                 b) the decision must be based exclusively on  the  personal
                    conduct of the person concerned;

                 c) the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;

                 d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision; and

                 e) a person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision."

28. In considering this issue the judge was required  to  consider  whether
    the continuation of the deportation was justified on grounds of  public
    policy, public security or public health in accordance with  Regulation
    21.  The scheme of the 2006 Regulations and those who face  removal  as
    the consequence of a "relevant decision"  as  defined,  is  to  provide
    three levels of protection.  The lowest level of protection is provided
    by Regulation 21(1) which requires that a "relevant decision" is to  be
    taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    and the intermediate level of protection, which apples to  someone  who
    has acquired a permanent right of residence such a decision can only be
    taken on serious grounds of public policy or public  security  (21(3)).
    The third and highest level of protection applies to  someone  who  has
    accumulated ten years' continuous residence and a  decision  cannot  be
    taken except on "imperative grounds  of  public  security"  (Regulation
    21(4)).

29. It is clear from the determination that the judge  did  not  deal  with
    this aspect of the Regulations and where he purported to deal with  it,
    did not make an assessment of the relevant evidence.  Whilst the judged
    recorded at [18] the Respondent's view that "It was not  accepted  that
    he had been resident in the UK in accordance with the 2006  Regulations
    for five years and therefore had not  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence", at [29] the judge recorded "In relation to  proportionality
    the Respondent relied on the fact that the Appellant  had  five  years'
    continuous  residence."   The  refusal  letter  clearly  set   out   at
    paragraphs [12]-[15] that it was not accepted that he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence when in the United Kingdom  and  therefore
    the lowest threshold applied.

30. Further at [79] the  judge  referred  to  his  previous  conviction  of
    burglary in the following terms:-

         "Whilst obviously a significant and serious offence this was not an
         offence involving terrorism, violence or the sale of drugs which is
         guarded in terms of European  jurisprudence  of  the  most  serious
         criminal offences."

    I agree with Mr Wilding's decision that it can be  inferred  from  that
    paragraph that he was thinking in terms of the  higher  threshold  when
    making an assessment under 21(5)(c).


31. As a result of the misstatement of the Respondent's case at [29] and at
    [30] where the judge recorded that the Secretary of State took the view
    that "There were some grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
    public health, to maintain the decision under Regulation 21" he made no
    further reference to this issue until the findings set out at [50]-[52]
    where the judge set out that he was satisfied that  the  Appellant  had
    been resident between June 2006 until his period of custody  commencing
    in October 2011.  I observed that at paragraph [30] when recording  the
    view of the Respondent that there was "some grounds of  public  policy,
    public security or public health" that the use of the  word  "some"  in
    that sentence might have been an error and that the judge was referring
    to "serious" which is consistent with the intermediate level of someone
    who had acquired a permanent  right  of  residence.   Thus  it  appears
    possible that the judge found that he had acquired a permanent right of
    residence based on the length of his residence.   However  as  set  out
    earlier at [29] he had misstated the  Respondent's  case,  at  [79]  he
    appeared to be stating that the highest level was being considered  and
    the  presumption  at  [51]-[52]  was  that  he  had  found   that   the
    intermediate category applied and consequently  there  was  a  lack  of
    clarity in the judge's determination as to the correct level.  Mr Malik
    in his written submissions and in his oral submissions  submitted  that
    the findings at [51]-[52] were open to him to find that  the  Appellant
    has indeed established a permanent right  of  residence  and  therefore
    applied the test of "serious grounds of public  policy"  based  on  the
    evidence given by the family members which the judge accepted  that  he
    had entered the UK in June  2006  and  resided  in  the  UK  until  his
    incarceration in October 2011.   In  support  of  this  submission,  he
    relied upon fresh evidence that had not been placed before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and also not served upon the Tribunal in accordance  with
    Rule 15 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules.  It consisted of a letter from
    the HMRC dated 2nd July 2015 confirming that the Appellant's father was
    in receipt of child benefit in  respect  of  the  Appellant  from  11th
    December 2006.  However as Mr Wilding submitted, even if  the  document
    was taken into account now,  it  would  not  demonstrate  that  he  had
    acquired permanent residence under the EEA Regulations.  The  Appellant
    could have been a qualified person in his own  right  or  as  a  family
    member.  The  evidence  relating  to  his  father's  own  status  as  a
    qualified person was  that  he  had  established  a  business  in  2008
    (paragraph [5]) but there was no  evidence  that  he  was  a  qualified
    person or exercising treaty rights in 2006.  Furthermore there  was  no
    evidence as to any comprehensive sickness insurance for  the  Appellant
    and there was a lack of any supporting evidence in this  regard  before
    the Tribunal.  The documentary evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    from a witness statement of the Appellant's  brother  referred  to  him
    obtaining permanent residence in 2013.  The judge made no reference  to
    these issues and in the absence of consideration of  the  evidence  (or
    lack of it) could not have  reached  the  decision  that  there  was  a
    permanent right of residence, if indeed that is what he did apply.

32. This was relevant to the analysis of Regulation  21(5).   The  question
    raised is whether or not in the light of the material and  assessed  at
    the date of the hearing that the requirement of  Regulation  21(5)  was
    being  satisfied  and  in  particular  whether  or  not  the  Appellant
    represented a "genuine, present and sufficiently threat  affecting  one
    of the  fundamental  interests  of  society",  so  as  to  justify  the
    continuation of the deportation order.  In this respect it is necessary
    to  establish  a  future  risk  of  reoffending  and  the  nature   and
    seriousness of such offences.  In this respect past  offending  may  be
    relevant in assessing future risk but the fact that he has  a  previous
    conviction cannot provide the justification.  In this respect the judge
    made a contrary self-direction in law at  [65]  citing  issues  of  the
    deterrence in contrast with that at [85].

33. In respect of issues of  personal  conduct  of  the  Appellant  and  an
    analysis of 21(5)(c) the determination I  find  lacks  clarity  and  an
    absence of reasoning.  They can be set out and summarised as follows:-

      i) At [71] the judge recorded a finding that:-

             "In considering whether there has been a  material  change  of
             circumstances I find that there is very limited evidence of  a
             material change of circumstance  other  than  that  one  would
             normally expect of a young man  who  has  been  released  from
             prison and is seeking to rehabilitate himself...".

         At [71] the judge referred to his community  work  in  Holland  and
         that he was seeking employment but "is  not  itself  a  significant
         material change given that he was effectively a person of  previous
         good character before his sentence  of  imprisonment."   The  judge
         went on to state "There  is  obviously  a  change  from  his  being
         released, one in which in my view constitutes to a material  change
         sufficient to trigger Regulation 24A(2) and 24A(3)."  It is unclear
         from paragraph 71 as to whether or not the judge did find that  the
         Appellant's circumstances have changed  following  his  deportation
         order in the light of the findings at [70]-[71].

     ii) The judge makes reference to the deportation and that  it  must  be
         justified on grounds of public policy or public security  and  then
         makes a self-direction law at [65] listing  matters  including  the
         issue of deterrence and whether the assessment  of  deportation  is
         "conducive to the public good" citing the decision of N (Kenya)  in
         contrast to that set out at [85] where he made a self-direction  in
         the opposing terms (and arguably the right terms).

    iii) At [90] he sets out his conclusion that:-

             "I come to the view that  continuing  this  deportation  order
             would be disproportionate to comply  with  the  principles  of
             proportionality.  It cannot be based on the  personal  conduct
             of the person concerned as the  does  not  present  a  genuine
             present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat   affecting   the
             maintenance of law and order in  the  United  Kingdom  or  the
             prevention of crime."

         However this is arguably the  wrong  test  as  Regulation  21(5)(b)
         makes it plain that the decision must  be  based  on  the  personal
         conduct of the person concerned and therefore  the  judge  did  not
         apply the correct test at 21(5)(c).

34. I am also satisfied that the judge did not take into  account  material
    considerations when reaching a decision as to whether he was a "genuine
    present and sufficiently serious  threat"  (Regulation  21(5)(c)).   It
    wholly open to the judge to take into account and find that he had  not
    committed any further offences since his release in 2013  and  also  to
    take into account the community work that he  had  undertaken  and  the
    steps taken  to  provide  employment  for  the  future.   However  when
    considering his personal conduct, his past offending was relevant  when
    considering  future  risk  (although  the  fact  that  he  had  a  past
    conviction or the seriousness of it could not justify  or  provide  the
    necessary justification).  In this respect his  finding  at  [92]  that
    there was nothing in his character or conduct to show that he  had  not
    been rehabilitated or not learnt his lesson was inconsistent  with  the
    finding made at [53] in which the judge recorded:-

         "I find that there is not extensive evidence of remorse  before  me
         as  the  Appellant's  father  appears  to  dispute  some   of   the
         ingredients of the sentence, however the Appellant himself did  not
         appeal that conviction or sentence and therefore I am bound  as  is
         he by the findings of guilt."

    It is further inconsistent with the statement of the Appellant  himself
    dated 20th February 2015 (in the Respondent's bundle) in which he  gave
    an account of the offence and where he clearly disputed the offence and
    the circumstances of it, including the amount of money that was said to
    have been taken during the  burglary  (some  �100,000).   I  take  into
    account Mr Malik's submission that this was written on his  behalf  and
    that the Appellant signed the document on 20th February 2015 and it was
    submitted on his behalf.  However, it would have been open to the judge
    to reject that statement or attribute little weight to it but this  was
    evidence that was material to the  overall  assessment  which  was  not
    taken into account when making an assessment of  his  personal  conduct
    and the risk under 21(5)(c).  Furthermore, the Secretary of  State  set
    out in the refusal letter that he had  not  provided  evidence  of  any
    courses that he had attended, either in the UK or  in  the  Netherlands
    either during his sentence or after his sentence which would  have  led
    to any form of rehabilitation.   That  point  is  also  not  considered
    within the analysis of the evidence.  This was a case where it does not
    appear that an OASys Report had been provided.


35. Furthermore as the grounds set out it is unclear as to what he factored
    into the analysis of Regulation 21(5) when considering paragraphs [70]-
    [80] when he reached the conclusion at [81] that he did not  present  a
    genuine present and sufficiently  serious  threat.   In  those  earlier
    paragraphs he made reference to the family, their circumstances and his
    lack of ties to Holland although he had lived there for a period of ten
    years (see [75]).  The judge appeared to be taking into account factors
    relating to the proportionality balance and at [75] sets out  that  the
    Appellant had "no real ties to Holland other  than  those  in  the  ten
    years where he spent there closely related to his family" then at  [76]
    and [77] reasoned that all his family were now in  the  United  Kingdom
    and therefore the "proportionality  balance  falls  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant and the nature of his cultural, linguistic and family  ties."
    I agree with the submission made by  Mr  Wilding  that  that  showed  a
    conflation of the issues.

36. I take into account the submissions made by Mr  Malik  that  there  was
    positive evidence before  the  Tribunal  as  to  his  circumstances  in
    Holland now and that he acknowledged in  his  submissions  that  whilst
    there was a lack of structure and consequently clarity in the  analysis
    that any  errors  were  not  material.   However  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the Secretary of State as the losing party was entitled
    to know upon which basis the overall decision was reached and that  all
    the evidence  was  properly  assessed  in  accordance  with  the  legal
    framework.  Consequently I have reached the conclusion that the  errors
    of law are material and therefore I set aside the decision.

37. As to remaking the decision, Mr Malik submitted that in the event of an
    error of law being found that the correct approach  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  indicated  that
    there would be further evidence provided.  I observed  that  a  request
    had been made by the solicitors on 11th May 2015 for the  OASys  Report
    and the presentence report but none of those appeared in the bundle and
    therefore should be obtained.  Furthermore, this has been conducted  as
    an out-of-country appeal  and  it  was  canvassed  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant would wish to give oral evidence by way of  a  video-link  so
    that he could take part in the proceedings.  That is a matter  that  Mr
    Malik would like  to  consider  further.   Consequently  I  accept  his
    submission that the Tribunal will be required to make further  findings
    of fact and that the correct course is as he submits for the matter  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

38. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall  be  set  aside
    and the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing in
    accordance  with  Section  12(2)(b)  of  the   Tribunal's   Court   and
    Enforcement Act under paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).

39. No anonymity direction is made or requested.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

