
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00722/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2014                             |On 4 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                 STEVE MOSES
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi born on 2 May 1976.   He  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  17
    April 2014 to make a deportation order against him.

 2. By any stretch  of  the  imagination  the  appellant  is  a  persistent
    criminal offender.  The First-tier Tribunal set out his convictions  in
    paragraph 40 of its determination - a task that took approximately  two
    and a half pages.  I do not recite again herein those  convictions  but
    observe that the  first  recorded  conviction  was  for  theft  from  a
    dwelling in 1995,  for  which  the  appellant  received  a  conditional
    discharge.  The appellant thereafter appears to have been convicted  of
    one or more offences in each of the subsequent years. For the most part
    these offences were dealt with by sentences that did  not  involve  the
    appellant being imprisoned, although he  was  imprisoned  in  1999  for
    eighteen months[1], in 2002 for twelve months[2] and in September  2010
    for twelve weeks and six weeks to run concurrently[3].

 3. The respondent made the decision to deport the appellant following  his
    conviction on 3 July 2013 for theft (for which sentenced  to  6  months
    imprisonment), assault occasioning actual bodily harm (for which he was
    sentenced to 6 months imprisonment to run consecutively) and 18  counts
    of making false representations to make gain for  self  or  another  to
    cause loss to other, with 33 other offences  taken  into  account  (for
    which the appellant was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment, also to run
    consecutively).

 4. The First-tier Tribunal[4] dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds in a determination signed on the 15 July 2014.

Permission to appeal - Preliminary matter

 5. The appellant made an application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal in grounds drawn in his own hand.  First-tier Tribunal Judge J
    M Holmes granted permission to appeal in a decision of 8 August 2014.

 6. It is plain that Judge Holmes made an 'accidental slip'  when  granting
    permission to appeal, given that the entirety of his reasoning supports
    a contrary conclusion i.e. that permission to appeal should be refused.
    Indeed, in the last paragraph of his reasoning  Judge  Holmes  says  as
    follows:

        "I can identify no arguable  error  of  law  in  the  determination
        likely to lead to Upper Tribunal setting aside the decision on  the
        appeal and remaking it".

 7. Nevertheless, Judge Holmes headed the document "Permission to appeal is
    granted" and thus the  administrations  of  both  the  First-tier,  and
    Upper, Tribunals, properly, treated this as a grant of permission.

 8. At the outset of the hearing before me Mr Jarvis submitted  that  given
    that there had plainly been an administrative slip by Judge Holmes, the
    Upper Tribunal should rectify this by amending the document  purporting
    to grant permission so as to remove the word "grant" and add  the  word
    "refuse".

 9. Even if I had power to make such an amendment, which would  require  me
    sitting as a First-tier Tribunal Judge in order to do so, I do not take
    such a course of action in this appeal. The appeal is  now  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, the appellant is not legally  represented  and  he  has
    been given no notice of such application. No  satisfactory  explanation
    has been provided as to why the application was made by  the  Secretary
    of State at the last possible moment, on the day of the hearing. In all
    the circumstances I conclude that it is in  the  interests  of  justice
    that Mr Moses' appeal be heard by the Upper Tribunal.

Decision on Error of Law

10. I heard lengthy submissions from Mr Moses as to why  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal  ought  to  be  set  aside.   It  is  to  be
    appreciated that Mr  Moses  has  little  if  any  legal  knowledge  and
    certainly no knowledge of the jurisdiction of the Upper  Tribunal.   To
    this end I provided what assistance I could to him  in  an  attempt  to
    focus the clear concerns he  has  over  the  respondent's  decision  to
    deport him, and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  upholding
    such decision.

11. Mr Moses was keen to emphasise that the First-tier Tribunal had reached
    the wrong conclusion on almost every  aspect  of  its  decision  making
    process. He particularly expressed that:

      i) He disagreed with the Tribunal's conclusions as to  the  extent  of
         his  relationships  with  his  various  family  members,  and  most
         particularly his children. In this regard  he  produced  additional
         evidence that had not been placed before the First-tier Tribunal in
         order to support the assertion that he had good relations with  his
         children;

     ii) He has significant ties to  the  United  Kingdom,  which  were  not
         properly taken into account by the Tribunal;

    iii) The Tribunal was wrong not to accept  that  he  had  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom for 30 years;

     iv) He disagreed with the Tribunal's assessment as to the risk  of  him
         re-offending - observing when doing so that  he  has  undertaken  a
         significant number of courses during his time in detention;

      v) The Tribunal had failed to pay adequate regard to the fact that  he
         had become a police informant, which had resulted in the arrest  of
         a number of corrupt police officers, and;

     vi) The Tribunal had been wrong in its  consideration  of  his  medical
         problems,  and  in  particular  in  its  conclusion  that   medical
         treatment would be available for him in Malawi.

12. The appellant  further  set  out  the  circumstances  underpinning  the
    numerous convictions he had acquired for  breaching  a  non-molestation
    order taken out against him by his former wife.

13. Turning then to the First-tier Tribunal's  determination.   This  is  a
    lengthy document running to 33 pages. The Tribunal  carefully  set  out
    the evidence relied upon by the parties and then addressed the relevant
    issues sequentially.

14. The appellant's immigration history is set out in paragraphs 32  to  37
    of the determination. Contrary to the appellant's understanding of both
    the respondent's position and the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions, it
    is not in dispute that he arrived in the United Kingdom in  1984,  when
    he would have been just under eight years old.  This  is  confirmed  in
    paragraphs 73(ii) and 96 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination. It
    was  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  was   granted
    Indefinite Leave to Remain on 27 April 1999 and the First-tier Tribunal
    did not go behind this concession.

15. As identified above, the First-tier Tribunal  thereafter  set  out  the
    appellant's offending history in some detail. There is no dispute as to
    the accuracy of such record.  This  was  immediately  followed  in  the
    determination by the Tribunal  setting  out  of  an  extract  from  the
    criminal judge's sentencing remarks of 3 July 2013.

16. Within paragraphs 42 to 46 of its determination the  Tribunal  identify
    circumstances relevant to its assessment of the risk of  the  appellant
    re-offending. Contrary to the appellant's assertions, this included his
    co-operation with the police. The Tribunal were entitled  to  conclude,
    on all of the available evidence, that there remains a significant risk
    of the appellant re-offending.  The  appellant's  submissions  on  this
    issue are no more than a disagreement with the  Tribunal's  conclusions
    and do not disclose an error of law.

17. The First-tier Tribunal  also  undertook  a  careful  analysis  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his wife [51-52], his current partner [53-
    58] and his children [59-68]. It  cannot  be  said  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to take into account any relevant evidence when  coming  to  its
    conclusions as to the extent of these relationships.

18. The  evidence  that  the  appellant  provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    regarding such relationships was not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and, consequently, the First-tier Tribunal cannot be said to have erred
    in not taking it in to account. In addition, it is not  evidence  of  a
    type that could be said to demonstrate  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made mistakes of fact amounting to an  error  of  law.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that the appellant had postal contact with his eldest
    daughter [63] and it was to this  fact  that  the  additional  evidence
    provided to the Upper Tribunal primarily went.

19. Although the Tribunal made no mention of Section 55 of the 2009 Act and
    the best interests of the  children,  it  did  conclude  that  "on  the
    information before [it] it would appear that there is  little  prospect
    of the appellant having significant access  and  care  of  any  of  the
    children".  In my conclusion given this finding it cannot be said  that
    the failure of the Tribunal  to  make  specific  mention  of  the  best
    interests of the children is a matter capable of affecting the  outcome
    of the appeal.

20. Looking for myself at the all the evidence that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal I find that its conclusions  as  to  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's various relationships with his children were rational and I
    would have come to exactly the same conclusions on such evidence.

21. The First-tier Tribunal also  carefully  and  cogently  considered  the
    relevance of the appellant's medical  issues  [paragraphs  78-85],  his
    private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  [paragraphs  86-102]  and  the
    circumstances that he  might  be  faced  with  upon  return  to  Malawi
    [paragraphs 103-104].  There is nothing in its consideration of any  of
    these matters that can be said to amount to an error of law capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal. In particular, it was open for the
    Tribunal on the evidence before it to conclude that appropriate medical
    treatment would be available to the appellant in Malawi.  Although  the
    appellant put additional evidence in relation to this issue before  the
    Upper Tribunal, such evidence does not lead me  to  conclude  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error of law  requiring
    it to be set aside.

22. Given that the appellant was not legally represented I  considered  for
    myself  whether  there  are  any  obvious  errors  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's determination that ought to lead to  me  setting  it  aside.
    Although I was initially troubled by  the  Tribunal's  misdirection  in
    relation to the ECtHR's decision in Maslov v  Austria  (1638/03)[5]  I,
    nevertheless, find on the facts of this case that such misdirection  is
    not one capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  In  coming  to
    this conclusion I observe  that  the  Tribunal  immediately  thereafter
    properly directed itself to, and applied, the "Uner criteria".

23. In summary, it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal  took  great  care
    over this decision.  It came to conclusions which were open  to  it  on
    all of the available evidence, taking into account all material matters
    and not failing to take into account any matter that  could  have  been
    material to the outcome of the appeal.  The reasons it gives are  clear
    and cogent and the appellant is perfectly capable of understanding from
    those reasons why it is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  his
    appeal.  The new evidence that has been placed before me does not  lead
    me to conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.   If  the
    appellant wishes to rely further upon this additional material the most
    appropriate course would be for him  to  make  an  application  to  the
    Secretary of State to revoke the deportation order.

24.  For  all  these  reasons  I  find  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination is to stand.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 21 November 2014



                           -----------------------
[1] Five offences of obtaining property by deception; two of attempting to
obtain property by deception, one offence of handling stolen goods and
breaching of a community service order.
[2] Five offences of obtaining property by deception.
[3] Making false representations to make gain for himself on four
occasions.
[4] First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and MR GF Sandall (non-legal member)
[5] Paragraph 72 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

