
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00110/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Crown Square       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 January 2016                      |On 11 April 2016                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

                                   Between

                                      C
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr Levine, Counsel
Respondent:   Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

Introduction

 1. The origins of this appeal are traceable to a decision made  on  behalf
    of the SSHD dated 8 January 2014, to deport the appellant,  a  national
    of Malaysia from the United Kingdom ('UK').  The appellant has  a  wife
    with discretionary leave to remain in the  UK  and  two  children,  the
    elder of whom is a British citizen.

 2. I have anonymised the appellant because this decision refers to matters
    relevant to his children.

Appeal proceedings

 3. On 24 July 2014, the appellant's appeal against the SSHD's decision was
    dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT').   The  appellant  has
    appealed against this decision on two grounds: (1) in  concluding  that
    it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's elder child, a British
    citizen to relocate to Malaysia the FTT has failed to  correctly  apply
    the principles set  out  in  Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -
    Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC); (2)  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's wife could care for the children  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant the FTT  failed  to  consider  her  emotional  and  financial
    ability to do so in the absence of the appellant.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the FTT failed to apply the guidance in Sanade.

Hearing

 5. At the beginning of the hearing I outlined  my  preliminary  views.   I
    indicated that  ground  1  set  out  a  clear  error  of  law  and  the
    materiality of that error turned upon whether ground 2  was  made  out.
    In these circumstances Mr Levine was content to confine his submissions
    to ground 2 and relied upon the grounds of appeal drafted on behalf  of
    the Appellant.

 6. Mr McVeety submitted that  the  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    children's mother has been and will be able to care for the children in
    the UK, and as such ground 2 has not been made out.

 7. After hearing submissions from both parties  I  announced  my  decision
    that the FTT did not  make  a  material  error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside.

Error of law discussion

 8. I accept that the FTT erred in law  in  concluding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's British citizen child to leave the
    UK to reside in Malaysia.   Sanade (supra) makes it  clear  that  where
    the child is a British citizen and therefore an EEA citizen, it is  not
    possible to require them to relocate outside the EEA or to submit  that
    it would be reasonable to do so [95].  It  follows  that  the  FTT  was
    wrong in law to find that it would not be unreasonable  for  the  elder
    child to relocate [26].

 9. This is not a material error of law requiring the decision  to  be  set
    aside.  The relevant version of paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in force at the date of decision only benefits the appellant as a
    result of his relationship with his British  citizen  child  where  two
    requirements are met: "(a) it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK; and (b) there is no other family member  who  is
    able to care for the child in the UK."


10. It is clear that in order for the appellant to benefit  from  paragraph
    399(a) two mandatory requirements must be met: (a) and (b).    The  FTT
    considered (b) at [27] in case it was wrong  regarding  its  conclusion
    regarding (a) (see first sentence of [27]).   The  FTT  made  it  clear
    that it did not consider that (a)  or  (b)  could  be  met  [27].    It
    follows that if the FTT was correct to conclude that (b) could  not  be
    met, the appellant could not meet a mandatory requirement of  399,  and
    any error of law regarding  the  other  mandatory  requirement  at  (a)
    matters not.  I now turn to the manner in which the FTT approached (b).

11. As the grounds of appeal concede, the FTT was entitled to conclude that
    the father played no significant role in the household for the  reasons
    outlined at [27 and 28].  The grounds of appeal however submit that the
    FTT failed to address whether or  not  the  mother  would  be  able  to
    emotionally or financially care for the  children  in  the  appellant's
    absence.  The issue for the FTT was whether or not the mother "is  able
    to care for the child[ren] in the UK".  The FTT gave clear and detailed
    reasons for finding that she is able to do so.  The FTT was clearly  of
    the view that the children's mother would be able to  emotionally  care
    for the children in the appellant's absence.  A careful reading of  [27
    and 28] makes it clear that the FTT regarded the  appellant's  role  in
    the family to be minimal.   The  FTT  regarded  the  mother  as  having
    demonstrated that she is able and willing to care for her  children  in
    the appellant's absence.

12. The submission that this  mother  would  not  be  able  to  financially
    support the children is difficult to follow.  She has been accommodated
    by family members  for  a  number  of  years.   Whatever  the  position
    regarding the intended length of their financial support there  was  no
    evidence that she and the children could not continue  to  reside  with
    the family members.  The children are of school age and their mother is
    entitled to work.  It is difficult to see why she could not financially
    support  her  children  through  employment.   Given  the   appellant's
    gambling addiction and lack of significant support to the family it  is
    unlikely that he has been a source of stable financial support to them.
     In any event  the  requisite  level  of  financial  support  would  be
    available from the state for the children, one of  whom  is  a  British
    citizen.

13. It follows that ground 2 is not made out and in the premises the  error
    of law identified in ground 1 is not material.

Decision

14. The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error of law and is
    not set aside.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Dated: 11 January 2016
