
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00372/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 July 2015                               |On 17 August 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ERVIN MURATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appeal with permission is brought  against  a  determination  of  a
    First-tier Tribunal panel (Judge Boardman and Non  Legal  Member  Mr  F
    Jamieson JP).  Sent  on  22  September  the  determination  allowed  on
    Article  8  grounds  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  (hereafter  "the
    claimant") a national of Kosovo, against the decision of the  appellant
    (hereafter "the Secretary of  State  or  SSHD").   The  claimant  is  a
    foreign criminal as defined by s.32(1) of the UK Borders Act  2007  and
    on 5 February 2013 the SSHD made a deportation order against him  under
    s.32(5) of this Act.  The trigger for this decision was his  conviction
    in 2010 for robbery and having a sharply  pointed  blade  in  a  public
    place for which he was sentenced to 40 and 9 months respectively to run
    concurrently.

2.   The claimant arrived in the UK as an unaccompanied minor and on 5  June
    1999 he was granted ILR as a refugee.  In October 2011  he  was  issued
    with a s.72 warning letter and the claimant was issued a decision  that
    his refugee status had ceased on the same day he was  served  with  his
    deportation order.

3.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal allege that the FtT misdirected itself  in
    several respects: (1) in failing to identify any unduly harsh effect of
    deporting the claimant; if his partner or children were  to  remain  in
    the UK (in this regard the FtT was said to have failed to engage  fully
    with s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as
    amended); (2) in attaching too much significance to the  issue  of  the
    risk of reoffending (in this regard the FtT was said  to  have  wrongly
    treated  the  claimant's  expression  of  remorse   as   negating   the
    seriousness of the claimant's index offence, and ignoring the fact that
    the  public  interest  has  to  reflect   not   just   the   particular
    circumstances  of  a  claimant  but  also  general  factors  going   to
    deterrence, social abhorrence and maintaining confidence in a system of
    control.

4.   A further issue was raised (by me) in the grant of permission (which  I
    shall deem a third ground)  as  to  whether  the  panel  had  erred  in
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 despite accepting that he  did  not
    comply with the Rules.

5.   Before proceeding further, I would  observe  that  in  grounds  seeking
    permission from the FtT the SSHD had argued that the panel  had  failed
    to provide sufficient reasons for  concluding  that  the  claimant  had
    rebutted the s.72 presumption that  he  is  a  danger  to  the  public.
    However, this was rejected by the judge who refused permission and this
    challenge was not maintained in the grounds seeking permission from the
    Upper Tribunal.

6.   By the same token there was no response  or  reply  from  the  claimant
    seeking to  challenge the panel's finding that he was no longer at risk
    on return to Kosovo of  persecution,  serious  harm  or  ill-treatment.
    Plainly the claimant was someone who had ceased to be a  refugee  under
    Article 1C of the 1951 Convention.

The Rules as a Complete Code

7.   In relation to ground (3) above, it is true that the panel did  say  in
    one place that it was allowing the appeal outside the Rules:  see  e.g.
    [49].

8.   If that had  been the panel's definitive position, it would have  erred
    in law because it is settled law that in respect of  foreign  criminals
    subject to automatic deportation provisions, the new Immigration  Rules
    are a compete code:  see  e.g.  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192.
    However, I am satisfied this was not the  panel's  definitive  position
    and that in substance it had clearly satisfied itself that the claimant
    met the requirement  set out in the last paragraph  of  paragraph  398.
    Thus at [48] it held that:

         "We find the appellant's case falls within para 398(b), in that his
         sentence of 40 months was between 12 months and 4 years,  and  that
         paragraphs 399 and 399A therefore apply."

    and at [77(c)] it said it was allowing the appeal because the  claimant
    had set out exceptional circumstances as referred to in  paragraph  398
    of the Rules.

9.   Although not raised in the grounds, Mr Whitwell sought  to  argue  that
    the panel had failed to apply the wrong version of  the  Rules  to  the
    claimant's case. Leaving aside that it was not open to the SSHD to  add
    new grounds without seeking or obtaining the Tribunal's  permission,  I
    would reject this argument.  Mr Whitwell sought to rely on  cases  such
    as YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ  1292  and  Oladeje  [2014]  UKUT  00326
    (IAC), but these were concerned with cases in which the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal had been set  aside  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    engaged in the task of re-making the decision.  In that context  -  and
    in that context only - the latter Tribunal was obliged  to  consider  a
    decision under a version of the Rules in operation at the date  of  the
    hearing.

10.  Miss Brown submitted that Mr Whitwell's claim that  the  wrong  version
    of the Rules stood to be rejected for a separate  reason,  namely  that
    there were transitional provisions preserving the  application  of  the
    previous Rules.  She referred us to paragraph 1  of  the  Statement  of
    Changes HC 352 which provides that:

         "If an applicant has made an application  for  entry  clearance  or
         leave before 11 July 2014 and the application has not been  decided
         before that date, it will be decided in accordance with  the  Rules
         in force on 10 July 2014."

    She prayed in aid Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 in  which  the  court
    held  that  the  "implementation  provision"  (in  that  case  HC  194)
    displaced the usual Odelola principle that the date of decision is  the
    relevant date.  That submission overlooks that  the  claimant  in  this
    case had not made an application for leave; he  had  simply  been   the
    subject of a deportation decision.

11.  In any event, even if Mr Whitwell were correct  in  his  argument  that
    the post-28 July  2014  version  of  the  Rules  applied,  he  has  not
    identified any respect in which the FtT would  have  been  required  to
    assess matters differently  than  it  did.   Even  assuming  there  are
    differences, he has not begun to demonstrate that they had  a  material
    impact on the panel's assessment.

Section 117C(5) as Determinative

12.  Although not set out plainly in  the  grounds  it  is  clear  that  the
    SSHD's position is that the FtT  erred  in  treating  the  claimant  as
    entitled to succeed solely by virtue of satisfying the requirements  of
    s.117C(5). That position is untenable.  It is plain from  the  way  the
    panel structured its "Findings" that having concluded that the claimant
    had established family life and that there had been an interference  in
    the same and that the decision was  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    pursued  a  legitimate  aim,  the  FtT  turned  at  [58]  to   consider
    proportionality.   At  [72]  the  FtT  ruled  that  the   policy   that
    deportation of  foreign  criminals  was  in  the  public  interest  was
    enshrined in s.117C(1).  It then concluded at [73] that the  weight  to
    be attached by the  SSHD  to  the  public  interest  in  this  case  is
    "justifiably high".  Only then in the two paragraphs headed  "Balancing
    the  Factors" ([75] and [76]) did it turn  to  consider  s.117C(5)  and
    that was in only one of three  subheadings  ("a")  all  of  which  were
    proceeding by the overarching statement .. "However  having  considered
    all the factors in the round".  Significantly "b" referred to a  factor
    outside the scope of s.117C(5), namely the relevance of the  claimant's
    expressions of remorse  - a factor clearly going to  the  relevance  of
    his risk of reoffending and level of criminality.

Undue Hardship

13.  As regards the SSHD's first ground, I am in agreement with  Miss  Brown
    that it amounts to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  panel's
    assessment.  It is said that the panel "failed to identify  any  unduly
    harsh effect of deporting the appellant if  his  partner  and  children
    were to remain in the UK". That assertion flies  in  the  face  of  the
    panel's careful elaboration of reasons as  to  why  it  considered  the
    effect on both the partner and the children would be unduly harsh.   It
    is said that the difficulties identified by the panel were less serious
    than "unduly harsh" in its plain and ordinary meaning as given  in  the
    Oxford dictionary which denoted severity.  But it  is  clear  from  the
    language used by the panel that they did apply its ordinary meaning and
    did consider the effect would be severe - see e.g. [39],  [60]  -  [70]
    and [75].

Public Interest

14.  However I do consider that  the  SSHD's  second  ground  is  made  out.
    Despite stating that it found the public interest in the deportation of
    the claimant "justifiably high" ([73]) and despite  stating  that  this
    reflected the consideration set out in s.117C(1) ([72]) ,  the  panel's
    actual proportionality assessment, which commences at  [75]  under  the
    heading "Balancing the factors" fails to demonstrate that  this  public
    interest was properly weighed in the balance.  Indeed it  is  not  even
    clear it was weighed at all since the only factor at all relevant to it
    was set out at [75(b)], but this was confined to (i) acceptance  of  is
    expression of remorse; (ii) acceptance that he would  not reoffend (and
    had not committed any further offences since release).

15.  In so limiting assessment of the importance of the public interest  the
    panel committed the classic error of treating the  public  interest  as
    merely one-dimensional, concerned  only  with  whether  the  individual
    claimant's deportation is in the  public  interest,  e.g.  because  (as
    here) there is a low - or no-risk of reoffending: see  e.g.  AM  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1634 at [42] per Elias J.

16.  Since this legal error had a material impact  on  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, I hereby set aside the FtT decision.

17.  I consider that because the judge's decision is  now  a  year  old  and
    there are children involved who are now British citizens, it  would  be
    appropriate for the remaking of this decision to be remade at a hearing
    in advance of which the  claimant's  representatives  have  had  fuller
    opportunity to produce updated evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision is set aside for error of law.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

