
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00408/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd April 2019                   |On 02nd May 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 GRACJAN [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed by ABN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis on 30th January and Mr E Tufan on 23rd
                    April, Senior     Home Office Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

By a decision promulgated on 7th February 2019, the Upper Tribunal found  an
error of law by the First-tier Tribunal who had allowed  the  appeal  by  Mr
[O] against the deportation decision of the Secretary of State made on  17th
July 2017. The Upper Tribunal Panel (Lord Beckett and Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Coker) found as follows:

          1. Mr [O], a Polish national date of birth 19 December 1997,  was
             served with  a  decision  to  deport  on  17th  July  2017  in
             accordance with regulation 23(6)(b) and regulation 27  of  the
             Immigration European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("2016
             Regulations"), following his conviction  and  sentence  of  28
             months' imprisonment for drugs offences.

          2. His appeal against the deportation  decision  was  allowed  by
             First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ruth  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
             decision promulgated on 13th August  2018.  The  Secretary  of
             State sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
             grounds that in concluding that Mr [O] could only be  deported
             on imperative grounds, the judge had failed to properly  apply
             the law in determining that Mr [O]'s continuity  of  residence
             and integration in the UK had not been broken by his period of
             imprisonment; that length  of  residence  was  different  from
             integration.

          3. Other grounds were set out but, very sensibly, not relied upon
             by Mr Jarvis.

             Background

          4. The SSHD does not dispute that Mr [O] has acquired a permanent
             right of residence. Mr [O]'s exact date of entry is not  known
             but the SSHD acknowledges that there  have  been  applications
             made by and on behalf of him since 14th November 2002. He  was
             granted leave to remain under the  EC  Association  Agreement;
             Poland acceded  to  the  EEA  on  1st  May  2004  and  it  was
             acknowledged that he would only  have  had  a  right  of  free
             movement since then.

          5. The SSHD, in the reasons for the decision, did not accept that
             Mr [O] had acquired 10 years residence, although  he  accepted
             that Mr [O] had acquired  permanent  residence.  The  decision
             gave reasons why, in the SSHD's opinion, Mr [O]'s  deportation
             was justified on serious grounds of public  policy  or  public
             security. In [42] to [53], the First-tier Tribunal  judge  set
             out the evidence relating to Mr [O]'s residence in the UK.  He
             concluded, with adequate reasons, that Mr [O] had accrued some
             12 years residence in the UK, prior to his  first  conviction,
             exercising Treaty Rights. Prior to conviction he had  been  in
             full time education. He has been resident in the UK  since  at
             least November 2002 (age 9). His offences were committed as an
             adult. The issue was whether  his  convictions  and  behaviour
             were such as to break the integrative links with  the  UK.  If
             not,  then  Mr  [O]  is  entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
             protection and deportation is  only  justified  on  imperative
             grounds of public policy or security. Mr  Jarvis  acknowledged
             that if Mr [O] was entitled to the  third,  highest  level  of
             protection  then  it  was  unlikely  that  the  threshold  was
             crossed.

          6. Mr [O]'s convictions:

             22nd  July  2016     convicted  of  possession  of   Class   B
                                 (cannabis/cannabis  resin),  sentenced  on
                                 3rd  October  2016  at  the  crown   Court
                                 resulting in forfeiture and destruction.

             30th September 2016    convicted of 4 counts supplying Class A
                                 (cocaine) and 2 counts of possession  with
                                 intent to  supply  (Cocaine  and  heroin);
                                 sentenced  to  28  months'   imprisonment,
                                 victim    surcharge,    forfeiture     and
                                 destruction, forfeiture of cash (�470,000)
                                 and  a  criminal  behaviour  order  (which
                                 included a prohibition on association with
                                 his co-defendant)  for  5  years.  He  was
                                 released  on  licence  after   serving   8
                                 months.

             2017  Recalled  from  licence   following   driving   offences
                                 including   driving   without   insurance,
                                 dangerous driving and assault on a  police
                                 officer. He had borrowed the car form  his
                                 former co-defendant.

          7. The OASys assessment, completed on 14th November  2016  before
             his recall from  licence,  records,  inter  alia,  information
             provided by Mr [O] to the interviewing officer. This  includes
             his statement that he would not commit further offences,  that
             he had, between 29th April  2016  and  18th  June  2016,  been
             making money in his spare time by travelling  to  Ruislip  and
             selling drugs. The OASys report, in assessment risk of serious
             harm layer 1 records the risk to the public of  illicit  drugs
             and expresses the opinion that a return  to  association  with
             those who helped him start selling drugs and frequenting areas
             where he had sold drugs would increase the risk. It goes on to
             state

                  "It is unlikely that Mr [O] would choose to return to drug
                  dealing. His offence is  described  by  him  as  a  stupid
                  mistake and was out of character compared to any  previous
                  behaviour. He tried his hand at making some easy money and
                  has been shocked by the result and is deeply regretful."

          8. The overall conclusion  of  the  OASys  report  was  that  the
             evidence before the interviewing officer was that Mr  [O]  was
             at low risk of serious harm; current evidence did not indicate
             likelihood of serious harm.

             Error of law

          9. Before the First-tier Tribunal the SSHD submitted that Mr  [O]
             was a persistent offender whose  criminality  had  broken  and
             ended his academic studies; he appeared to  have  no  work  or
             study plans, no family life, no partner  and  no  particularly
             strong ties to the UK. Mr Paramjorthy who appeared for Mr  [O]
             before the First-tier Tribunal submitted that Mr [O] was not a
             persistent offender,  the  offences  for  which  he  had  been
             recalled on license were not drug related and that  there  was
             insufficient evidence to suggest that the original crimes  and
             the much less serious crimes which had led to his recall  from
             license represented a break in integrative links. He was not a
             prolific offender, had completed various course to address his
             offending  behaviour  including   courses   on   consequential
             thinking.

         10. The First-tier Tribunal judge referred to Vomero and  set  out
             [70] to [74] and [80] in his decision.  The  judge  identified
             that he was required to undertake

                  "an  overall  assessment  of  all  the  circumstances   in
                  deciding whether he is entitled to the  highest  level  of
                  protection from expulsion".

         11. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  set  out  his  decision  with
             subheadings but some of the findings  under  the  heading  EEA
             Regulation 27 were of relevance to the findings made under the
             heading the overall assessment - is the continuity of 10 years
             residence broken.  The First-tier Tribunal judge found:

                  61.  While the appellant's  serious  criminality  and  the
                  fact that  he  committed  further,  albeit  less  serious,
                  crimes while on licence, does suggest he has  severed  his
                  links to the community, I take the view his  behaviour  in
                  detention as set out by those who knew of  him  intimately
                  while in prison, is indicative of a person  who  has  made
                  the  best  possible  efforts   [sic]   to   re-forge   his
                  connections and prepare to  return  to  the  community  in
                  which he was previously, undoubtedly embedded.

                  62.  I look at all  of  these  matters  in  the  round  as
                  required by Vomero, within the context of the  appellant's
                  thirteen years of lawful  residence  as  an  EEA  national
                  before his conviction. Having regard to the  circumstances
                  of  his  offending  and  reoffending,  the  view  of   the
                  probation service in the OASys report that he represents a
                  low risk of future offending, the  excellent  testimonials
                  from those who knew him best in prison, his  age  now  and
                  the fact that for most of his life in the UK he  has  been
                  in  education  and  living  with  his  nuclear  family,  I
                  conclude  that,  notwithstanding   his   re-offending   on
                  licence, his period of imprisonment  does  not  break  the
                  continuity of his residence.

                  ...

                  67.  It is difficult to  imagine  more  foolish  behaviour
                  from a young  man  on  licence  after  the  commission  of
                  serious drug offences and although the  probation  service
                  state in the OASys report that the appellant represents  a
                  low risk of reoffending, that report was  prepared  before
                  the appellant actually did reoffend. While  the  documents
                  before me show that he has completed some relevant courses
                  which might be taken to address aspects of his  propensity
                  to reoffend, including a course on consequential thinking,
                  and has been working hard with his case manager to prepare
                  for release, as set out in her letter of 17 July 2018, the
                  fact remains that he  failed  to  have  insight  to  avoid
                  placing himself in a situation where he  was  involved  in
                  further criminality on licence.

                  68.  ... One of his  conditions  on  licence  was  not  to
                  associate with that person [his  former  co-defendant]  in
                  public. Although it is not clear whether he did  associate
                  with that person in breach of his licence, the fact of his
                  involvement in any way with that individual, including  by
                  borrowing his car, represents a complete  failure  of  the
                  appellant to understand the seriousness of his  situation,
                  to amend his behaviour and to  avoid  placing  himself  in
                  circumstances which could lead to further criminality.

                  ...

                  70.  ... I take the view he does pose some continuing risk
                  to the public, albeit  very  likely  not  in  relation  to
                  offences of  similar  gravity  to  those  leading  to  his
                  imprisonment in 2016.

         12. The sentencing remarks of the judge at Isleworth  Crown  Court
             considered Mr [O]'s relative youth, that he pleaded guilty  at
             the  first  opportunity,  that   he   had   good   educational
             qualifications and that although he played a significant  role
             in the commission of the  offences  there  were  some  aspects
             which  indicated  he  played  a  lesser  role.  The   Criminal
             Behaviour Order required him not  to,  inter  alia,  associate
             with his former co-defendant in public.

         13. The First-tier Tribunal judge, in his decision at [60], refers
             to the evidence being suggestive of severed links and the  re-
             forging of connections. When this is read with the  subsequent
             paragraphs in the context of the recall to  prison  whilst  he
             was on licence and that there is a Criminal Behaviour Order in
             force which suggests continuing risk and that the  finding  of
             the First-tier Tribunal judge that there is a continuing  risk
             to the public he will commit  further  offences,  there  is  a
             contradiction in the findings by the judge that  the  offences
             have not broken the integrative links. It may well be that the
             offences which  led  to  his  recall  were  not  of  the  same
             magnitude as those for which he was convicted and sentenced in
             October 2016, but they  are  nevertheless  offences  committed
             whilst on licence. In the First-tier Tribunal  judge's  words,
             the evidence is suggestive of Mr [O] having 'severed his links
             to the community' albeit  he  is  making  'the  best  possible
             efforts to re-forge his connections'.

         14. The wording used by the Judge  is  itself  an  acknowledgement
             that such integrative links as there are have been severed. We
             are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge has erred  in
             law in finding Mr [O] is entitled  to  the  highest  level  of
             protection from deportation such  that  the  decision  is  set
             aside to be  remade.  The  judge  has  provided  contradictory
             reasoning for his conclusion that integrative links  have  not
             been broken given the finding in [60] that they have, that  he
             continues to be a risk to the public and that he was  recalled
             from licence.

 1. Although provision had been made for oral evidence from  the  appellant
    and his mother, Mr Tufan confirmed he did  not  seek  to  cross-examine
    either possible witness; there was no  dispute  as  to  the  underlying
    facts and the issues were firstly whether the appellant had integrative
    links with the UK and if so had he lost them and  secondly  if  he  was
    only entitled to the 'serious grounds' level of protection, did he meet
    that threshold.

    Integrative links

 2. Mr [O] has been resident in the UK since at least November  2002,  aged
    4. He attended school in the UK and, prior to conviction  had  been  in
    full time education. He had no offending record prior to the  offences,
    which were committed when he was  an  adult.   His  criminal  offending
    history is set out above; he was crime-free for 14 years and  there  is
    no suggestion that he was unruly at school or displayed any anti-social
    behaviour prior to arrest. He obtained GCSEs and completed a first year
    at college studying 'electricals'; it was during his second year,  just
    prior to taking  some  exams,  that  he  was  arrested  for  the  drugs
    offences. He speaks English and Polish but cannot read or write Polish.
    His close family (parents and younger brother) are in the UK  and  have
    been since he arrived; his father arriving a year  earlier.  None  have
    returned to Poland for any length of time. There was a period  of  time
    when his  parents  separated  but  they  are  now  together.  Mr  [O]'s
    Probation officer, in a short report dated 4th April 2019 said that  Mr
    [O]'s parents  continued  to  be  "a  strong  supportive  factor".  The
    sentencing judge referred  to  the  family  problems  at  the  time  of
    sentence. It is accepted by the SSHD that Mr [O] has acquired permanent
    residence.

 3. The sentencing judge took the view that Mr [O]  played  "a  significant
    role" in the drug dealing  but  that  there  were  some  aspects  which
    indicated that he "played a lesser role". Neither of these  aspects  is
    amplified in the sentencing remarks but  the  judge  sentenced  Mr  [O]
    within the Category 3 guidelines - street dealing. He was not sentenced
    as a gang member or as a possible gang member. Mr Tufan in  submissions
    did not assert the appellant had been a gang member but  said  that  he
    was "not sure" whether the offences indicated gang membership and  that
    gang membership was an aggravating feature. There is no indication that
    there is a "gang membership" aspect to the appellant's criminality  and
    I reject that submission, in so far as it impacts upon my decision.

 4. The OASys report in November 2016 assessed him as being at low risk  of
    serious  harm  to  the  public  in  the  future.  It   concludes   that
    circumstances that might increase risk include association  with  those
    who helped him to start selling drugs  and  frequenting  areas  of  his
    former offending. The writer says it

         "is unlikely Mr [O] would return to drug dealing.  His  offence  is
         described by him as a stupid  mistake  and  was  out  of  character
         compared to any previous behaviour. He tried  his  hand  at  making
         easy money and has  been  shocked  by  the  result  and  is  deeply
         regretful."

    The factors that are likely to reduce future risk are described in  the
    report as full-time employment,  a  positive  law-abiding  peer  group,
    family support and continuing studies in electrical installation.

 5. Mr Tufan submitted that the committing of crime was such  as  to  sever
    links. The criminal activity had been of increasing seriousness, he had
    breached his licence and been recalled; this was highly  suggestive  of
    the severance of any integrative links that may have been forged and he
    could not therefore benefit from the highest threshold. Mr [O] was,  he
    submitted a persistent offender.

 6. In addition to drawing my attention to the lengthy period of  time  the
    appellant had been in the UK, crime-free, and that the  centre  of  the
    appellant's  life  could  not  be  anywhere  other  than  the  UK,   Mr
    Paramjorthy submitted that the OASys report, the sentencing remarks and
    the appellant's life during his  imprisonment  and  upon  release  were
    indicative of the fact that the integrative links had not been broken.

 7. In B v Land Baden-Wurttemberg (C-316/16) and Secretary of State for the
    Home Department v Vomero (C-424/16) the ECJ gave a  preliminary  ruling
    on 17th April 2018 and held, in response to the three questions  before
    it:

         Was it a prerequisite of eligibility  for  the  protection  against
         expulsion provided for in Directive 2004/38 art.28(3)(a)  that  the
         person concerned have a right  of  permanent  residence?  Yes.  The
         court noted that the protection against expulsion provided  for  in
         the directive gradually increased in proportion to  the  degree  of
         integration of the EU citizen concerned in the host  Member  State.
         Thus, whereas a citizen with a permanent  right  of  residence  may
         only be expelled on 'serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
         security', a citizen who had resided in the host Member  State  for
         the previous ten years may only be expelled on 'imperative  grounds
         of public security'. Accordingly, the enhanced protection linked to
         a 10-year period of residence was available to an EU  citizen  only
         if he first satisfied the eligibility condition for the lower level
         of protection, namely having a right of permanent  residence  after
         residing legally in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
         of five years.

         How should the period corresponding to  the  'previous  ten  years'
         within the meaning of Directive 2004/38 art.28(3)(a) be calculated?
         The 10-year period of residence must be calculated by counting back
         and that period  must,  in  principle,  be  continuous.  The  court
         observed, however, that  Directive  2004/38  did  not  specify  the
         circumstances which were capable of interrupting the 10-year period
         of residence for  the  purposes  of  the  acquisition  of  enhanced
         protection. The court therefore held  that  an  overall  assessment
         must  systematically  be  made  of  the  situation  of  the  person
         concerned at the time when the question of expulsion arose. In that
         assessment, the national authorities had to take all  the  relevant
         factors  into  consideration  in  each  individual  case  and  must
         ascertain whether the periods of absence from the host Member State
         involved the transfer  to  another  State  of  the  centre  of  the
         personal, family or occupational interests of the person concerned.

         Did periods of imprisonment automatically deprive a person  of  the
         enhanced protection  in  Directive  2004/38  art.28(3)(a)?  No.  To
         determine whether detention  periods  had  broken  the  integrative
         links  previously  forged  with  the  host  Member  State,  it  was
         necessary to carry out an overall assessment of  the  situation  of
         the person concerned at the  precise  time  when  the  question  of
         expulsion arose. Thus, periods of detention did  not  automatically
         deprive a person of the enhanced protection. The court also pointed
         out that the overall assessment of  the  situation  of  the  person
         concerned must take into account the strength  of  the  integrative
         links forged with the host Member State  before  his  detention  as
         well as the nature of the offence, the circumstances in which  that
         offence was committed and the behaviour  of  the  person  concerned
         during the period of imprisonment.

         At what point in time  should  compliance  with  the  condition  of
         having 'resided in the host  Member  State  for  the  previous  ten
         years' be assessed? At the date  on  which  the  initial  expulsion
         decision was adopted. However,  where  an  expulsion  decision  was
         adopted but its enforcement was deferred for a  certain  period  of
         time, it may be necessary  to  carry  out  a  fresh  assessment  of
         whether the person concerned represented a genuine, present  threat
         to public security.

 8. In Land Baden-Wurttemberg v  Tsakourides  (C145/09)  in  a  preliminary
    ruling given on 23rd November 2010, the ECJ held

         (1)  Article 28(3)(a) was silent as to the circumstances capable of
         interrupting  the  10-year  residence  period.  Starting  from  the
         premise that, like the right of permanent  residence,  art.28(3)(a)
         protection was acquired after a certain length of residence in  the
         host Member State and could  subsequently  be  lost,  it  could  be
         possible to  apply  the  criteria  in  art.16(4)  by  analogy.  The
         national authority had  to  take  into  account  all  the  relevant
         factors in each individual case, in  particular:  the  duration  of
         each period of absence; the cumulative duration and  the  frequency
         of those absences; the reasons for them; and whether they  involved
         the transfer of the individual's  centre  of  personal,  family  or
         occupational  interests  to  another  state.  The  fact   that   an
         individual had been forced to return to the host  Member  State  in
         order to serve a term of imprisonment could, together with the time
         spent in prison and with the factors listed above,  be  taken  into
         account as part of the overall assessment. It was for the  national
         court to assess, in the main proceedings, whether  the  integrating
         links with the host Member  State  had  been  broken.  Were  it  to
         conclude that  T's  absence  did  not  prevent  him  from  enjoying
         art.28(3)(a) protection, it would then have to examine whether  the
         expulsion decision was  based  on  "imperative  grounds  of  public
         security" (see paras 22, 29-30, 32-35, 37-38 of judgment).

         (2)  The fight against drug dealing by organised groups was capable
         of being covered by "imperative grounds of public security"  within
         the meaning of art.28(3) and "serious grounds of public  policy  or
         public  security"  within  the  meaning  of   art.28(2).   The   EU
         legislature had clearly intended to limit art.28(3)  expulsions  to
         exceptional circumstances, which presupposed a very serious  threat
         to public  security.  Public  security  covered  a  Member  State's
         internal and external security, and threats might  include  threats
         to the functioning of institutions, essential  public  services  or
         the survival of the population; the risk of a  serious  disturbance
         to foreign relations or the peaceful coexistence of nations;  or  a
         risk to military interests. Organised drug dealing was a crime with
         impressive economic and operational resources and often had  trans-
         national connections. It posed a threat to the health,  safety  and
         quality of life of EU citizens as well as  to  the  legal  economy,
         stability and security of  Member  States.  Drug  addiction  was  a
         serious evil fraught with social and economic danger, and organised
         drug trafficking could  reach  a  level  of  intensity  that  might
         directly threaten the calm and physical security of the  population
         (paras 39-47). Still, expulsion could be justified only if  it  was
         necessary for the protection of the interests it aimed  to  secure,
         and a balance had to be  struck  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the
         exceptional nature of the threat to public  security  activity  and
         the risk of reoffending  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  risk  of
         compromising the individual's social  rehabilitation  in  the  host
         Member State. Account had to be taken of the nature and seriousness
         of the offence; the  length  of  the  individual's  residence;  the
         length  of  time  since  the  commission  of   the   offence;   the
         individual's conduct during that time; and the solidity of his ties
         with the host Member State. There  had  to  be  very  good  reasons
         justifying the expulsion of an individual who had spent most of his
         childhood in the host Member State (paras 49-56).

 9. Mr [O] had been resident in the UK for more  than  10  years  prior  to
    committing the offences which led to the expulsion. He came as a child,
    completed his childhood in the UK, undertook the whole of his education
    in the UK, and has not spent any significant  period  of  time  in  his
    country of origin.  His  whole  family  is  in  the  UK.  There  is  no
    suggestion of any criminality, disorderly or unruly behaviour or  other
    anti-social behaviour prior to him reaching adulthood. There can be  no
    doubt that at the date of his first arrest he was fully  integrated  in
    the UK.  The question is whether  those  integrative  links  have  been
    broken. The  fact  and  nature  of  his  offences  and  his  subsequent
    imprisonment, including his recall on licence,  are  factors  that  are
    required to be considered in making that assessment.

10. Both Tsakourides and Vomero refer to  the  possibility  of  integrative
    links being lost. At the time of the expulsion decision, the  appellant
    had been convicted of  drug  dealing  Class  A  drugs.   The  expulsion
    decision was taken on 10th July 2017; the sentencing took place on 30th
    September 2016 and the offences which led to  the  sentencing  occurred
    earlier that year. There is no doubt but that dealing in drugs is  very
    serious. He has been convicted of street  dealing;  there  is  no  gang
    membership suspicion. During  his  imprisonment  he  undertook  courses
    which have been of benefit to his development. The OASys report and his
    probation officer are positive as to his behaviour. The prison  reports
    reflect his participation as thoughtful and positive.

11. I do not find the appellant to be a persistent offender. He has accrued
    drugs offences over a short period of time and has  been  sentenced  to
    the minimum applicable.  There  is  no  suggestion  in  the  sentencing
    remarks or the OASys report of a possibility of increasing criminality.

12. Since his release from prison, Mr [O]  has  started  work;  he  remains
    living at home where he has strong relationships with his parents whose
    shock at his conviction and their determination  to  provide  him  with
    support in the future was apparent from their  witness  statements.  He
    has committed no further offences and there is  no  indication  of  any
    unruly or anti-social behaviour since his  release  from  prison.  This
    reflects not only his dismay and remorse at the offences  he  committed
    but also that the offending was a period of time in his life  that  was
    out of character.

13. Without in any way condoning  or  minimising  the  seriousness  of  the
    offences  committed  I  am  satisfied  that   the   integrative   links
    established by  Mr  [O]  prior  to  the  commission  of  his  offending
    behaviour have not been broken by his behaviour.

14. As acknowledged by Mr Jarvis on 30th January it would be  difficult  to
    sustain a submission that the convictions of Mr [O] were sufficient  to
    meet the threshold required where integrative links are held to  exist.
    Nevertheless, Mr Tufan did  submit  that,  as  per  Tsakourides,  'drug
    pushers could meet that high threshold. This appellant  does  not  fall
    into the category of gang related drug pushing. He was sentenced at the
    very lowest level of the lowest guideline. Furthermore,  the  appellant
    has been categorised as being at low risk of further drug offences,  he
    is not a persistent offender, the ties he has with the  UK  are  strong
    and established during his childhood of which all but  the  first  four
    years have been spent in the UK and his behaviour both in prison and on
    release has not given rise to suspicion of further offences. The recall
    from licence was for non-drugs offences albeit for offences  that  were
    themselves serious. But taking those into account in the context of the
    evidence as a whole I am satisfied that the criminality does not  reach
    the threshold required of 'imperative grounds'.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for  legal  error.
    The appeal against the decision giving rise to the appeal in the First-
    tier Tribunal is allowed.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and is set aside.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


     Date 30th April 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
