
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00051/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2019                     |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 VALDAS [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O' Ryan
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 18 December 1977 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Lithuania. By a decision dated 6 December 2017, the Secretary of  State
    decided  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the  appellant.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 October 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I notified the representatives at the initial hearing at Birmingham  on
    9 August 2019 that I intended to allow the appeal. I shall,  therefore,
    only give brief reasons. One of grounds of appeal concerns  an  alleged
    procedural irregularity. The judge had reserved his decision  following
    a hearing on 6 July 2018 and gave directions for both parties  to  make
    further written submissions. The Secretary of State  had  sent  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal the written further submissions of Mr  Tallis,  the
    presenting officer before the First-tier Tribunal. There is a  copy  of
    the written submissions on the Tribunal file.  The  judge's  directions
    provided that the submissions should also  be  sent  to  the  appellant
    solicitors who, in turn, would have permission to  respond.  I  have  a
    witness statement,  endorsed  with  a  statement  of  truth,  from  the
    solicitor of the appellant. She states that no copy of the Secretary of
    State's written submissions was ever received at her  firm.  The  first
    she learnt of the existence of the submissions was when she read  about
    them in the judge's decision dismissing her client's appeal.

 3. In the light of the solicitor's statement which I accept as truthful in
    its entirety, I find that the appellant/his solicitors did not  receive
    the submissions of Mr Tallis. Given that  the  judge  had  provided  an
    opportunity to the appellant to respond to  any  such  submissions,  it
    follows that that opportunity was denied to the  appellant  who,  as  a
    consequence, has been denied a fair hearing of his appeal. I also  take
    the point made by Mr O'Ryan, who appeared for the appellant before  the
    Upper Tribunal, that  the  decision  of  the  judge,  in  part,  adopts
    arguments advanced by Mr Tallis in  the  written  submissions.  In  the
    circumstances, I did not hear argument regarding the remaining  grounds
    of appeal as it is clear that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    must be set aside and the appeal heard by a fresh Tribunal.

 4. The judge found that the appellant had acquired a  permanent  right  of
    residence. No challenge to that finding has been made by the  Secretary
    of State. The First-tier Tribunal shall proceed to determine the appeal
    de novo on the basis that the appellant has a permanent right to reside
    in the United Kingdom.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  6
    October 2018 is set aside. None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal  to
    remake the decision at or following a hearing.

    Both  parties  may  submit  fresh  evidence  provided  copies  of   any
    documentary evidence are filed at the First-tier  Tribunal  and  served
    upon the other party no less than 21 days prior to  the  next  hearing.
    Both parties are directed to file and serve skeleton arguments no later
    than 10 days prior to the next hearing. The parties are referred to the
    preserved finding at [4] above.


Signed                              Date 9 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

