
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00006/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Determination Promulgated|
|On 19 September 2014                      |On 13 January 2015       |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAZHAD AKHTAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Barton, instructed by Sabz Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer in this determination to the appellant as the  respondent
    and to the respondent as the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant, Shahzad Akhtar, was born on 26 January  1983  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant made a claim for asylum  using
    a false identity in July 2007 and, in November 2010,  applied  in  that
    false  identity  for  a  certificate  of  approval  for  marriage.   He
    subsequently married Shamaila Ghazal in Manchester  in  February  2011.
    He pleaded guilty to offences of obtaining leave to remain by deception
    and making a false statement to obtain a payment,  fraud  by  making  a
    false statement to the Department for  Work  and  Pensions,  possession
    with intent of a false identity document and, on 24 November  2011,  at
    the Crown Court in  Manchester  he  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.  He was released on licence after  serving  three  and  a
    half months in prison.  A  decision  was  made  to  deport  him  on  16
    December 2013 and the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Brunnen; Mr A E Armitage) which, in a determination  promulgated
    on 18 June 2014, allowed the appeal.  The Tribunal found [61] that  for
    the purposes of "paragraph  398  [of  HC  395]  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in this case that outweigh the  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation".  The  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights would be breached and that the appellant did fall
    within Exception 1 of Section 33 of the 2007  Act.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the circumstances in the  appellant's
    case were not exceptional.  The Tribunal had found that members of  the
    appellant's family relied upon him for physical and  emotional  support
    in a manner which  exceeded  that  which  might  normally  be  expected
    between family members.  The appellant's parents are deaf and mute  and
    also illiterate.  They are unable to use any form  of  recognised  sign
    language and can communicate only using an  informal  system  of  signs
    which they have developed between  themselves  [36].   The  appellant's
    brothers, his  wife  and  youngest  sister  can  communicate  with  the
    appellant's parents only to a very limited extent.  The Tribunal  noted
    [38] that they had before them a "quantity of medical evidence".  There
    was also evidence from  Manchester  Social  Services  and  the  grounds
    complain that the offer to the family of assistance and support by  way
    of a "family support package" provided by the social services  had  not
    been taken into  account  by  the  panel.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    strongest ground, perhaps, is  that  of  paragraph  [11].   The  ground
    complains that the Tribunal took:

         The appellant's evidence as to his family's circumstances  at  face
         value contrary to  the  fact  that  it  had  been  found  that  the
         appellant fabricated an asylum claim  and  had  been  convicted  of
         crimes of deception which he committed in  order  to  stay  in  the
         United Kingdom.

 4. Dealing with that ground first, I find that it is without  merit.   The
    Tribunal's determination is extremely  thorough  and  is  very  clearly
    expressed.  It is apparent that the Tribunal was well aware that it was
    accepting an account of the appellant's family's circumstances  against
    a background of previous deception exercised by this appellant with the
    cynical and criminal intention of remaining in the United Kingdom.   At
    [37] the Tribunal gave virtually no weight to testimonials which it had
    received  speaking  of  the  appellant's   "reputable   character   and
    describing him as an honest person".  It  is  equally  clear  that  the
    Tribunal was aware  that  there  was  limited  medical  evidence  which
    provided "no real commentary on the state of health of the  appellant's
    parents".  It was  noted  that  the  appellant's  father  suffers  from
    hypertension, osteoarthritis and prostate cancer whilst the mother  has
    a history of hypertension and diabetes.  The Tribunal  was  well  aware
    that there was no medical evidence that "provides us with an assessment
    of the severity of these  conditions  or  their  implications  for  the
    couple's ability to care for themselves".  There was, however, a number
    of items  of  correspondence  from  Manchester  Social  Services  which
    outlined the  very  considerable  difficulties  which  the  appellant's
    parents have in coping with everyday life, including communicating with
    others.  I find that the Tribunal was entitled to place weight on  that
    evidence.  The evidence also corroborated what  the  appellant  himself
    said about his parents' circumstances.  To that  extent,  the  Tribunal
    was not placing reliance entirely upon the evidence of a  proven  liar.
    The  Tribunal  reminded  itself  throughout  of  the  severity  of  the
    appellant's offending and the fact that his own evidence has had to  be
    treated with circumspection.

 5. Crucial to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  was  the  detailed  analysis
    undertaken by the Tribunal of the  likely  effect  of  the  appellant's
    deportation upon his  other  family  members.   At  [46]  the  Tribunal
    considered the  ability  of  other  family  members  to  care  for  the
    appellant's parents should he be removed to Pakistan.   I  can  see  no
    error in that analysis which is factually correct and reasonable in the
    circumstances.  The Tribunal's conclusion that "there is no  reason  to
    think that [other family members] would be willing  to  step  into  the
    appellant's shoes as their parents' carer still less  reason  to  think
    that they would be suitable" was  plainly  available  to  them  on  the
    evidence.

 6. There was also detailed evidence from the children services  department
    at Manchester City Council  regarding  the  appellant's  sister.   That
    evidence  indicated  the  "extremely  close  relationship"   with   the
    appellant and the incontrovertible fact that  the  appellant's  parents
    would themselves be unable to care for the sister  in  the  appellant's
    absence.  His sister had become "extremely distressed  ...  very  upset
    and unable to  concentrate  in  ...  lessons"  during  the  appellant's
    absence in prison.  Whilst not inevitable, the Tribunal's conclusion at
    [57] that the sister's best  interests  "strongly"  depended  upon  the
    appellant remaining in the United Kingdom it was a finding achieved  by
    the Tribunal following a rigorous analysis of the evidence.  At the end
    of the day,  the  Tribunal  was  drawn  towards  the  conclusion  that,
    notwithstanding the seriousness of his offending  (which  the  Tribunal
    did not seek to minimise), the appellant's sister and also his  parents
    would suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences in  the  event  that  the
    appellant was deported to Pakistan.  Crucial to that decision  was  the
    Tribunal's finding  that  neither  social  services  nor  other  family
    members would be able to provide the same  or  an  adequate  substitute
    level of care for those individuals.  The Secretary of  State  may  not
    agree with the Tribunal's findings but I am  unable  to  conclude  that
    they were in  any  way  wrong  in  law.   There  was  sufficient  other
    documentary evidence to support the appellant's own description of  his
    family's circumstances.  Accordingly, I find that the appeal should  be
    dismissed.

DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


