
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00655/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April 2015                              |On 28 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                TEDROS MEHARI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr N Stevens, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondent is a citizen of Eritrea born on 3 July 1974.
    However for the sake of convenience, I shall refer to Mr Mehari as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent  which  are  the
    designations they held before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant applied to the SSHD seeking to have the deportation order
    made against him on 9 February 2009, following a court  recommendation,
    revoked under paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules.   The  respondent
    refused that application  without  right  of  appeal.   The  respondent
    appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett  who  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 10 December 2014.  The respondent  now  appeals  against
    that determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

    Findings of First-tier Tribunal

 4. The first-tier Tribunal Judge saw no merit in the appellant's appeal in
    respect of his asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds.  He  stated
    that  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  has  been  considered  in   two
    determinations and dismissed. He stated that following  the  principles
    in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 that the appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk in Eritrea for any reason and there is no  new  evidence  provided
    which would lead him to reach a different conclusion.

 5. The Judge  also  dismissed  the  appellant's  application  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276 ADE the Immigration Rules and stated since  the  decision
    was prior to July 2012, the appellant has not been able to  demonstrate
    that he has the necessary 14 years continuous residence in  the  United
    Kingdom because the original decision of 3 November 1994 was made under
    section 15 (1) as it was then, of the Immigration Act 1979.  By  virtue
    of the former 276B be (i) a notice of intention to deport stopped  time
    running for continuous residence.

 6. The Judge however allowed the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights. After taking  into  account
    section 11C and 117D (ii) which provides that  a  foreign  criminal  is
    someone who is not British and has been convicted in the United Kingdom
    of an offence and has been sentenced to a period of at least 12 months.
    The  Judge  stated  that  the  appellant  was  given  a   sentence   of
    imprisonment of only two months.

 7. The Judge stated "despite the way it is phrased in paragraph 117C  that
    cannot be taken to mean that the deportation of someone  who  has  been
    sentenced only to 2 months imprisonment, rather than 12 months, is  not
    in the public interest, however plainly there is less  public  interest
    in the removal of those sentenced to a short period. In addition,  with
    regard to this appellant's sentence is, at the date of  this  decision,
    spent. He has not been convicted of any  other  offence  since  in  the
    United Kingdom".

 8. In the refusal letter at paragraph 85 is reference to  the  appellant's
    identity being used as an alias. The paragraph is unclear  but  was  in
    any event not relied on by Ms Owen as she had no information about what
    was being suggested in that paragraph.

 9. The Judge stated that on the  one  side  there  is  a  person  who  has
    committed a crime in the United Kingdom, who was sentenced  to  a  very
    short period of imprisonment and his offences are  now  spent.  On  the
    other hand, the appellant has now been in the  United  Kingdom  for  21
    years and has not  been  charged  that  any  other  criminal  offences.
    Clearly section 117B considerations have to be taken  into  account  as
    the appellant's time in the  United  Kingdom  has  largely  been  on  a
    precarious basis.

10. The Judge stated, the public interest  in  removing  the  appellant  is
    reduced by the unexplained delay on the part of the Secretary of  State
    following receipt of the application made  by  the  appellant  in  July
    2010. It was not until four years later, on  9  August  2014  that  the
    Secretary of State decided to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order.
    That does not suggest that the Secretary of State considers there to be
    any significant public interest in the removal of this  appellant.  The
    evidence is that those working for the respondent are of the view  that
    it was not possible to remove  the  appellant  and  in  2009,  a  final
    attempt was made to obtain a travel document by  an  interview  of  the
    appellant with the Eritrean Embassy. The respondent says  that  it  was
    the fault of the appellant that  he  failed  to  obtain  the  necessary
    travel documents. It is for the respondent to prove as she has made the
    assertion that it is the appellant's fault that he  did  not  obtain  a
    travel document, but no evidence has  been  produced  to  support  this
    claim and I do not find the appellant was at fault.

11. The appellant has lived in the United Kingdom longer than he has  lived
    in Eritrea. He left that country when he was 16 years old and spent two
    years in Sudan and has been in the United Kingdom for 21 years,  albeit
    with no leave. The offence for which he was convicted was plainly not a
    particularly serious one, as he was only sentenced to 2 months  and  he
    served nine days in prison. The  appellant  has  committed  no  further
    offences and the offences are now spent. He does not  appear  in  those
    circumstances to be a risk to the public.

12. The appellant's medical issues were considered and Judge noted that the
    appellant is currently receiving  medication  or  treatment  for  these
    conditions. He stated that the medical report of 15 June 2010, which is
    the most recent that  was  lodged,  referred  to  the  appellant  being
    stressed by this situation. The judge noted that this is not surprising
    bearing in mind the length of time that he has  been  in  this  country
    without any leave.

13. The Judge was not satisfied that removal of  this  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom after 21 years  is  legitimate  to  the  public  aim  of
    prevention of disorder of crime, as in the 20 year period, he has  been
    convicted only of one offence which was plainly minor as it attracted a
    very short sentence and that sentence  is  now  spent.  The  legitimate
    public aim does not seem to have been given  a  high  priority  by  the
    Secretary of State in light of the four-year delay in dealing with  the
    appellant's application in 2010. The public interest in the removal  of
    this appellant is extremely low for those reasons and it is  outweighed
    by the length of time  that  the  appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

    The grounds of appeal

14. The grounds of appeal asserted that because there is no provision for a
    deportation appeal to be allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. It is either allowed under paragraph 399 or 399A  or
    granted leave under  paragraph  399B,  or  it  is  allowed  under  very
    compelling or exceptional circumstances which is  under  the  Rules  at
    paragraph 398 and also leads to a grant of leave under paragraph  399B.
    This is the complete code which was upheld by the Court of Appeal in MF
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192.

15. The Judge has failed to give regard to the government's  view  on  what
    are compelling or exceptional circumstances.  The  appellant  needs  to
    demonstrate his circumstances are something above and  beyond  that  in
    paragraph 399 (a) or 399  (b)  to  succeed  under  very  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances grounds. The Judge has failed to identify why
    the appellant circumstances are very  compelling  or  exceptional.  The
    appellant circumstances have not materially altered  since  his  appeal
    was dismissed. The  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  attempting  to
    pervert the course of justice, has been found at previous appeals to be
    not credible and has used  false  documents.  Therefore  he  is  not  a
    credible witness and his evidence cannot be trusted and the  Judge  has
    not taken into account any of these considerations.

16. The appellant stay in the United Kingdom has been either unlawfully  or
    precarious and therefore in  accordance  with  paragraph  117B  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, little weight should be given to his private life
    which  the  judge  has  failed  to  do.  There  is  nothing  about  the
    appellant's private life at all which could not  continue  in  Eritrea.
    Whilst his residence  has  been  lengthy,  it  has  been  unlawful  and
    precarious at all times, he cannot be said to  have  become  integrated
    here and to have become estranged from life in Eritrea.  The  onus  has
    been on the appellant to leave the country and he has failed to do so.

17. The appellant has family in Eritrea who he is in contact with them.  He
    speaks the language and he has spent his youth and formative  years  in
    Eritrea, so there would  not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in to  Eritrea.  The  Judge  has  placed  weight  on  the
    appellant's  mental  health   problems   at   paragraph   29   of   his
    determination, but the evidence does not support this finding and there
    is no evidence beyond 2010 of his medical problems. The Judge has given
    no consideration to the available medical  treatment  in  Eritrea.  The
    appellant circumstances therefore cannot be said to be exceptional.

18. There are no factors in the appellant circumstances which set it  apart
    from an ordinary private life claim. The  appellant  circumstances  are
    not very strong to outweigh the public interest in line with  the  case
    of SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550. Most recently in the case of The Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636,  the  Court  of
    Appeal emphasised the importance of Tribunal's  considering  Article  8
    claims within the rubric of the new Rules.

19. The Judge failed to take into account that the Court of Appeal decision
    in AJ which stated that the  scales  were  "very  heavily  weighted  in
    favour of deportation, and something "very compelling" was required  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation given the circumstances  of
    this case.

20. The appellant has been convicted of attempting to pervert the course of
    justice and has been found in previous appeals to be not  credible  and
    has used false documents and therefore cannot be trusted. Even  if  the
    appellant is at low risk of reoffending,  there  is  a  need  to  deter
    others from similar offences. There has been no delay by the  Secretary
    of State as attempts have been made to obtain a travel document and the
    appellant has failed to comply with this.

21. There is  a  strong  public  interest  in  favour  of  the  appellant's
    deportation. The cases  of  AM  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1634  and  Masih  (deportation  -  public
    interest -  basic  principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00046  provides
    helpful guidance to the instant appeal.

22. In the case of AM it was  held  that  deportation  in  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of preventing crime and disorder, is not to be seen as a
    one-dimensional in its effect. It has the effect not only  of  removing
    the risk of reoffending by the deportee himself, but also of  deterring
    other foreign nationals in a similar position. Furthermore, deportation
    of foreign criminals preserves  public  confidence  in  the  system  of
    control whose loss would itself tend towards crime and disorder. In the
    case of Masih it was found that "in a  case  of  automatic  deportation
    full account must be taken of the strong public  interest  in  removing
    foreign citizens convicted of serious offences, which lie not  only  in
    the prevention of further  offences  on  the  part  of  the  individual
    concerned, but in deterring others from committing them  in  the  first
    place  "...  deportation  of  foreign   criminals   express   society's
    condemnation  of  serious  criminal  activity   and   promotes   public
    confidence in the treatment of  foreign  citizens  who  have  committed
    them".

23. The Judge has failed to carry out a  thorough  assessment  taking  into
    consideration society's revulsion against the kind of  crime  that  the
    appellant committed and the deterrence of other foreign criminals.  The
    Court of Appeal in DS  (India)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 544 held that even if it could  probably  be
    said that there was no risk of reoffending,  the  respondent  would  be
    entitled to say in appropriate circumstances that  the  removal  of  an
    offender from the country was in the public interest. This  is  because
    the public interest in the deportation  of  those  who  commit  serious
    crimes goes well beyond the need  to  deprive  the  individual  of  the
    opportunity of the chance to reoffend in this country: it  extends  the
    need to deter others and to prevent  serious  crime  generally  and  to
    uphold the public abhorrence of such offending. It is submitted had the
    Judge taken these issues into consideration, he would have  found  that
    the decision to deport is proportionate.

    Is there an error of law in the determination?

24. The Judge in his determination put considerable emphasis  on  the  fact
    that the appellant was only sentenced to 2 months imprisonment and that
    is clearly not sufficient to undermine the respondent's public interest
    in removal of a foreign citizen having committed a crime in the  United
    Kingdom. He  also  lay  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    conviction was now spent. The Judge therefore concluded that the public
    interest in the removal of this  appellant  is  extremely  low  and  is
    outweighed by the length of time the appellant has been in  the  United
    Kingdom,  the  low  risk  of  reoffending  evidenced  by  his  lack  of
    reoffending and the interference in his private life  in  removing  him
    after  such  a  lengthy  period  in  the  United  Kingdom  is   not   a
    proportionate  interference   with   the   appellant's   private   life
    established in the United Kingdom.

25. I find that the judge  fell  into  material  error  for  the  following
    reasons. Paragraph 390 of the Immigration Rules requires  consideration
    of all the circumstances and expressly states that  one  factor  to  be
    considered is 'the grounds on which the (deportation) order was  made'.
    Consideration of this factor in my view requires reference to paragraph
    364  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph  364   deals   with   the
    circumstances in which a deportation should be made  against  a  person
    liable to be deported.  Those circumstances must apply  as  much  to  a
    decision whether to revoke a deportation order under paragraph  390  as
    they do to a decision whether to make a deportation order in the  first
    place.  Paragraph 364 states that it is  intended  that  the  power  to
    deport should be exercised in a manner that is 'consistent and fair  as
    between one person and another'. That aim  would  be  undermined  if  a
    decision to make a  deportation  order  and  a  decision  to  revoke  a
    deportation order were each based on different criteria.

26. This does not mean that an  application  under  paragraph  390  of  the
    Immigration Rules is a mechanism for achieving a de novo  consideration
    of whether the power to deport should be exercised.  The starting point
    in a decision under paragraph 390 must be that a decision  to  exercise
    the power to deport has  already  been  made,  and  that  the  existing
    decision will stand unless there is a reason why it  should  not.   The
    power in paragraph 390 must be intended to cater for  situations  where
    there has been a change in circumstances since  the  deportation  order
    was made, or some other reason, such that an exercise of the  power  to
    deport would no longer be appropriate in accordance with the  paragraph
    364 criteria.

27. The Judge in allowing the appellant's appeal ignored the nature of  the
    offence which is, use of a false passport, which is an offence  of  the
    sort that undermines the good order of society. The  appellant  had  no
    right to live in this country but nevertheless remained.  The Judge did
    not properly take into account that the appellant's stay in the  United
    Kingdom has been precarious from the very beginning. The  Judge  failed
    to take into account that it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in deportation will be outweighed  in  a  case
    where it would not be contrary to the Human Rights Convention  and  the
    Convention and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees to deport.

28. In the cases detailed in paragraph 363A deportation  will  normally  be
    the proper course where a person has  failed  to  comply  with  or  has
    contravened a condition or has remained without  authority.  The  Judge
    failed to take into account that the appellant removed  his  tag  which
    was the condition of his release,  which  led  to  his  being  detained
    again.

29. In JO (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA
    Civ 10 the Court of  Appeal  said  at  paragraphs  29-30  that  in  the
    application of  Article  8  there  is  a  material  difference  between
    deportation cases on the one hand, and administrative removal cases  on
    the other:

         "... they generally involve the  pursuit  of  different  legitimate
         aims: in deportation cases it is  the  prevention  of  disorder  or
         crime, in ordinary removal cases it is the maintenance of effective
         immigration control. The difference in aim is potentially important
         because the factors in favour of expulsion are in my  view  capable
         of carrying greater weight in a deportation case than in a case  of
         ordinary removal. The maintenance of effective immigration  control
         is an important matter,  but  the  protection  of  society  against
         serious crime is even more important  and  can  properly  be  given
         correspondingly greater weight in the balancing  exercise.  Thus  I
         think it perfectly  possible  in  principle  for  a  given  set  of
         considerations  of  family  life  and/or   private   life   to   be
         sufficiently weighty to render  expulsion  disproportionate  in  an
         ordinary  removal  case,  yet  insufficient  to  render   expulsion
         disproportionate in a deportation case because  of  the  additional
         weight  to  be  given  to  the  criminal  offending  on  which  the
         deportation decision was based. I stress  "in  principle",  because
         the actual weight to be placed on the criminal  offending  must  of
         course depend on the seriousness of  the  offences  and  the  other
         circumstances of the case.

         Where the person to be removed is a person  unlawfully  present  in
         this country who has also committed criminal offences, the decision
         to remove him may pursue a double aim,  namely  the  prevention  of
         disorder  or  crime  as  well  as  the  maintenance  of   effective
         immigration control. If that is the case, it should be  made  clear
         in the reasons for the decision, since it affects the way in  which
         the criminal offending is factored into  the  analysis.  Where  the
         prevention of disorder or crime is an aim,  the  person's  criminal
         offending can weigh positively in favour of removal,  in  the  same
         way as in a deportation case. But if reliance  is  placed  only  on
         effective immigration control, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
         person's criminal offending would relate to that aim or, therefore,
         count as a factor positively favouring removal. On the other  hand,
         it might still have a significant  effect  on  the  proportionality
         balance by reducing the weight to be placed on the person's  family
         or private life: to take an obvious example,  where  a  person  has
         spent long periods in detention, his family ties  and  social  ties
         are likely to be fewer or  weaker  than  if  he  has  been  in  the
         community  throughout.  Criminal  offending  can  therefore  remain
         relevant even if the maintenance of effective  immigration  control
         is the only aim of the removal decision; but careful  account  must
         be taken of how it bears on that decision."

30. I note that the Court of Appeal  referred  in  this  passage  that  the
    protection of society against 'serious crime'. I do not  consider  that
    this should be understood as seeking  to  distinguish  between  persons
    deported after conviction for a  'serious  crime'  and  those  deported
    after conviction for a 'less serious crime'.  In any case  in  which  a
    person is lawfully deported as a result of a conviction  for  a  crime,
    whether because the Secretary of  State  considers  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good or  because  a  court  has  recommended  a
    person for deportation, the crime is sufficiently  'serious'  to  merit
    deportation.  As the Court of Appeal said in the quoted  passage,  'the
    actual weight to be placed on the criminal  offending  must  of  course
    depend on the seriousness of the offences and the  other  circumstances
    of the case'. I consider the quoted passage to be generally  applicable
    to all cases of deportation following conviction for a crime.

31.  The  Judge  fell  into  material  error  with  his  finding  that  the
    appellant's offending was not serious enough because it only  attracted
    two months imprisonment  notwithstanding  that  the  court  recommended
    deportation. He also  fell  into  material  error  when  he  failed  to
    appreciate that the appellant  has  been  convicted  of  attempting  to
    provide the course of justice, has been found at previous  appeals  not
    to be a credible witness and cannot be trusted to tell the truth.

32. The Judge acknowledged in his determination at paragraph 9, that at the
    first asylum appeal hearing, the appellant was found to be an  Eritrean
    national. The judge found him to be inconsistent about the events  that
    took place prior to his departure and concluded  his  account  was  not
    credible because of inconsistencies. At paragraph 10, the  Judge  noted
    that the appellant said that his  father  was  from  Ethiopia  and  his
    mother from Eritrean. He noted that in the  screening  interview,  when
    the appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on 24  November  1993
    he said both his parents were from Ethiopia but  in  his  statement  of
    evidence form he said that his father was of Ethiopian nationality  and
    his mother was an Eritrean and the first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  hearing
    his appeal, considered his claim on the latter basis.

33. At paragraph 11 the judge noted that the second determination which was
    promulgated 10 years later, in 2006 the  Judge  in  his  determination,
    noted that there  was  no  additional  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was not Eritrean and that his application was under Article 3
    and Article 8 only. The Judge concluded in  the  second  asylum  appeal
    that the appellant was an Eritrean national and that  finding  has  not
    been overturned by any subsequent judicial process following the  first
    determination.

34. At paragraph 13 the Judge noted that the appellant still maintains that
    he  is  Eritrean  and  has  given  no  explanation  for  the  different
    nationalities he has attribute it to his parents in the previous asylum
    applications he has made. The Judge noted that the in his first  asylum
    appeal, the Judge stated in  his  determination  said  that  after  the
    appellant left Eritrea, he could not get in contact  with  his  family.
    The Judge stated that was some three years ago and  the  appellant  now
    says that he is in touch with his mother and with his sisters  who  are
    in America but has not given an explanation as to how he came to be  in
    contact with them.

35. These findings by the Judge does not reflect in his decision  to  allow
    the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8. Had the Judge taken  this
    into account, in assessing the appellant's credibility  he  might  have
    come to a different conclusion.

36. This is especially so about his finding that the appellant was  not  to
    blame for the Eritrean Embassy not giving  him  travel  documents.  The
    Judge noted the appellant's telephone  call  to  the  Eritrean  Embassy
    "clearly did not result in a travel document but failing  to  obtain  a
    travel document for unexplained reasons is not sufficient  evidence  to
    show he is stateless. At paragraph 27, the Judge  noted  that  a  final
    attempt was made to obtain a travel  document  by  interview  with  the
    appellant with the  Eritrean  Embassy.  That  failed  for  reasons  the
    respondent says was the fault of the appellant. The judge noted "it  is
    for the respondent to prove she has made that assertion but no evidence
    has been produced to support that claim and I  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant was at fault.

37. It was clear to the Judge that  the  appellant  has  found  to  be  not
    credible by two First tier Tribunal Judges. The  Judge  although  fully
    aware that the  appellant  was  said  to  have  lacked  credibility  in
    previous determinations, nevertheless found that the appellant was  not
    at fault without giving adequate reasons.

38. At Paragraph 11 the Judge who heard the appellant second appeal in  his
    determination promulgated in  2006  stated  that  the  Judge  "was  not
    satisfied that the appellant could not provide evidence to show that he
    was an Eritrean national to the Eritrean authorities and concluded that
    this was because the  appellant  was  unwilling  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom". Also the Judge, at paragraph 27 of his  determination  stated
    that "the evidence before me was that those working for the  respondent
    took the view it was not possible to remove the appellant and  in  2009
    final attempt was made to obtain a travel document by an interview with
    the appellant with the Eritrean Embassy.

39. These findings are  at  odds  with  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not at fault for the Eritrean Embassy's failure  to  give
    him travel documents. The Judge by stating that the burden  is  on  the
    respondent to show that  the  appellant  is  at  fault,  whilst  not  a
    misdirection, did not take into account that there was evidence  before
    him that the appellant was attempting to frustrate removal.  The  Judge
    failed to consider that the  appellant  has  accepted  that  he  is  an
    Eritrean national and there is some force to the respondent's  argument
    that he made it difficult to be removed by  not  telling  the  Eritrean
    Embassy he is an Eritrean  national.  The  Judge  fell  into  error  by
    failing to take into account all the evidence in the round.

40. The Judge stated, the public interest  in  removing  the  appellant  is
    reduced by the unexplained delay on the part of the Secretary of  State
    following receipt of the application made  by  the  appellant  in  July
    2010. The Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the  delay  was
    explained to some extent as the appellant failed to leave  the  country
    when all his applications to remain in this country were refused and he
    did not have to wait for the respondent to remove him.  The  delay  was
    also explained by  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  attempting  to
    frustrate removal. The Judge fell into material error in  finding  that
    the respondent's delay meant that she did not have an interest  in  the
    appellant's removal from this country.

41. The seriousness of the offence of which the  respondent  was  convicted
    was a matter not taken into account by the Judge. He was  convicted  of
    perverting the course of justice and used a false document to leave the
    country for Scotland. He also  did  not  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant's circumstances had not changed since the  deportation  order
    was made.  The  jurisprudence  suggest  that  the  public  interest  in
    preventing the fraudulent use of passports to  gain  entry  or  support
    residents is of considerable importance and deserves protection. As was
    stated in R v Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113 at paragraphs 41-42:

         "While we would be reluctant ourselves to go as far  as  Lawton  LJ
         did in Nazar; in suggesting that a recommendation  for  deportation
         should be automatic in the case of every overstayer - and the  case
         of Akan supports us in that view - we  do  think  that  the  public
         interest in preventing the fraudulent  use  of  passports  to  gain
         entry or  support  residence  is  of  considerable  importance  and
         deserves protection. Moreover, in such a case the issue  of  Nazari
         detriment is intimately bound up  with  the  protection  of  public
         order afforded by confidence in a system  of  passports.  We  think
         that the sentencing judge was correct to say that the use of stolen
         and forged passports undermine the good order of  society.  In  our
         judgment, such a view is consistent with what the ECJ has  said  in
         Bouchereau, which subsequent English authorities have  said  to  be
         the same as the detriment principle (see Escauriaza, Cravioto).

         We therefore think that Current Sentencing Practice is  correct  to
         distinguish at K1-5D and K1-5E between the case  of  a  person  who
         enters the United Kingdom by fraudulent means and  the  case  of  a
         person who is in the country unlawfully  and  is  convicted  of  an
         offence unconnected with his status and the circumstances in  which
         he entered the country. ..."

42. In R v Kluxen [2010] EWCA Crim 1081, the Court of Appeal said that:

         "In our view  it  will  rarely  be  that  [the  relevant]  test  is
         satisfied in the case of an offender none of those offences  merits
         a custodial  sentence  of  12  months  or  more.  An  offender  who
         repeatedly commits minor offences could conceivably do so, as could
         a person who commits a single offence  involving  for  example  the
         possession or use of false identity documents for which he receives
         a custodial sentence of less than 12 months (as in Bennabas above).
         But we repeat that such cases will be rare;  and  we  observe  that
         even  if  a  court  makes  no  recommendation  for  an   offender's
         deportation, the Secretary of State may nevertheless deport him  if
         he deems this conducive to the public good."

43. In this case the respondent continued to  live  in  this  country  even
    after all his appeal rights were exhausted and when he knew that he was
    here illegally. I find that the appellant was in no doubt that  he  had
    no right to live in this country and that he should leave, and that his
    failure to do so was a conscious disregard of the  immigration  law  of
    this country. Consistent with what was said in Benabbas,  I  find  that
    the public interest in  preventing  the  fraudulent  use  of  passports
    either to support  residence  of  a  person  here  is  of  considerable
    importance and deserves protection, as  is  the  protection  of  public
    order afforded by confidence in a system of passports. I agree that the
    use of fraudulent documents undermines the good order of society.

44. Having considered the determination as a whole,  I  conclude  that  the
    Judge erred in  law  in  his  evaluation  of  the  appellant's  appeal.
    Although I indicated at the hearing, that a full  chronology  would  be
    beneficial to re-evaluate the appellant's appeal, I have decided that I
    would not be assisted by a full chronology and it is not necessary  for
    the appeal to be reheard. I have considered the appellant's appeal  and
    find  that  the  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances whereby he should succeed pursuant to Article
    8 when he cannot succeed pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

45. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination  decision
    and allow the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and  uphold  the  removal
    directions.

    Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed



      Dated this 26th day of May 2015
Signed by

.............................................
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana

