
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00260/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by way of a remote hearing     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2021                      |On 05 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                REDZEP ABDULI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Mohzam, instructed on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Meah) promulgated on 8 January 2020.  By
    its decision, the Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decisions, dated, 7 May 2019 and 10 June  2019  to
    deport him from the United Kingdom.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity order and Mr Mohzam  did  not  seek  to  advance  any
    grounds as to why such an order would be necessary.

 1. The decision to deport was made under Regulation 27 of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"). The
    appellant's case was that the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the Regulations,  and/or  that  it  was
    incompatible with his rights under Article 8  of  the  Convention,  and
    thus unlawful by reason of S.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 2. By a decision and reasons promulgated on the 8 January  2020  the  FtTJ
    (Judge Meah) dismissed the appeal, holding that  the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Regulations as he found  that  the  respondent  had
    established that the  appellant  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to public policy or security such that  his
    deportation was justified. The  judge  also  considered  the  issue  of
    proportionality of the decision.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed and permission to appeal was granted by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) on the 18 February 2020.

 4. The hearing took place on 14 July 2021, by  means  of  Microsoft  teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
      The advocates attended remotely  via  video.  There  were  no  issues
    regarding sound, and no substantial technical problems were encountered
    during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make
    their respective cases by the chosen means.

 5. I am grateful to  Mr  Mohzam  and  Mr  McVeety  for  their  clear  oral
    submissions.

Background:

 6. The appellant is a citizen of Slovakia. The key factual  background  is
    set out in the decision of  the  FtTJ,  the  decision  letter  and  the
    witness statements filed on behalf  of  the  appellant.  The  appellant
    claimed to have entered the United Kingdom in May 2017 and had  resided
    in Ireland since 2011. The respondent considered that the appellant had
    made no claims regarding his length of residency in the UK, nor had  he
    provided any evidence in support of his residence or that he  had  been
    exercising treaty rights in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years.

 7. On 8 February 2019 at the Crown Court, the appellant was  convicted  of
    attempted burglary (with intent to steal, in a dwelling), burglary  and
    assault by beating, and he was sentenced on 3  separate  counts  to  12
    months imprisonment and ordered to pay a victim surcharge of �140.

 8. The sentencing remarks of the Crown Court judge  are  set  out  in  the
    respondent's bundle at B1.The circumstances of the offence with that on
    6 December 2018 he attempted to break into two  households and when  he
    could not enter one, he moved onto the next house which not only did he
    gain access to, but also assaulted the homeowner.  The  judge  regarded
    the offences as being serious  and  that  they  warranted  a  custodial
    sentence. The appellant was given full credit for  pleading  guilty  at
    the 1st available opportunity. The judge noted that the  appellant  had
    no accommodation and that there were great concerns about him complying
    with any community sentence in the absence of any home.

 9. On 16 February 2019, the appellant was served notice that he was liable
    for deportation and invited to make any representations as to why  this
    should not take place. He provided representations on the 4 March 2019.
    the A deportation order was signed on the 1 May 2019.  He  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom after the deportation order was signed and  the
    appellant applied for revocation of the deportation  order  by  way  of
    making representations via his solicitors on his behalf.  Consideration
    was given to those representations, but the  respondent  refused  those
    representations in a supplementary decision letter of 20 June 2020.

10. The decision letter began by considering his residence noting  that  he
    had made no claim regarding his length of residence within the  UK  and
    had not provided any evidence in support  to  show  that  he  had  been
    exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  for  a  period  of   5   years
    continuously. Thus it was not accepted he  had  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance  with  the  EEA  regulations  2016  for  a
    continuous period of 5 years thus did not require a permanent right  to
    reside in the UK. Consideration was  therefore  given  to  whether  his
    deportation was  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security.

11. The respondent undertook an assessment of threat and consideration  was
    given to the principles set out in regulation 27 (5). The decision  set
    out  the  appellant's  criminal  history  as  recorded  above.  It  was
    considered that  the  circumstances  of  the  offences  which  included
    burglary were serious offences  with  long-term  consequences  for  the
    victims. The offence of assault by beating  was  the  type  of  conduct
    whereby a victim would have suffered physically to  some  degree  as  a
    result as it can leave victims feeling fearful of violence.

12. The respondent was of the view that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant recognised the effect of his offending behaviour  on  others.
    Whilst it was recognised that he did not  have  an  extensive  criminal
    record, the respondent took the view that the serious harm which  would
    be caused as a result of any similar instances of  offending  was  such
    that it was not  considered  reasonable  to  leave  the  public  to  be
    vulnerable to the potential of him reoffending

13. The  respondent  also  considered  that  the  nature  of  the  offences
    suggested that he was unable  to  support  himself  in  United  Kingdom
    without resorting to criminal  activities.  The  sentencing  judge  had
    referred  to  the  appellant  as  having  "no  accommodation"  and  the
    appellant had provided no evidence that his circumstances  had  changed
    and that as he had no fixed accommodation he would have no prospect  of
    lawful employment upon release from prison.

14. As to the nature of the offences, the respondent considered  that  they
    showed that he had a potential to act violently and that there  was  no
    indication that he shown any remorse for his offending or that  he  had
    any recognition of the impact that his behaviour may have on others.

15. The respondent noted that he had not  stated  whether  or  not  he  had
    attended any offence related courses whilst in custody but in any event
    the respondent was of the view that attendance of  such  courses  in  a
    custodial environment did not in itself  rehabilitate  an  offender  or
    guarantee that the risk of reoffending would reduce after  release.  In
    his case  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  he  had  adequately
    addressed the reasons for his offending  behaviour.  On  the  available
    evidence it  indicated  he  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend  and  thus
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the
    public to justify his deportation on grounds of public policy.

16. In terms of proportionality, the decision letter took into account  his
    age of 37 years and his nationality  and  that  he  did  not  have  any
    medical issues. He made no claim as to when he 1st arrived  in  the  UK
    and had not  provided  any  evidence  of  length  of  residence  or  of
    exercising treaty rights in accordance with the regulations.

17. As to his claim that his family  were  living  in  United  Kingdom,  no
    evidence had been provided in support of this. It was  considered  that
    he spent his formative  years  in  Slovakia  and  that  he  would  have
    completed his education to at least secondary level there. It was  also
    considered that he  would  have  developed  social  relationships  with
    others in Slovakia during the time he resided there and may have family
    members.

18. As the appellant had no accommodation it was considered without such he
    had no claimed family life and upon return to Slovakia  he  could  take
    advantage of options available  and  support  from  family  members  to
    improve his personal situation. It was considered that he would be able
    to use any work experience, skills and qualifications acquired  in  the
    United Kingdom to obtain employment in  Slovakia  to  support  himself.
    Thus, he had not demonstrated that he could  not  survive  economically
    given his particular circumstances, taking into account  his  language,
    knowledge, educational skills, age and life experiences, family, health
    and assets on return to Slovakia. There was no evidence to  suggest  he
    was now in a position where he was stranger to Slovakia to  the  extent
    that reintegration into private life in that country  would  amount  to
    undue hardship.

19. As to the issue of rehabilitation the respondent cited the decision  in
    Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718  but  there  was  no  evidence  that  he  had
    undertaken any rehabilitative work while in custody. He had not made  a
    claim as a length of  residence  within  the  UK  and  demonstrated  no
    significant integration into the community of the UK.  He  provided  no
    evidence of being engaged in any regular or lawful  employment  and  no
    evidence of a support network  to  aid  rehabilitation.  Therefore  the
    respondent concluded that there was no reason why  he  could  not  work
    towards rehabilitation in Slovakia with the support of  family  members
    living there and that he did not need to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    to become rehabilitated.

20. Having regard to all the available information, it was  concluded  that
    deportation  to  Slovakia  would  not  prejudice   the   prospects   of
    rehabilitation and that any interference to it would  be  proportionate
    and justified when balanced against the continuing risk he posed to the
    public.

21. It was concluded that there was a real risk that he  may  reoffend  and
    therefore it was considered  that  his  deportation  was  justified  on
    grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security,  or  public  health  in
    accordance the regulation 23 (6) (b). His  personal  circumstances  had
    been considered but given the threat posed, the decision to deport  was
    proportionate and in accordance with the principles of  regulations  27
    (5) and (6).

22. At paragraphs 43 - 52 the decision letter addressed additional  matters
    relevant to Article 8 of the ECHR.

23. A supplementary decision letter was served on the 20  June  2019  as  a
    result of further submissions dated 10 June 2019.

24. As to residence, the appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK in May
    2017 and resided in Ireland since 2011 but he provided no  evidence  of
    arrival in the UK or any documentary evidence of  continuous  residence
    in the UK. As such the length of residence of 2 years  meant  that  the
    appellant did not acquire a permanent right of residence under the  EEA
    regulations  and  therefore  the  decision  was  maintained  that   his
    deportation was considered justified on grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security.

25. As to the issue of proportionality, the appellant claimed that  he  was
    living in Ireland between November 2011 and May  2017.  He  claimed  to
    have been away from Slovakia 8 years. However he provided  no  evidence
    of residence  in  Ireland  and  the  birth  certificate  of  his  child
    demonstrated that he was born in Ireland  in  March  2017  and  he  was
    married in Cardiff in January 2017. This was not sufficient evidence of
    residence outside of Slovakia.

26. Even if it been accepted that he spent his time  in  Ireland  it  would
    still be considered that it spent 30 years in Slovakia prior to that as
    such there was no evidence to suggest that he was now in a position  of
    being a stranger from Slovakia to the extent  that  reintegration  into
    private life in that country would amount to undue hardship. He was  of
    an age  where  it  was  considered  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  be
    responsible for himself.

27. As to the issue of  rehabilitation,  the  appellant  claimed  had  been
    working on drug and alcohol issues. Whilst it  was  accepted  that  the
    medical records provided support for the issues he claimed to have,  he
    had not  provided  evidence  that  he  completed  any  offence  related
    courses. Thus the view was taken that there was no reason why he  could
    not work towards rehabilitation in Slovakia.

28. At paragraphs 16 - 35 the respondent considered the appellant's  family
    life with his child born in March 2017. The appellant  had  provided  a
    birth  certificate,  a  British  passport  copy  for  the   child   and
    photographs. It was accepted that his child was under the age of 18 and
    was a British citizen. It was further accepted that he  had  a  genuine
    subsisting parental relationship with the  child  as  he  had  provided
    evidence that he was residing in the same house as the  child.  It  was
    accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to  live  in
    Slovakia. The evidence from the appellant solicitors  stated  that  the
    marriage between the appellant and his ex-wife had broken down and that
    they were no longer in a subsisting relationship. She was  the  primary
    carer  for  the  child  and  given  that  they  were  no  longer  in  a
    relationship it was considered that it would be unduly harsh for her to
    have to relocate to Slovakia. However it was not accepted that it would
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's  child  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom even though the appellant was  to  be  deported.  The  evidence
    provided indicated that the child was in the care  of  his  mother  and
    that he was no longer in a relationship with his ex-partner. There  was
    no evidence that the child had suffered any detrimental effect  due  to
    his separation from the appellant since his imprisonment. Nor  had  the
    appellant provided evidence to show that his  presence  United  Kingdom
    was needed to prevent his child from being  ill-treated,  or  that  his
    health or development would be impaired,  or  the  child's  care  being
    other than safe and effective. It was acknowledged that the appellant's
    absence would result in some negative emotional impact but as the child
    continued to live with his mother who would support him, he would adapt
    to life without face-to-face  contact  and  would  continue  to  attend
    school where he would have  the  stability  and  support  necessary  to
    complete  his  education.  It  was  further  concluded  that  with  the
    permission of his primary carer, the  appellant's  child  would  be  to
    maintain contact via modern methods  of  communication  and  visits  to
    Slovakia. Thus there was no evidence that the deportation would  result
    in his child losing all contact with him.

29. Consequently it was not accepted that he met the  requirements  of  the
    Exception to deportation on the basis of family life with a  child  and
    would not be a breach of article 8.

30. As he was no longer in a relationship  with  his  former  wife  it  was
    concluded that he had no family life with his partner. It  was  further
    concluded that there were no very compelling circumstances and that any
    treatment he was currently receiving could take place in Slovakia.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

31. The appellant appealed the decisions, and the appeal  came  before  the
    FtTJ on 6 January  2020.  The  appellant  had  been  allowed  temporary
    admission into the UK to attend and participate in the hearing and thus
    gave evidence before the FtTJ.

32. At paragraphs [9 - 39] the FtTJ set out his  analysis  and  assessment.
    The FtTJ summarised the arguments relied upon by the appellant. Firstly
    that he did not pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society  which  required
    his deportation from the UK and that he had no past convictions and  he
    had taken steps to  address  his  criminal  behaviour  which  had  been
    fuelled by drug and alcohol addiction. Secondly it was argued that  the
    decision  to  deport  was  not  proportionate  given  the   appellant's
    subsisting relationship with his British child.

33. In relation to the first argument, the judge reached the conclusion  on
    the  evidence  that  the  appellant  still  posed  a  present,  genuine
    sufficiently serious  risk  and  that  this  was  only  being  "curbed"
    directly by the help he received in Slovakia as he had  stated  and  as
    the judge had set out at paragraphs [18  -19].  The  judge  found  that
    there was no structured assistance set up for him in the UK and that it
    is likely to take some time for such a system to be put in place if  he
    accepted the claim that his criminal behaviour was  necessarily  linked
    his addictions. The judge also found  that  the  evidence  demonstrated
    that the appellant would during any such period whilst he  was  waiting
    to access any appropriate help and treatment pose an  immediate  threat
    as described in regulation 27 (5) (at [23]).

34. At [24] the judge made reference to the sentencing remarks and that the
    judge had stated that whilst he was in custody had access  to  services
    and facilities, but it may be difficult for him to  access  it  in  the
    community. The judge found that he also agreed with those  observations
    as there was no evidence before him that the appellant would be able to
    access any appropriate services if he was allowed  back  into  the  UK.
    Furthermore, he had not engaged in any formal  rehabilitation  such  as
    counselling  and/or  appropriate  courses  to  address   his   criminal
    behaviour which he claimed  was  all  down  to  his  drug  and  alcohol
    addiction. The judge found there was no direct or actual evidence apart
    from the appellant's own claim to  confirm  that  one  was  necessarily
    corollary to the other.

35. The judge stated at [26] that even if he accepted the appellant's claim
    at face value, there was insufficient evidence before the  tribunal  to
    show that the appellant did not pose a genuine and present threat.  The
    appellant claimed that he wished to speak to his  medical  practitioner
    in Slovakia to see if  the  daily  methadone  doses  could  be  lowered
    however there was no  evidence  of  that  nor  any  suggestion  by  any
    professional organisation including  those  helping  the  appellant  in
    Slovakia to indicate that the lowering of his daily methadone doses was
    either in the pipeline or even a realistic consideration for him.

36. The judge therefore concluded that the appellant had not  overcome  his
    addictions to drugs and alcohol  which  he  claims  accounted  for  his
    criminal offending behaviour and that he is  now  reliant  entirely  on
    methadone to manage it.  The  judge  found  that  was  insufficient  to
    alleviate the risk he continued to pose (at [27]).

37. In relation  to  the  claim  that  he  had  rapidly  accessed  all  the
    appropriate services upon return to Slovakia after his deportation from
    the UK and the progress he had made by renting his own flat in Slovakia
    and obtaining full-time employment the judge found were all  contingent
    on the assistance he was receiving from the  professional  services  in
    Slovakia.

38. At [28] the judge referred to paragraph 29 of the decision  in  SSHD  v
    Dumliauskas and ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145 which had been relied  upon  by
    the appellant's representative. The judge stated that the appellant  in
    his appeal was not suffering from  any  mental  health  conditions  and
    found in fact the opposite was true and that the claimed rehabilitation
    he was receiving in  Slovakia  appeared  to  be  working  if  that  was
    accepted at face value and it was that it had  enabled  him  to  obtain
    employment and rent  his  own  accommodation.  The  appellant  had  the
    support of his sister and mother who lived very close by and  therefore
    the judge concluded to take the appellant out of  that  existing  setup
    where he would not have immediate access to any comparable  support  in
    the UK, would destabilise the claimed progress he was making, and  this
    would have the "concomitant effect of him becoming an immediate risk to
    the  fundamental  interests  of  the  society  here  as  envisaged   in
    regulation 27 (5)".

39. At [30] the judge rejected the appellant's account  that  there  was  a
    potential for him and his wife to reconcile. The judge attached  little
    weight to this claim in the light of there being no evidence to confirm
    such a reconciliation from his wife. He  concluded  that  this  was  an
    embellishment to bolster his claim against his deportation.

40. Dealing with the second argument advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant
    which related to his relationship with his child, the judge  took  into
    account that the appellant's child was a British citizen  and  that  it
    was  conceded  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with him. The appellant accepted that the  child's  mother
    was his primary carer and that regular contact had been maintained with
    the child by calls via the Internet and that the child and  his  former
    partner visited the appellant in Slovakia  in  September  and  December
    2019 and stayed at the appellant's mother's home although the appellant
    stayed in a separate room given that they were separated.

41. Against that background, the judge found that was  entirely  reasonable
    and proportionate to the appellant to continue to maintain contact with
    his child in the manner that he had been doing  since  his  deportation
    from the UK. There was nothing to stop the appellant's ex-partner  from
    continuing to take the child  to  Slovakia  to  see  him  as  and  when
    feasible and that the appellant could pay for such trips  in  the  same
    way that he had done so during the most recent trip at Christmas  2019.
    The judge found that the appellant had both the resources and  familial
    support from his mother who would also play  a  part  in  accommodating
    such visits in the future as she had done so in the past.

42. The judge concluded that the child's best interests were to remain with
    his mother in the UK and the status quo to be maintained of his  mother
    to remain as his primary carer and that there was "no suggestion to the
    contrary".

43. The judge concluded at [35] that the fundamental interests  of  society
    were outweighed by far by any claim the appellant may have based on his
    subsisting relationship with his  child  and  this,  the  judge  found,
    required his deportation to remain in place.

44. The judge  considered  other  relevant  matters  when  considering  the
    proportionality  of  the  decision.  In  respect  of  the   appellant's
    nationality and length of residence, he found that  the  appellant  was
    born and raised in Slovakia and moved to Ireland approximately 7  years
    ago before coming to live in the UK in 2017. He had  been  educated  to
    secondary school level in Slovakia and he had family  members  such  as
    his  mother  and  sister  living  there.  He  had  obtained   his   own
    accommodation and full-time employment there. The judge contrasted  his
    ties in Slovakia with those in the United Kingdom and concluded that he
    had no other real connection with the UK apart from his  former  spouse
    from whom he was separated and a British child for whom he was not  the
    primary carer.

45. At [37] the judge found that there was "no evidence before  me  of  any
    tangible integration of any kind by  the  appellant  into  the  culture
    and/or society in the UK, and the evidence shows that since  coming  to
    the UK in 2017, the majority of his time  spent  pursuing  his  illegal
    heroin habit and alcohol addiction, which  he  said  then  led  to  the
    serious crimes committed culminating in a conviction prison  sentence."
    The judge found that spoke for itself and was  against  any  notion  of
    "cultural integration into UK society".

46. Against that background that the FtTJ concluded  that  the  appellant's
    real ties and connections were significantly in Slovakia and  this  was
    evidenced by the way which he was very quickly able to  integrate  back
    into society following his deportation from  the  UK  in  all  respects
    especially in relation to accessing professional service there to  deal
    with his addictions and then to secure his own accommodation and  full-
    time permanent employment there. The judge  contrasted  that  with  the
    position in the UK at [39] where he noted that the appellant  had  made
    no such progress in the UK after coming here from Ireland in  2017  and
    that  his  entire  time  was  spent  engaging  in  illegality  (illicit
    drugtaking and then the burglary/beating for which was  convicted)  and
    then being imprisoned before being deported. The judge stated  "I  find
    that this evidence speaks volumes and it confirms in my  view  that  if
    the appellant is genuinely on the path to managing his addictions, then
    Slovakia is the best place for him to be to achieve this rather than in
    the UK, where I find there is a very strong and real  possibility  that
    he will engage in behaviour akin to that when he was  here  previously,
    and this therefore means that he  will  therefore  pose  the  necessary
    threat to society as set out in regulation 27 (5)." The FtTJ  therefore
    found that the decision to deport the appellant  was  proportionate  in
    all respects.

The applicable legal framework:

47. The appellant is  an  EU  citizen.  Under  Article  20  of  the  Brexit
    Withdrawal Agreement the conduct of EU Citizens, their family  members,
    and other persons, who exercise Citizens' rights under  the  Withdrawal
    Agreement, where that conduct occurred before the end of the transition
    period, 31 December 2020, shall be considered under the  provisions  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC  which  gives  effect  to  the  free  movement  of
    persons. This means that in this appeal it is the EU standards and  not
    the UK standard that applies to any decision to deport, which are  more
    favourable to Mr Abduli than those applying under UK law.

48. The deportation of EEA nationals is subject to the regime  set  out  in
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ('The  EEA
    Regulations')  which  were  made  under  section  2  of  the   European
    Communities Act 1972 by way of implementation of Directive  2004/38  on
    the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and
    reside freely within the territory of Member States. The Directive sets
    conditions that must be satisfied before a Member  State  can  restrict
    the rights of free movement and residence provided for by EU law.

49. By virtue of Regulation 23(6) of the 2016 regulations an  EEA  national
    who has entered the United Kingdom or  the  family  member  of  such  a
    national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if:

         (a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right  to  reside
         under these Regulations; or

         (b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is
         justified on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security,  or
         public health in accordance with regulation 27; or

         (c) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is
         justified on grounds of misuse of rights under regulation 26(3).

    Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows: -

         '27. - (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security, or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-"

                  (a) has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b) is under the age of 18, unless the  relevant  decision
                  is in the best  interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United  Nations  on
                  20th November 1989

             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-"

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality.

                  (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                  conduct of the person concerned.

                  (c) the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a genuine,  present,  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society, taking into account past conduct  of  the  person
                  and that the threat does not need to be imminent.

                  (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision.

                  (e) a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

                  (f) the decision may be  taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                  even in the absence of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
             policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who
             is resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must
             take account of considerations such as the age, state of
             health, family and economic situation of P, P's length of
             residence in the United Kingdom, P's social and cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of P's
             links with P's country of origin.

             ...

             (8) A court or Tribunal considering whether  the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security, and the fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

    SCHEDULE 1

50. CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC SECURITY  AND  THE  FUNDAMENTAL
    INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.

    Considerations of public policy and public security

     The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform  scale  of  public  policy  or
    public security values: member States  enjoy  considerable  discretion,
    acting within the parameters set by  the  EU  Treaties,  applied  where
    relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own standards of  public
    policy and public security, for purposes tailored to  their  individual
    contexts, from time to time.

    Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

    2. An EEA national or the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  having
    extensive  familial  and  societal  links  with  persons  of  the  same
    nationality or language does not amount to integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom;  a  significant  degree  of  wider   cultural   and   societal
    integration must  be  present  before  a  person  may  be  regarded  as
    integrated in the United Kingdom.

    3. Where an EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national  has
    received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the  longer
    the sentence, or the more numerous the  convictions,  the  greater  the
    likelihood that the  individual's  continued  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom represents a genuine, present, and sufficiently serious  threat
    affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

    4. Little weight is to  be  attached  to  the  integration  of  an  EEA
    national or the family member of an  EEA  national  within  the  United
    Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or  around  the
    same time as-"

    (a) the commission of a criminal offence.

    (b) an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of society.

    (c) the EEA national or  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  was  in
    custody.

    5. The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the family
    member of an EEA national who is able to provide  substantive  evidence
    of not demonstrating a threat (for example, through demonstrating  that
    the  EEA  national  or  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  has
    successfully  reformed  or  rehabilitated)  is  less   likely   to   be
    proportionate.

    6. It is consistent with public policy and public security requirements
    in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be  taken  in  order  to
    refuse, terminate or withdraw any right otherwise  conferred  by  these
    Regulations in the case of abuse of rights or fraud, including-"

    (a) entering, attempting to enter, or assisting another person to enter
    or to attempt to enter,  a  marriage,  civil  partnership,  or  durable
    partnership of convenience; or

    (b) fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain or assisting another
    to obtain or to attempt to  obtain,  a  right  to  reside  under  these
    Regulations.

    The fundamental interests of society

    7. For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests  of
    society in the United Kingdom include-"

    (a) preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the  immigration  laws
    and maintaining the integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the  immigration
    control system (including under these Regulations) and  of  the  Common
    Travel Area.

    (b) maintaining public order.

    (c) preventing social harm.

    (d) preventing the evasion of taxes and duties.

    (e) protecting public services.

    (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member  of  an  EEA
    national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that  person
    is likely to  cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,  public  offence)  and
    maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  ability   of   the   relevant
    authorities to take such action.

    (g) tackling  offences  likely  to  cause  harm  to  society  where  an
    immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there
    is wider societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs
    or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of
    the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).

    (h) combating the effects  of  persistent  offending  (particularly  in
    relation to offences, which if taken in  isolation,  may  otherwise  be
    unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27).

    (i) protecting the rights and freedoms  of  others,  particularly  from
    exploitation and trafficking.

    (j) protecting the public.

    (k) acting in the best interests of a child (including where  doing  so
    entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or  otherwise
    taking an EEA decision against a child).

    (l) countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared values."

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

51. In the light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
    directions, inter alia, indicating that it  was  provisionally  of  the
    view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-to-
    face hearing and that this could take place  via  Skype.  Both  parties
    have indicated that they were content for the  hearing  to  proceed  by
    this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to enable  oral
    submissions to be given by each of the parties.

52. Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant was represented by  Mr  Mohzam
    and the Secretary of State was represented by Mr McVeety

53. Mr Mohzam relied upon the grounds as drafted. The written grounds  seek
    to challenge the assessment of  whether  the  appellant  represented  a
    genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.

54.  It is submitted that the appellant did not have any  past  convictions
    and had not committed any further offences. At paragraph [20] the judge
    stated that the appellant would become a threat if  he  stopped  taking
    methadone to cope with his drug habit and at  [21]  the  judge  further
    accepted that the appellant had taken proactive steps  to  address  his
    drug and alcohol addiction. At [22] the judge stated he  must  continue
    with a structured help he was receiving  in  his  home  country  in  an
    effort to deal with his offending behaviour and that at [23] he had not
    reoffended because of the help received in Slovakia which he had sought
    out himself. As the judge accepted that the appellant's  behaviour  was
    linked to his  addictions,  the  judge  failed  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
    threat due to his addiction being managed.

55. The written grounds submit that the reasons for dismissing  the  appeal
    was that there was a risk of  future  offences  if  he  stopped  taking
    treatment for his addiction, but the judge had failed to conclude  that
    in the light of his own  findings  with  the  treatment  the  appellant
    received, he did not pose a present, genuine sufficiently serious  risk
    to the public policy in accordance with regulation 27.

56. The judge found that the appellant would only pose a risk if he  ceased
    the treatment he received therefore the judge had made a decision  that
    he posed such a risk on the assumption  that  his  treatment  would  be
    stopped.

57. In the light of that  finding  the  judge  had  not  set  out  how  the
    appellant's personal conduct represented such  a  sufficiently  serious
    risk when the judge stated it is based on a future possibility and  not
    the present.

58. Mr Mohzam submitted that the FtTJ's use of the word "if"  at  paragraph
    [20] indicated that his assessment was speculative and that  the  judge
    was assuming that if he came off methadone or cease treatment he  would
    be a risk to the public. However the appellant's evidence was  that  he
    had obtained support in Slovakia on his own  basis.  He  submitted  the
    judge had not taken into account the appellant's  personal  conduct  by
    returning to Slovakia  and  undertaking  treatment  to  deal  with  his
    addiction. The risk is a future risk if he came off the  treatment  and
    therefore was not a certainty. Given that the appellant had  taken  all
    necessary steps to rehabilitate himself to change, the  judge  had  not
    made a proper finding on this.

59. In his oral submissions Mr Mohzam also submitted that the judge made an
    error at [39] where he stated that the appellant had made  no  progress
    in the UK and  that  his  "entire  time  here  was  spent  engaging  in
    illegality". He submitted that the finding that he had been involved in
    illegal activities was not made out in the judge had failed to consider
    that  his  present  conduct  represented   a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. The appellant had only committed one  offence  and  by  his
    conduct he had shown he had been rehabilitated. He therefore invited me
    to find that the judge had made a material error of law.

60. Mr McVeety relied upon the written submissions dated 7 June 2020  which
    had been sent to the Tribunal as a response to the directions  sent  to
    the parties.

61. In addition he submitted that contrary to  the  appellant  submissions,
    regulation 27 (5) (c) made  reference  to  "taking  into  account  past
    conduct of the  person  and  that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
    imminent". He submitted that often  it  was  argued  on  behalf  of  an
    appellant that deportation would be disproportionate because  it  would
    increase the risk of offending as a result of  rehabilitative  progress
    in the UK. Here the appellant's own evidence was that the offending was
    due to addiction to drugs and alcohol which he had not addressed whilst
    in the UK from 2017 and had gone on to be convicted of  offences  as  a
    result. The appellant's own evidence was that the offending was due  to
    his addiction. He was undertaking  treatment  by  taking  methadone  in
    Slovakia. The FtTJ found that if he had stopped taking the methadone or
    ceased the treatment, he would pose a genuine and sufficiently  serious
    threat or risk and that this was not speculative but was based  on  the
    appellant's own evidence. The judge was entitled to take  into  account
    his previous past conduct and his own evidence which demonstrated  that
    his offending was due to his addiction. It was therefore  open  to  the
    judge to find that there was a likelihood of reoffending and  this  was
    not based on any speculation but on the evidence. The appellant had not
    engaged previously, and all treatment had been undertaken in  Slovakia.
    There was no error of law in the assessment made by  the  FtTJ  in  the
    light of the evidence that was before him.

Ground 2:

62. The second ground relates to the appellant's  consideration  of  family
    life with his son. It is submitted that the judge  failed  to  consider
    the appellant and his son's article 8 rights in line with sections 117A-
    D regarding whether it will be unduly harsh on his son for  his  father
    to be deported (see Badewa (S117A-D and EEA  Regulations)  [2015]  UKUT
    329).

63. It is submitted that the judge failed to consider the best interests of
    the child and whilst brief references were made there was  no  detailed
    analysis of the impact on the minor child. The best  interests  of  the
    child were to be considered independently of his parents (reference  is
    made to paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria).

64. In his oral submissions Mr Mohzam submitted that  the  FtTJ  failed  to
    consider the relationship between the appellant and his child and  that
    a fundamental error was his failure to  consider  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness (see  KO(Nigeria)  and  HA  (Iraq).  He  submitted  that  the
    consideration depended on the individual circumstances of the child and
    that it was important to look at the impact upon  the  relevant  child,
    but the judge had failed to do so.

65. Mr McVeety relied upon the written submissions.  He  further  submitted
    that the factual findings made by the judge as set out on his  decision
    had not been challenged in the grounds.  Whilst  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his  child  it  was
    necessary for there to be at least some  evidence  to  demonstrate  the
    impact or circumstances upon the relevant child. Here there was no such
    evidence and whilst it was argued that it would be disproportionate for
    the child to be away from his father, this was not supported  with  any
    evidence individual to the child.

66. He further submitted that the judge dealt with the relationship between
    the  appellant  and  his  son  in  the  decision  under   the   heading
    "proportionality" and that there had been no evidence to show that  the
    consequences of deportation would be unduly harsh. The child was  still
    in contact with his father and remained in  the  primary  care  of  his
    mother which was the point that the judge was  entitled  to  take  into
    account. He submitted that any assessment  had  to  be  fact-based  and
    there was no evidence to show any unduly harsh consequences.  Thus  the
    findings made were open to the judge in light of the lack of evidence.

Conclusions:

Ground 1:

67. I am grateful for the submissions made by  each  of  the  advocates.  I
    confirm that I have taken them into account and have  done  so  in  the
    light of the decision of the FtTJ and the material that was before him.

68. Dealing with ground 1, as the appellant has not exercised treaty rights
    for a continuous period of five years, the regulations  give  only  the
    lowest level of protection against removal. Nevertheless, the appellant
    cannot be deported unless his personal conduct represents  "a  genuine,
    present,  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct  of
    the person and that the threat does not need to be  imminent.  This  is
    set out at regulation 27(5)(c).

69. In this context, the grounds seek to challenge the assessment  made  by
    the FtTJ.

70. In Arranz (EEA regulations - deportation -test)  [2017]  UKUT  294  the
    Upper Tribunal held that the burden of proof lay on the SSHD  to  prove
    that a person represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. That  the
    burden of proof lies on the SSHD has  recently  been  accepted  by  the
    Inner House of the Court of Session in SA v SSHD [2018]  CSIH  28.  The
    person concerned must also  be  a  present  threat,  Orphanopoulos  and
    Oliveri v Verwaltungsgericht Stuttgart, [2004] ECR  1999  and  previous
    convictions are relevant:

         "Only  insofar  as  the  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  that
         conviction are evidence of personal conduct constituting a  present
         threat to the requirements of public policy".

71. In accordance with the provisions the FtTJ was required to consider the
    personal conduct of the appellant  and  whether  his  personal  conduct
    represented a genuine and presently sufficient threat affecting one  of
    the fundamental interests of society. As the respondent submits, whilst
    the regulations refer to a "present" threat, it does  not  need  to  be
    imminent and past conduct of the person is also a matter to  take  into
    account although the conviction itself does not justify the decision to
    deport.

72. In his decision, the FtTJ was plainly aware that the decision to deport
    the appellant may not be taken except on grounds of  public  policy  or
    security and that as a consequence he was required  to  identify  those
    relevant factors and evaluate them as to their seriousness.

73. In this assessment the FtTJ was required to consider whether there  was
    a risk of the appellant reoffending. Whilst the grounds assert that the
    judge has not set out how the appellant's personal conduct presented  a
    sufficiently serious risk, in my view that is  not  borne  out  by  the
    decision.

74. He properly analysed the evidence that was before him.  Beginning  with
    the offence at [14]  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of a "very serious crime" that it is including the beating of
    another person whilst  committing  a  burglary.  The  judge  took  into
    account that the appellant had no previous convictions.

75. There was no evidence from the probation service or OASys's report  nor
    was there any evidence  from  those  whom  the  appellant  stated  were
    concerned with  his  treatment  in  Slovakia.  This  was  important  as
    reference to the prospects of rehabilitation concerned  the  reasonable
    prospects  of  the  person  ceasing  to  commit  crime  not  the   mere
    possibility of rehabilitation and the FtTJ was entitled  to  find  that
    the evidence was limited in this regard.

76. The risk identified by the FtTJ was a continuation of his offending  as
    a result of his dependence upon heroin and also his alcohol  dependency
    which had been the appellant's previous conduct and which the appellant
    himself had claimed had given rise to his offending  behaviour  in  the
    UK.

77. This was not based on any speculation on the part of the judge but  was
    based on the appellant's own evidence and are set out in the  notes  he
    told the probation service that  he  had  been  using  heroin  since  a
    teenager (at page 70).

78. On his assessment of the appellant's evidence, the FtTJ found that  the
    appellant was still reliant upon methadone for his drug  addiction  and
    that whilst the appellant claimed to be seeking  to  lessen  the  dose,
    that had not been evidenced and in the judges view was not a "realistic
    consideration" (at [26]).

79. Whilst Mr Mohzam submits that the use of the word "if" was  speculative
    and that the judge simply assumed that he would be a risk the public is
    not an accurate reflection of the FtTJ's reasoning.

80. The judge was entitled to take into account that if the  appellant  did
    not take methadone this would lead to an immediate or genuine  risk  of
    the appellant reoffending given that it was  the  appellant's  evidence
    that it was the addiction  to  drugs  which  had  led  him  commit  the
    burglaries to obtain money to fund his drug  addiction.  As  the  judge
    found he was wholly reliant on  methadone  and  had  not  overcome  his
    addiction to drugs (at [26]-[27]) and that the appellant still posed  a
    present and genuine and sufficiently serious risk and that it was  only
    being "curbed" due to the treatment in Slovakia.

81. The FtTJ found that the treatment he described was of a structured type
    and that no such assistance of the type was set up in the UK  and  that
    it was likely to take time for such assistance. The judge was  entitled
    to take  into  account  this  period  where  there  was  no  comparable
    treatment available and that it would  likely  lead  to  the  appellant
    posing a risk to the public. It had not been the case  that  there  had
    been any prolonged period of compliance with treatment, and it does not
    appear that there was any evidence put  before  the  judge  from  those
    treating the appellant to give any idea of the progress  he  had  made,
    any future prognosis or any reduction in risk. One of  the  fundamental
    interests of society the judge is required to consider is that set  out
    in schedule 1 (7)  (g) "tackling  offences  likely  to  cause  harm  to
    society where an  immediate  or  direct  victim  may  be  difficult  to
    identify but where there is  wider  societal  harm  (such  as  offences
    related to the misuse of drugs or crime with a  cross-border  dimension
    as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning  of  the
    European Union)".

82. Furthermore for the purposes of his assessment, the FtTJ  was  entitled
    to take into account at [29]  that  for  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    stability that he had in Slovakia which not only included the treatment
    but also the support of close family members would have had the  effect
    of destabilising any progress he was likely to make and would have  the
    effect of him becoming an immediate  risk  to  society.  I  agree  with
    submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  that  in  light  of  the
    requirement under regulation 27 (5)(c )  to  take  into  account  "past
    conduct of the  person  and  that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
    imminent", that there was evidently a sufficient nexus between personal
    conduct and a risk that would arise as soon as the  appellant  returned
    to the UK without immediate treatment.

83. Whilst a person's previous convictions do not in themselves justify the
    decision to deport in carrying out his assessment, in my judgement  the
    FtTJ properly had regard to the offences themselves and the appellant's
    past conduct including his drugtaking  (  including  his  addiction  to
    heroin)  which the FtTJ found had been carried out throughout his short
    residence in the UK  which had been the catalyst for his offending  and
    the FtTJ addressed and assessed the risks of reoffending in  the  light
    of the evidence as a whole which included the appellant's  evidence  of
    treatment he was undergoing in Slovakia. It was open to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the appellant had not demonstrated that he  had  overcome
    his addiction to drugs and alcohol which accounted  for  his  offending
    behaviour and was entirely reliant on  methadone  and  that  this   was
    insufficient to alleviate the risk of harm that he continued to pose to
    the public.

84. In summary, the public policy grounds for removal are an  exception  to
    the fundamental principles of the free exercise of  EU  rights  and  as
    such an EU citizen should not be expelled  as  a  deterrent  to  others
    without the personal conduct of the person  concerned  giving  rise  to
    consider that he will commit other offences that are against the public
    policy of the state.

85. It must be  established  that  the  Appellant  represents  "a  genuine,
    present or sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
    interests of society".  In this context I am satisfied  that  the  FtTJ
    properly considered the future risk of reoffending and did  so  in  the
    light of all the evidence before him.

86. As set out in the decision of SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA  Civ  1245
    at paragraph [25],  it  required  an  evaluation  to  be  made  of  the
    likelihood  that  a  person  concerned  would  offend  again  and   the
    consequences if he did so.  In addition, the need for  the  conduct  of
    the person concerned to represent a "sufficiently  serious"  threat  to
    one of the fundamental interests of society required the decision maker
    to balance the risk of future harm against the need to give  effect  to
    the right of free movement. This was the evaluation carried out by  the
    FtTJ.

87.  A finding as to whether the conduct  of  the  appellant  represents  a
    genuine, present, and sufficiently serious threat is a prerequisite for
    the adoption of an expulsion measure and it is only upon such a  threat
    being established, that the issue  of  proportionality  arises.  As  Mr
    McVeety submitted it was open to the FtTJ to conclude  that  there  was
    sufficient  evidence  before  him  to  reach  the  judgement  that  the
    appellant presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    affecting one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.  Whilst  a
    different judge may have reached a different conclusion as  to  whether
    he was a present threat, I am satisfied that the judge did consider the
    regulations correctly and made a careful assessment of the evidence.

Ground 2:

88. Mr Mohzam has submitted that the FtTJ  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider the appellant and his son's family life under article  8  and
    in particular that he did not do so by reference  to  section  117A-D.
    Whilst the section is highlighted in the grounds the submissions  made
    were only directed to S117C (5) and whether it would be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant's child in the light of the appellant's  deportation
    . It has not been suggested in the grounds or in any oral  submissions
    that any other section was relevant to the appellant's circumstances.

89. Under S117C(5) of the NIAA 2020 applies that where C has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the
    effect of  C's deportation on the child would be unduly harsh.  As  is
    accepted by both advocates, it was not in dispute before the FtTJ that
    the relevant child was a British citizen and therefore  a  "qualifying
    child" for the purposes of section 117C (5). Nor  was  it  in  dispute
    that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with his child.

90. The position taken by the respondent  was  set  out  in  the  decision
    letter of 20 June 2020 and that whilst it was accepted that  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the appellant's child  to  live  in  Slovakia  (at
    paragraph 25), it was not accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  for
    his child to remain in the United Kingdom even  though  the  appellant
    was to be deported. At paragraphs 29 - 33, the respondent set out  the
    reasons for that assessment  based  on  the  evidence  that  had  been
    provided by the appellant. It indicated that the appellant's child  in
    the care of his mother and that the appellant and his partner were  no
    longer in a relationship. There was no evidence  that  his  child  had
    suffered any detrimental effect due to the separation from  him  since
    his imprisonment and that the appellant had not provided any  evidence
    to show that his presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  required  to
    prevent his child from being  ill-  treated,  the  child's  health  or
    development being impaired or his  care  being  other  than  safe  and
    effective. It had been acknowledged that his absence would  result  in
    some negative emotional impact on him, but he would continue  to  live
    with his mother who would support him who was his primary  carer.  The
    respondent considered that he would be able to maintain  contact  with
    his child  via  visits  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    deportation of the appellant would result  in  his  child  losing  all
    contact with him. There had been no evidence that they would be unable
    to visit Slovakia.

91. It is acknowledged in the respondent's written submissions  and  those
    given by Mr McVeety that the FtTJ did not expressly  set  out  section
    117C(5) in his decision at paragraphs [31]-[35] and [36]. However, the
    FtTJ undertook an analysis of the evidence relevant to the appellant's
    child and s55 ( best interests) at paragraph [34] under the heading of
    "other matters and proportionality".

92. It is also submitted on behalf of the respondent that it  was  unclear
    whether the appellant's case had been argued on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation would lead to unduly harsh consequences for his child  and
    what had been recorded by the judge at [17] was that the case for  the
    appellant was argued on the basis that "the decision to deport was not
    proportionate given the appellant's subsisting relationship  with  his
    British child." That would be consistent with the assessment  made  by
    the judge at paragraphs 31 -  35  and  36.  I  also  observe  that  at
    paragraph [41] the FtTJ stated that  he  found  the  decision  letters
    contained a "detailed and extensive  analysis  of  all  the  available
    evidence put to  the  respondent  to  support  the  appellant's  claim
    against deportation, and this is fully and appropriately reasoned, and
    I uphold the content of those letters. I find the decision  to  deport
    is entirely proportionate". The reference at paragraph 41 demonstrates
    that the FtTJ agreed with the assessment of proportionality set out by
    the respondent and  which  the  FtTJ  considered.  This  included  the
    assessment made of S117C (5) and the issue of undue harshness.

93. I have nonetheless considered the assessment undertaken by  the  FtTJ.
    The appellant in his evidence accepted that the child's mother was his
    primary carer and that regular contact had been  maintained  with  the
    child by calls via the Internet and that  the  child  and  his  former
    partner visited the appellant in Slovakia in  September  and  December
    2019  and  stayed  at  the  appellant's  mother's  home  although  the
    appellant stayed in a separate room given that they were separated.

94. Against that background, the judge found that was entirely  reasonable
    and proportionate for the appellant to continue  to  maintain  contact
    with his child in  the  manner  that  he  had  been  doing  since  his
    deportation from the UK. There was nothing to stop the appellant's ex-
    partner from continuing to take the child to Slovakia to  see  him  as
    and when feasible and that the appellant could pay for such  trips  in
    the same way that he had done  so  during  the  most  recent  trip  at
    Christmas 2019. The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  both  the
    resources and familial support from his mother who would also  play  a
    part in accommodating such visits in the future as she had done so  in
    the past.

95. The judge concluded that the child's best  interests  were  to  remain
    with his mother in the UK and the status quo to be maintained  of  his
    mother to  remain  as  his  primary  carer  and  that  there  was  "no
    suggestion to the contrary".

96. None of those findings of fact have been challenged  in  the  grounds.
    Whilst the  FtTJ  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his  child  that  would  be,  by
    itself, insufficient to demonstrate that the  effect  upon  the  child
    would be "unduly harsh".

97. Whilst Mr Mohzam made reference to KO(Nigeria) and HA (Iraq) I was not
    taken to any particular paragraphs of those decisions.

98. The decision of the Supreme Court in KO(Nigeria) and  others  v   SSHD
    [2018] UKSC sets out that the assessment of whether the impact upon  a
    qualifying child or partner is "unduly harsh" focuses solely upon  the
    consequences for, and impact upon, those family  members  irrespective
    of the seriousness of the offence or public interest ( at [32]).

99. Also in KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath, with whom the other  members  of
    the Supreme Court agreed, explained the nature of the  test  of  undue
    harshness:

         "23 On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence..."

100. The decision of  the  Court  in  HA  (Iraq)  underlined  that  what  is
    required in all cases is an informed evaluative assessment  of  whether
    the effect of deportation on a child or partner would be  unduly  harsh
    in the context of the strong public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals. The leading judgment of Underhill V-P contains these
    passages:

         "51 ... The  underlying  question  for  tribunals  is  whether  the
         harshness which the deportation will cause for the  partner  and/or
         child is of a sufficiently elevated degree to outweigh that  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals."

         "53 ... It is inherent in the nature of an  exercise  of  the  kind
         required by section 117C(5) that Parliament intended that tribunals
         should in each case  make  an  informed  evaluative  assessment  of
         whether the effect of the deportation of the parent or  partner  on
         their child or partner would be "unduly harsh" in  the  context  of
         the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals;
         and further exposition of that phrase will never be  of  more  than
         limited value."

         "56 ... if tribunals treat the essential question as being "is this
         level of harshness out of the ordinary?" they  may  be  tempted  to
         find that Exception 2 does not apply simply on the basis  that  the
         situation fits into some commonly-encountered pattern.  That  would
         be  dangerous.  How  a  child  will  be  affected  by  a   parent's
         deportation will depend on an almost infinitely variable  range  of
         circumstances and it is not possible  to  identify  a  baseline  of
         "ordinariness". Simply by way of example, the degree  of  harshness
         of the impact may be affected by the child's age;  by  whether  the
         parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or separated father  may
         still have a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  child  who
         lives with the mother); by the  degree  of  the  child's  emotional
         dependence on the parent; by  the  financial  consequences  of  his
         deportation; by the availability of emotional and financial support
         from  a  remaining  parent  and  other  family  members;   by   the
         practicability of maintaining  a  relationship  with  the  deported
         parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of  the
         child.

         57 ... Tribunals considering the  parent  case  under  Exception  2
         should not err in law if in each case they carefully  evaluate  the
         likely effect of the parent's deportation on the  particular  child
         and then decide whether that effect is not merely harsh but  unduly
         harsh applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with  the  guidance  at
         paras 50-53 above."

101. I agree with submission made by Mr McVeety that the  burden  was  upon
    the appellant to provide evidence to demonstrate the  consequences  of
    deportation and the impact or possible impact that they would be  upon
    the child concerned. In the evidence before the  FtTJ,  there  was  no
    witness statement from  the  appellant's  former  partner  making  any
    reference to the circumstances of the child or  any  impact  upon  the
    appellant's relationship with his child in the circumstances where the
    parties were separated. There was no evidence as to  the  impact  upon
    the child  when  the  parties  were  separated  as  a  result  of  his
    imprisonment. The FtTJ noted this at paragraph [30].

102. At  its  highest  there  was  reference  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement that  despite  the  relationship  between  himself  and  his
    partner  breaking  down  he  maintained  a   stable   and   subsisting
    relationship (paragraph 8) and that even when they were  living  apart
    geographically he would visit  every  2  weeks.  At  paragraph  10  he
    describes taking his son out shopping, playing in the  park  and  that
    since his release from prison he spoke to his son over the  telephone.
    At paragraph 12 reference is made visits whereby his son  visited  him
    Slovakia along with his ex-partner. The appellant provided  copies  of
    cards and letters.

103. The grounds do not identify any material that the judge overlooked  or
    failed  to  have  regard  to  when  reaching  his  assessment  on  the
    relationship between the appellant and his son and his  assessment  of
    the best interests. Furthermore  I  have  not  been  directed  to  any
    evidence before the tribunal which had any bearing  on  the  issue  of
    whether or not the impact upon the appellant's  son  would  be  unduly
    harsh.

104. Therefore I have concluded that even if the FtTJ should  have  applied
    S117C (5) it is not an error of any  materiality  given  the  lack  of
    evidence that was before  the  tribunal.  The  assessment  is  a  fact
    sensitive one. The FtTJ made findings of facts which are  unchallenged
    in the grounds that demonstrated that there was a very limited  degree
    of family life between the appellant and his son  and  that  his  best
    interests for him to be cared for by his primary carer. The FtTJ found
    that it was in the best interests of the child for him  to  live  with
    his primary carer. It follows from that it would also be in  his  best
    interests to maintain contact with his father. However  the  FtTJ  did
    not find that necessarily required the appellant to reside in the  UK.
    The FtTJ found that family life could be maintained and  continued  by
    visits as it had been since his departure to Slovakia as  set  out  at
    paragraph [32] where both the appellant's child and ex-partner visited
    the appellant in Slovakia staying at the  appellant's  mother's  house
    and also by the indirect contact via letters and cards which had taken
    place previously. I have not been referred to any  evidence  that  was
    before the tribunal judge to show  that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would be unduly harsh on the appellant's child who at the time of  the
    judge's decision was very young and his primary attachment was to  his
    mother.

105. It was not for the judge to speculate about the  possible  effects  of
    deportation when no evidence existed to  indicate  the  likely  effect
    other than that which would usually be the case on separation, or  any
    such evidence advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  There  was  no
    evidence to show the effects of deportation  upon  the  family  member
    concerned to demonstrate that  it  would  be  such  as  to  merit  the
    description as being "unduly harsh".

106. I therefore conclude that the grounds  cannot  succeed  and  that  the
    error, if any made no  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. The judge had already undertaken a proportionality  assessment
    under EU law in deciding whether the decision breached the appellant's
    rights under the EU treaties. The judge made  factual  findings  which
    were entirely sustainable when considering his personal  circumstances
    and the proportionality of the decision. I have already  set  out  the
    factual findings made concerning his relationship with his son and the
    judge's assessment of his best interests based on the limited evidence
    that had been advanced before the tribunal. Further  factual  findings
    related to his ties to Slovakia, where his family  members  lived  and
    the lack of any ties or integration to the United Kingdom based on his
    short length of residence, his failure to demonstrate any exercise  of
    treaty rights whilst in the United Kingdom, and as a judge stated  "he
    has no other real connection with the UK apart from his spouse who  is
    separated and the British child for whom he is not the  primary  carer
    "(at [36]). At [37] in terms of his integration, the judge found  that
    there was "no evidence before me of any tangible  integration  of  any
    kind by this appellant into the culture and social society in the  UK,
    and the evidence shows that since  coming  to  the  UK  in  2017,  the
    majority of this time was spent pursuing his illegal heroin habit  and
    alcohol addiction."  The  judge  concluded  that  his  real  ties  and
    connections were significantly with Slovakia and  that  was  evidenced
    "by the way which he was able to  very  quickly  integrate  back  into
    society thereafter his deportation from the UK in  all  respects."  At
    [38] he contrasted the position in the UK.

107. As stated in the  decision  of  Straszewski,  in  any  given  case  an
    evaluative exercise of this kind may admit of more  than  one  answer.
    If so, provided all the  appropriate  factors  have  been  taken  into
    account, the decision cannot be impugned  unless  it  is  perverse  or
    irrational, in a sense of falling outside  the  range  of  permissible
    decisions.  It has not been advanced on behalf of the  appellant  that
    the FtTJ's findings of fact were either irrational or perverse and  in
    light of the foregoing, the judge properly considered the  appropriate
    factors and made findings of fact  based  on  the  evidence  that  was
    before him.

108.  The  FtTJ  therefore  addressed  the  factual  issues  to  reach  the
    conclusions that his deportation  was  not  unlawful  under  the  2016
    regulations and therefore also addressed materially the  issues  under
    article 8 having considered the position under  the  regulations.  Any
    error was not material because the protection for removal provided  by
    the 2016 regulations is arguably greater than  any  enjoyed  by  those
    subject to immigration control under article 8.

109. In my judgement all of those issues relating to  proportionality  were
    relevant to any article 8 assessment, and it has not been demonstrated
    that the judge overlooked any  evidence  that  had  been  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant. As to his time in the  UK  the  evidence  was
    very limited. In the short period  of  his  residence,  there  was  no
    evidence of any  regular  employment  or  any  integrative  links  and
    therefore the assessment made that removal of the  appellant  did  not
    constitute a disproportionate interference with  his   (whether  under
    the EU treaties or article 8) was a decision reasonably  open  to  the
    FtTJ to make on the evidence that was before him.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law which requires the decision to be set aside.
     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated :  15 July 2021

