
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00402/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr SHAMSUL ARAFIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel (instructed by RLegal Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the respondent with permission
granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow on 30 May 2019.

It relates to a decision and reasons of Judge Rowlands in the First-tier
Tribunal promulgated on 1 April 2019.

For the sake of continuity and clarity, we shall refer to Mr Arafin as the
appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent, as they were before
the First-tier Tribunal, even though this is the Secretary of State's
appeal.

The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 23 February 1981 had an
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's
decision to deport him as a result of his conviction for assault
occasioning actual bodily harm, false imprisonment and two robberies for
which he was sentenced, on 18 January 2016, to 5 years imprisonment.

The appellant is the spouse of an EEA national and as a family member of an
EEA national the decision to deport him was made under the EEA Regulations.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that as the appellant and his EEA
national partner had started living together and were in a durable
relationship since 2008, by 2015 he had acquired a right of permanent
residence on account of five years continuous residence in accordance with
the EEA Regulations.

Having so found, the judge went on to consider the deportation on the basis
that the appellant could only be deported on imperative grounds of public
security.

The Secretary of State, in the grounds of appeal, pointed to two major
errors by the First-tier Tribunal. Firstly, the appellant had not acquired
permanent residence. He had not applied for or been given a residence card
as an extended family member of his now wife on the basis of a durable
relationship. Not having the benefit of a residence card, he was not to be
regarded, for the purposes of these proceedings, as a family member at that
time. (Macastena [2018] EW CACI V1558). The couple married on 19 February
2011 and therefore he would not acquire permanent residence until 19
February 2016. By that time he had been incarcerated and therefore was not
residing in accordance with the Regulations.  As a matter of law therefore
he had not acquired permanent residence.

The second error is that even had the judge been correct in finding the
appellant had acquired permanent residence, he still erred in applying the
test of imperative grounds of public security. That test only applies where
someone has acquired both permanent residence and 10 years residence in the
United Kingdom. The judge has not mentioned at all or considered whether
the appellant had been resident for 10 years.

To their credit the appellant's representatives filed a Rule 24 response
accepting that the First-tier Tribunal 's decision contained material
errors of law. They did however suggest that some of the findings in the
appellant's favour, particularly in relation to his relationship and risks
should be preserved.

We agree that the errors identified by the Secretary of State's are
material errors of law such that First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot
stand. Given that the judge has completely misunderstood and misapplied the
law in relation to deportation under the EEA Regulations, we find it
inappropriate to preserve any findings.

Both parties were in agreement that the appropriate step, having set aside
the First-tier Tribunal's decision is to remit it for a full rehearing on
all matters to the First-tier Tribunal and this we do.

We would add that in a case such as this, where the material errors of law
were clearly apparent, the appropriate step to have been taken by the first-
tier Judge, considering whether to grant permission to appeal, should have
been to review that decision and then to set it aside under Rule 35 of the
Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. This matter should never have come before
the Upper Tribunal at all.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the  matter  remitted  to  that
tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.

There was no anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal, no
application for one and we see no reason to make one.






Signed [pic]                            Date 2 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



