
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00796/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st January 2020                 |On 14th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            DAMARS DAMARS PUCINS
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr
    Pucins.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision
    I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to Mr
    Pucins as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis
    promulgated on 9th July 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA
    Regulations 2016") against the respondent's decision to make a
    deportation order. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant on 5th August 2019.


 3. Notice of the hearing of the appeal before me was sent to the parties
    on 20th November 2019.  A copy was sent to the appellant at his home
    address, and having checked the Tribunal file, I am satisfied that the
    Notice of Hearing has not been returned to the Tribunal.  I am
    satisfied that the Notice has been sent to the last known address
    provided by the appellant.  The matter was called on for hearing at
    12:35pm and there was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.
    No explanation has been provided for the appellant's absence.  My clerk
    telephoned a telephone number held on the Tribunal's records for the
    appellant, but the phone was switched off and the Tribunal was unable
    to contact the appellant to consider whether there is an explanation
    for his absence.  Mr Bates informed me that according to records held
    by the respondent, the appellant has not reported to the respondent
    since 28th May 2019 and is shortly to be treated as an absconder.  In
    the absence of any explanation for the failure of the appellant to
    attend the hearing, it is in my judgement in the interests of justice
    for me to proceed to determine the appeal in the appellant's absence.


Background


 4. The appellant is a national of Latvia.  He first came to the attention
    of the authorities in the UK on 7 November 2014, when he was convicted
    at South Derbyshire Magistrates Court of possession of a Class A drug -
    heroin.  The appellant was served with a notice of liability to
    administrative removal on 14 February 2016 as an EEA national who was
    not exercising treaty rights.  He was removed from the United Kingdom
    on 20th May 2016. On 25th January 2017, the appellant sought admission
    to the UK by deception when he attempted to use a travel document that
    did not belong to him, to gain entry. He was refused entry.  He again
    came to the attention of the authorities in December 2017, February
    2018 and August 2018 when he was convicted of various offences at South
    Derbyshire Magistrates Court.  The appellant's offending history is set
    out in the respondent's decision and is referred to in the decision of
    the FtT.


 5. The appellant attended the hearing of his appeal before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant was unrepresented and at paragraph [9], the
    judge sets out the relevant legal framework.  The judge referred to
    Regulations 23 and 27 of the EEA Regulations 2016 that apply to
    exclusion and removal decisions taken on the grounds of public policy,
    public security or public health.


 6. Judge Hillis refers to the evidence at paragraphs [10] to [19] of his
    decision.  The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at
    paragraphs [35] to [48] of the decision.  The judge noted, at [36],
    that on the appellant's own account he has not been living continuously
    in the United Kingdom for the previous five years, and thus is only
    entitled to the lowest level of protection from removal under the EEA
    Regulations 2016.


 7. The judge noted the appellant was released from HMP Moorland on licence
    on 14th December 2018 and the licence expired on 26th April 2019.  The
    post-sentence supervision commenced on 26th April 2019 and expired on
    14th December 2019.  Therefore, at the date of the hearing before the
    FtT and decision of Judge Hillis, the appellant was still under the
    supervision of the Derby Probation Service.  The judge noted at [37]
    that there was no evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant has
    breached any of the supervision requirements.  At paragraph [38], the
    judge stated:


         "The appellant's record shows that his first offence was committed
         on 7th November 2014 which involved the possession of a Class A
         drug, namely heroin for which he was fined and ordered to pay court
         costs and the victim surcharge. His following offences from 7th
         September 2015 to 10th October 2018, save for one offence of
         battery on 10th August 2018, all involved shoplifting to fund his
         own drug habit. There is no evidence before me that the appellant
         has committed any offences or been in breach of his licence
         following his release from prison on 14th December 2018, which at
         the date of hearing was a period of six months."


 8. The Judge found the appellant to be a credible and truthful witness who
    showed clear remorse for his previous of offending and the judge
    accepted that he was never involved in the supply of drugs, despite his
    addiction to Class A heroin.  At paragraph [40], the judge stated:


         "Since his release from prison he has been in regular employment
         and has managed to remain drug-free. He has established a
         relationship with a lady and her son which, on the face of it,
         appears to be stable although they are not currently cohabiting.
         During his last prison sentence he took the opportunity to
         undertake education courses and become drug-free. In my judgement,
         the appellant has given every indication that he seeks to lead a
         lawful life in future and put his dependence on unlawful drugs in
         the past. In my judgement, although he committed many offences of
         shoplifting to fund his drug habit he was as much a victim of his
         dependency as he is a criminal and he has put that dependency
         behind him."


 9. At paragraph [42], the judge referred to the conviction for the offence
    of battery, and the sentence of four weeks imprisonment that the
    appellant received to run concurrently with the sentences he received
    for shoplifting on the same occasion. The judge referred to the
    evidence of the appellant's employment and noted there was an absence
    of evidence in the form of a report from the probation service or the
    supervising officer of his licence, to show that the appellant is
    anything other than at low risk of offending in the future.  The judge
    considered the letters from Prison Officers provided by the appellant
    in support of his appeal, which had not been challenged by the
    respondent.  At paragraph [43], the judge concluded that the respondent
    placed too much weight on the appellant's previous convictions, which
    under Regulation 27(5) do not in themselves justify the decision. The
    judge accepted the appellant's entire family are now living in the UK
    in exercise of their treaty rights.  At paragraph [47] the judge
    concluded as follows:


         "In my judgement, on the evidence before me taken as a whole the
         appellant has shown that he behaved very positively whilst in
         prison, became a trustee and assisted the officers with
         interpreting for other Latvian prisoners during discussions with
         the prison officers. He undertook education courses and regained
         his physical fitness on the gym course whilst successfully
         participating in the drug course to become drug-free. He has not
         reoffended since his release and has not breached any of his
         licence conditions. He has obtained gainful employment, is living
         in the same accommodation as his mother and appears to be in a
         settled relationship with his partner. He has shown all the
         indications of someone who seeks to rehabilitate himself within
         society."


10. The judge concluded that taking the evidence as a whole, the decision
    to remove the appellant from the UK has not been shown by the
    respondent to be proportionate and justified on the grounds of public
    interest in public policy.  The judge concluded that there was
    insufficient evidence before him to conclude that the appellant
    presents a genuine and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society.


The appeal before me


11. The respondent claims First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis erred in his
    approach as to whether the personal conduct of the appellant represents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting the
    fundamental interests of society, taking into account past conduct and
    the principle that the threat does not need to be imminent.  The
    respondent claims that given the appellant's offending history,
    although the appellant may have behaved positively whilst in prison and
    not reoffended since his release, the judge erred in finding that the
    appellant has rehabilitated himself to the extent that he no longer
    poses a threat to the fundamental interests of society.  The respondent
    claims that in reaching his decision, the judge only refers to the
    convictions and failed to have regard to the fact that the appellant
    sought readmission to the UK using a false passport on 25th January
    2017, which was a facet of the personal conduct of the appellant and
    relevant to the fundamental interests of society. The public policy
    requirements of the United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise
    conferred in order to protect the fundamental interests of society.
    Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations 2016 expressly provides that the
    'fundamental interests of society' include inter alia preventing
    unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration laws, and maintaining
    the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration control system, and,
    combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in relation
    to offences which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to
    meet the requirements of regulation 27).  The respondent claims the
    judge considered the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation, but there
    is no evidence that the appellant's prospects of rehabilitation would
    be less likely in Latvia.   The respondent claims the judge erred in
    his assessment of proportionality by focusing upon the reasons why the
    appellant does not wish to be removed from the UK without sufficient
    regard to the public interest in the appellant's deportation.


12. Mr Bates adopts the grounds of appeal, and submits that although the
    judge refers to factors that weigh in favour of the appellant, the
    judge failed to have proper regard to the unlawful conduct of the
    appellant which is relevant to a proper consideration of whether the
    exclusion of the appellant is justified on the grounds of public
    policy.  Mr Bates submits the fundamental interests of society include
    the prevention of unlawful immigration and abuse of immigration laws
    and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the immigration
    control system; Schedule 1, Paragraph 7(a) of the EEA Regulations.  It
    also includes combating the effects of persistent offending
    particularly in relation to offences which have taken in isolation, may
    otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27;
    Schedule 1, Paragraph 7(h). The respondent submits that in reaching his
    decision the judge fails to engage with the matters set out in Schedule
    1 identifying the fundamental interests of society.  Mr Bates submits
    the appellant has shown utter disregard for immigration laws and the
    judge failed to consider the appellant's conduct as a whole, in
    considering whether the personal conduct of the appellant represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society. Mr Bates submits that when one
    considers the appellant's offending, the appellant has demonstrated in
    the past that there can be long periods during which he did not offend
    and it was irrational for the Judge to conclude the appellant does not
    pose a risk of reoffending because he had behaved positively whilst
    prison and has not reoffended since his release.  That was a short
    period during which the appellant has been under the threat of
    deportation.


13. Mr Bates submits the judge erred in concluding the exclusion of the
    appellant from the UK is not proportionate and the appellant would not
    pose a sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
    society.


Discussion


14. As the judge noted found at paragraph [36] of his decision, it is
    uncontroversial that the appellant has not acquired permanent residence
    and is only entitled to the basic level of protection set out in
    Regulation 23(5) and Regulation 27(1) of the 2016 Regulations.  It is
    convenient to set out, at the outset, Regulation 27 of the EEA
    Regulations 2016 insofar as it is relevant:


      1) In This regulation, a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
         health.


      2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


         ...


         5)   The public policy and public security requirements of the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-


             (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking into account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need
             to be imminent;


             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
             which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
             justify the decision;


             (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision;


             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
         resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


15. It is also convenient to set out Schedule 1 insofar as it is relevant
    to this appeal.


         7.   Fundamental interests of society


         For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
         society in the United Kingdom include-


         (a)  preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the immigration
         laws, and maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the
         immigration control system (including under these Regulations) and
         of the Common Travel Area;


         ...


         (h)  combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
         relation to offences which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
         unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);


         ...


16. As the appellant has not exercised treaty rights for a continuous
    period of five years, the Regulations give only the lowest level of
    protection against removal. Nevertheless the appellant cannot be
    deported unless his personal conduct represents "a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
    of society, taking into account past conduct of the person and that the
    threat does not need to be imminent. This is set out at Regulation
    27(5)(c).


17. Judge Hillis considered the factors set out in Regulation 27(5) of the
    EEA Regulations at paragraphs [37] to [48] of his decision.  The judge
    found the appellant to be a credible and truthful witness who showed
    clear remorse for his previous offending and I remind myself that the
    judge had the advantage of hearing from the appellant who clearly made
    a favourable impression upon the judge.


18. A finding as to whether the conduct of the appellant represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat is a prerequisite for
    the adoption of an expulsion measure and it is only upon such a threat
    being established, that the issue of proportionality arises.  Here, the
    judge concluded at paragraph [48] that there is insufficient evidence
    before him to conclude that the appellant presents a genuine and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
    of society.  In reaching that decision, the judge appears to have taken
    into account a number of factors. First, the appellant was released on
    licence on 14th December 2018, and there was no evidence that the
    appellant breached any of the licence conditions or committed any
    further offences; Paragraphs [37], [38] and [47]. Second, the
    appellant's conduct whilst in prison and the courses that he completed;
    Paragraphs [40] and [47]. Third, the evidence that since his release
    from prison the appellant has been in regular employment and has
    managed to remain drug-free; Paragraphs [40], [42] and [47]. Fourth,
    the appellant has established a relationship with a lady and her son
    which, on the face of it, appears to be stable, although they are not
    currently cohabiting; Paragraphs [40] and [47].


19. In my judgement, in reaching his decision the judge had regard to a
    number of factors that weigh in favour of the appellant and the judge
    was undoubtedly entitled to have those factors in mind.  However, this
    is not a case where there has been a prolonged period of industrious
    good behaviour showing that the appellant's offending can be considered
    in isolation when considering the fundamental interests of society.  In
     reaching his findings and the overall conclusion set out at paragraph
    [47], the judge fails to have any regard whatsoever to the  fact that
    the appellant was administratively removed to Latvia on 20th May 2016,
    and, on 25th January 2017 sought admission to the UK by deception when
    he attempted to use a travel document that did not belong to him, to
    gain entry.  Although the judge was concerned with the question of
    whether the appellant presents a genuine and sufficiently serious
    threat  affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, there is
    no reference at all by the judge to the 'fundamental interests of
    society' expressed in Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.  The judge
    concludes at paragraph [48] that there was insufficient evidence before
    him to conclude the appellant presents a genuine and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.
    I cannot be satisfied that the judge would have reached the same
    conclusion, if the matters set out in Schedule 1 had been taken into
    account, and the judge had factored in, the appellant's attempt to gain
    entry in January 2017 by deception.  In my judgement, the decision of
    the FtT is vitiated by a material error of law and must be set aside.


Remaking the decision


20. I must then decide what to do now.  The appellant has not attended the
    hearing before me and is not represented.  However, I have had the
    advantage of reading the papers. The appellant's stay in the United
    Kingdom has not been particularly prolonged.  As the FtT judge found,
    it is only long enough to give the basic level of protection to which
    an EEA national is entitled.


21. The appellant has established a relationship with a lady and her son,
    which on the face of it, the FtT judge found to be "stable although
    they are not currently cohabiting". The appellant lives with his mother
    and the FtT judge found that his entire family are now living in the UK
    in exercise of the Treaty rights.  There does not appear to have been
    an OASys Report and the FtT judge proceeds upon the premise that there
    is no evidence to show the appellant is anything other than a low risk
    of re-offending. That however, is to disregard the fact that the
    appellant has in the past had periods during which he has not offended,
    but overall, he is a persistent offender.  I find the personal conduct
    of the appellant, taking into account his convictions and his attempt
    in January 2017 to enter the UK by deception in breach of immigration
    laws, to be such that he presents a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.
    In reaching that decision I have had regard to the lack of evidence
    showing the commission of any further offences and the steps taken by
    the appellant towards rehabilitation and the remorse that he expressed
    before the FtT.  In short I find that this is a case of a man whose
    criminality and conduct is sufficient to warrant deportation and who
    has not been able to show that his or his family's circumstances come
    within the exceptions to exclusion.  I find that the decision to the
    appellant complies with the principle of proportionality and the
    appellant is not somebody who is entitled under EEA law, with its
    different regime, to be allowed to remain.


Notice of Decision


22. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.


23. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to deport him.






Signed                                  Date     27th March 2020


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

