
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00670/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester CJC             |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 9 September 2019                 |On: 16 September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Dirie, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Poland, has appealed against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 14 June 2019 in which  it  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on EEA grounds.


 2. I make an anonymity direction because this decision refers to sensitive
    medical evidence relevant to the appellant.

 3. Mr Tan relied upon a written notice dated 4 September  2019,  in  which
    the SSHD conceded that there was an error of law in the  decision  such
    that it should be set aside and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  relevant
    considerations into account, including medical evidence concerning  the
    appellant's mental health available to  it,  when  making  findings  of
    fact.    I am satisfied that Mr Tan was entirely correct to concede  an
    error of law was made such that the decision must be set aside.

 4. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the
    factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have  decided
    that this is an appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    No findings of fact are preserved.


 5. Upon remittal, the First-tier Tribunal's  attention  is  drawn  to  the
    addendum psychiatric report from Dr Galappathie dated 19 July 2019  and
    in particular the prognosis at [63].  It would be  helpful,  given  the
    appellant's mental health concerns and the  related  issues  likely  to
    arise in this appeal, for there to be a case management review  hearing
    at an early stage.

Decision


 6. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


 7. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 9 September
2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
