

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00770/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 20 January 2015                            |on 22 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                IRFAN LIAQAT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire
                    Solicitors (Scotland) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly, promulgated on 18 July 2014, dismissing his appeal against
    deportation to Pakistan.

 2. The grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (prepared  by  previous
    representatives) are in part no more than insistence on the case  which
    was put to the First-tier Tribunal.  Other parts dilate upon  the  case
    law on the interaction of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  the  Immigration
    Rules but in rather confused terms, asserting generally that the First-
    tier Tribunal should have engaged in a proportionality exercise without
    much regard to the Immigration Rules.

 3. The ground which the judge granting  permission  thought  arguable  was
    that the finding of a medium risk of re-offending and a  high  risk  of
    causing serious economic harm contradicted the "expert evidence"  in  a
    probation service report, without sufficient  reasons  -  ground  5(a).
    The grant of permission explicitly finds no merit in grounds  5(b)  and
    (c), but leaves the remaining grounds to be argued.

 4. Mr Winter sought to argue additional grounds, although he said that  at
    least in part they aim to clarify points which might be  based  on  the
    original grounds: (1) error in stating at paragraph  24  there  was  no
    evidence whether the appellant had sisters or more distant relatives in
    Pakistan, all the witnesses having said he had no family  there,  which
    might have borne materially upon the outcome; (2) error at paragraph 26
    in not being satisfied that the appellant would cope with everyday life
    or the workplace environment in particular, which  overlooked  that  he
    had been working [for 6 to 7 months prior  to  being  sentenced]  as  a
    delivery driver for Dominoes Pizza without further offending;  and  (3)
    error in failing to have regard to the development of  family  life  in
    the future, and not appraising how his child's  interests  and  welfare
    might be better served by his remaining here.

 5. Mrs O'Brien had no objection to the additional grounds being argued.

 6. Mr Winter's submitted along the following lines.  He went  through  the
    evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal, in particular  going
    to low risk of re-offending now  that  the  appellant's  mental  health
    difficulties are controlled by medication, with a good  prognosis;  the
    various statements about having no relatives left in Pakistan; and  the
    period of work as a delivery driver.   He accepted what is said  in  MF
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  about  exceptional  circumstances  in  the  Rules
    equating to very compelling reasons to outweigh the public interest, as
    cited by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 29.  However, he  adopted
    the grounds on error of legal approach at 5(d) and 19-20.  He said  the
    Judge concentrated unduly on the Rules, failed to  look  at  the  wider
    circumstances, and was wrong  to  conclude  that  there  were  no  very
    compelling reasons against deportation.  Ganesalaban [2014]  EWHC  2712
    [a judicial review of an Article 8 decision by the SSHD]  held  that  a
    proportionality consideration is always required.  In a case  where  it
    was unreasonable for wife and child to relocate, the Judge was wrong to
    hold at paragraph 35 that the medical condition was the only point  not
    contemplated by the Rules.  MM (Zimbabwe) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  279  arose
    under very similar circumstances and was a strong indication that  this
    case should have been allowed, see paragraph 35:

          In my view, the Upper Tribunal was  diverted,  by  reason  of  the
          arguments advanced, from an important aspect of the case,  namely,
          whether it was disproportionate to deport  the  appellant  on  the
          grounds of his previous convictions in the light of  the  evidence
          of the prognosis and the relationship between his  mental  illness
          and his offending. The judge never seems to have reached any clear
          conclusion based on an assessment  of  the  risk  of  re-offending
          despite continued medication and support from his family here.  If
          the correct view is that there is no  realistic  risk  of  further
          offending and the prognosis is excellent then it is  difficult  to
          see how it could be proportionate to deport this appellant. He has
          been in this country for 12 years and he has nothing to go back to
          save his grandmother and great-aunt, if they are still alive.

    The appellant and his family are now aware of his mental health problem
    and  it  can  be  controlled.   On  a  correct   legal   approach   and
    understanding of the facts, the determination should be reversed.

 7. Mrs O'Brien submitted that paragraph 26 of the determination was  based
    on a full reading of the reports placed before the First-tier Tribunal.
     The pre-sentencing report (page E5) and the  psychiatric  reports  all
    linked the offending  to  stress  in  the  working  environment.    The
    circumstances narrated at paragraph 5 of the determination  showed  two
    separate incidents at each of two workplaces.  The Judge did  not  have
    to set out every detail of the evidence.  A short period of  employment
    without further offending while awaiting sentence did not displace  the
    Judge's reasoning.  Even if a low re-offending risk  should  have  been
    found, a medium risk of harm towards others would remain (page E10, pre-
    sentence report).  The point was not one which  affected  the  outcome.
    The Judge was correct not to find separation  from  wife  and  child  a
    reason to allow the appeal outside the Rules because such  consequences
    are catered for in  the  Rules  and  by  definition  cannot  constitute
    exceptional circumstances.  The Judge would not have been  entitled  to
    go on a free-wheeling Article 8 exercise.   The relevant  factors  were
    governed by the Rules, which provided that those factors in  favour  of
    the appellant were outweighed by the public  interest  in  deportation.
    The only possible other factor was the mental health element  but  that
    would not help the appellant anyway.  There was no reason to think  the
    necessary medication was not available in Pakistan and the  point  was,
    as the Judge said, a double-edged sword since the condition lies behind
    the offending.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. MM predates the far-reaching changes in the  Rules  in  July  2012  and
    their interpretation in MF.  The Judge followed MF.  Paragraphs 399 and
    399A of the Rules did not apply.  The exceptional circumstances had  to
    be found in other matters, not in the  considerations  about  wife  and
    child which were settled by the Rules.  I prefer  the  submissions  for
    the respondent to the argument  in  grounds  and  submissions  for  the
    appellant, which sought latitude of approach beyond  the  settled  case
    law.

10. The considerations outside the  Rules  were  self-evidently  much  less
    weighty than those within the Rules, which went to the heart of  family
    life.

11. The Judge's reasons for the finding of a medium  risk  of  re-offending
    are carefully considered and in my opinion legally sufficient.  I  also
    agree that a low risk finding would not change the outcome.

12. The Judge made a slip about there being no evidence whether there  were
    sisters or more distant relatives in Pakistan.  The witnesses concurred
    that there were no relatives.  However,  it  is  also  plain  that  the
    absence of evidence on that point played no  significant  part  in  the
    finding that there were no exceptional circumstances or very compelling
    reasons.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



         [pic]


         20 January 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


