
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00465/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Video Link at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 May 2021                       |On 05 October 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          Mr EFREN ALEXANDER MUJICA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris instructed by McKenzie Beute & Pope
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to revoke a deportation order against  the
    appellant, a decision made on 28 July 2017.  His  appeal  against  that
    decision  was  allowed  in  a  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated on 19 December 2019.  That decision was,  for  the  reasons
    set out in my decision of 9 March  2020  (copy  attached),  set  aside.
    Owing, amongst other things, the COVID  pandemic  and  difficulties  in
    obtaining instructions from the appellant, it was not possible to  hear
    the re-making of the appeal until 14 May 2021.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Italy born on 24 January  1995.   He  was
    born in Venezuela but arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 October  2000
    to join his mother Maria Luisa Alejandrina Cuculo, an Italian  citizen.
    Other than a caution administered on 4 February 2006 for  burglary  and
    theft from a non-dwelling, the  appellant  was  not  convicted  of  any
    offences until 2016.  On 22 August 2016 the appellant was convicted  of
    a number of offences between 12 April 2016 and 16 June 2016.  These are
    as follows:-

         12 April 2016 Burglary with intent to steal

         13 May 2016   Assaulting a police constable

         13 May 2016   Using threatening, abusive and  insulting  words  and
                           behaviour with intent to cause fear or violence

         16 June 2016  Assaulting a constable and  possessing  an  offensive
                           weapon in a public place

         17 June 2016  Assaulting a constable and criminal damage less  than
                           �5,000

         17 May 2016   Sexual assault on a woman

         27 April 2016 Possession of a knife in public place

 3. The appellant was sentenced at Southampton Crown Court  by  His  Honour
    Judge Henry who imposed the following sentences:-

         For the burglary four months' imprisonment.

         Threatening a member of the public with a craft knife  ten  months'
         custody consecutive to the burglary charge.

         For the offences of 13 May four months and three months  concurrent
         plus four months for the sexual assault, again consecutive.

         For the offences on  16  June  he  was  sentenced  to  four  months
         concurrently on each and two months concurrent for criminal  damage
         plus six  months  for  possession  of  a  knife  on  that  occasion
         consecutive to those sentences but concurrent of the sentences  for
         the offences on 16 June.  This resulted in a total  of  two  years'
         imprisonment and the appellant  was  required  to  be  on  the  Sex
         Offenders Register for seven years).

 4. On 7 February 2017 the respondent wrote to  the  appellant  giving  him
    notice that he may be liable to deportation pursuant to the Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 5. On 8 February 2017 the appellant signed a disclaimer  ticking  the  box
    which provided "I  am  aware  that  I  have  an  opportunity  to  lodge
    representations against my deportation but I wish nevertheless to leave
    the United Kingdom without doing so".   These  papers  were  served  in
    substitution for papers served in 2016 based on  the  mistaken  premise
    that the appellant was a citizen of Venezuela.

 6. On 6 March 2017 the Secretary of State made a deportation order against
    the appellant under  Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  in
    accordance with Regulation 32(3) of the EEA Regulations.   On  8  March
    2017  the  appellant  signed  a  further  disclaimer  stating  that  he
    nevertheless wished to leave the United Kingdom and  waive  his  appeal
    rights.  The appellant was removed  to  Italy  in  consequence  of  the
    deportation order on 4 May 2017.   On  17  June  2017  the  appellant's
    representatives sought a revocation of the deportation order which  was
    refused on 26 July 2017.

 7. The respondent noted the appellant's convictions concluding that  there
    had not been a change in circumstances.  It was noted that the case put
    was that the appellant's mother had since relocated to Italy,  that  he
    had stated he did not wish to be deported, did not understand  that  he
    was consenting to deportation when he signed the disclaimer as  he  did
    not have sufficient mental capacity, and wishes to be returned  to  the
    United Kingdom to appeal the decision to deport him.

 8. The respondent did not accept on the basis of  the  documentation  that
    the appellant had been resident in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years.   She
    concluded, having considered in detail his criminal offending  and  the
    OASys Report, that in the absence of any evidence that he had addressed
    the  reasons  behind  his  violent,  sexual  and  otherwise  aggressive
    behaviour that he continued to pose  a  real  risk  of  reoffending  in
    future, posing a significant and unacceptable risk of  harm  to  women,
    unknown  individuals,  known  individuals  and  others  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It also observed that there was no indication that  he  would
    be able to financially support himself on release and  absent  evidence
    of any improvement in his personal circumstances it was  reasonable  to
    conclude that absent employment and stable accommodation he may have to
    revert to reoffending.

 9. The respondent considered also that the appellant he had  a  propensity
    to reoffend, presented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  and  that  it  was
    proportionate to maintain the deportation order against him.  She noted
    also that there was no evidence about the appellant's two children nor,
    having had regard to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  was  she
    satisfied that the appellant  had established  a  family  life  with  a
    partner, that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules or  that
    there were very compelling  circumstances  such  that  his  deportation
    order should be revoked.

10. There is on file an OASys assessment from 9 February 2017 in  which  it
    is noted at [2.8] that the appellant has a history of  mental  illness,
    substance abuse and low  IQ.   It  is  noted  also  that  there  was  a
    psychiatric report from a Dr Cummings which, it  is  said,  "offers  an
    extensive and detailed account of Mr Mujica's life".   In  his  opinion
    and recommendations, the doctor states that:

         "[t]he [appellant] presented with a disordered  mental  state  both
         times he saw him - 15 6 16 and 22 6 16 but with some improvement in
         the latter".

11. He goes on to say "there is overwhelming evidence  from  reviewing  his
    medical  records  that  Mr  Mujica's  mental  state  although   thought
    disordered, is clearly related to his use of illegal drugs".

12. The report notes that the appellant had been on remand since  May  2016
    and had been to several prisons.  At HMP Winchester the In-Reach mental
    health team allowed a  period  of  assessment  without  medication  and
    illegal substances.  It is noted that the appellant still presented  as
    thought disordered with paranoia and was due to be seen by  the  prison
    psychiatrist with a view to prescribing an antipsychotic medication  as
    he had been prescribed previously.

13. Further, at section [2.11] it appears  that  the  appellant  has  three
    children but could not recall more detail, said he  had  mental  health
    problems but did not fully answer questions.

14. Reading the OASys assessment it  appears  that  the  appellant  had  at
    various different times given different accounts of when he  was  born,
    when he had come to the United Kingdom, as to the number of children he
    had had as well as to reasons why he was  in  Southampton.   There  are
    also indications that he had injected  heroin  and  had  taken  ecstasy
    [8.9] and that there is a strong link  between  drugs  and  his  mental
    health.  It is also  noted  [9]  that  the  appellant  has  significant
    problems as a result of binge drinking or excessive use of alcohol  and
    violent behaviour related to  alcohol.   At  section  [11]  the  report
    records:-

         "It is difficult to assess what elements of Mr  Mujica's  behaviour
         is as a result of his drug use or his mental health problems.  From
         my dealing with Mr Mujica it appeared that he was avoiding  talking
         about anything difficult and was only focusing  on  one  issue  and
         that was his deportation and new life in Italy.  He  would  not  be
         drawn into how he would cope in Italy or that he would  be  leaving
         his mother behind.  He demonstrated no  planning  or  consequential
         thinking".

15. Again, at section [12.8]:-

         "Mr Mujica showed a poor attitude to his  offending  behaviour  and
         was not able to offer any insight, remorse or empathy  towards  his
         victims.  He was not willing to consider any  help  from  Probation
         with gaining a better understanding even if  this  meant  he  would
         receive a prison sentence.  He was assessed [R10.6] of presenting a
         medium risk in the community to the public, known adults and staff,
         risk likely to be greatest when  he  was  under  the  influence  of
         alcohol and drugs.  The risk likely to be increased due to unstable
         accommodation, lack of finance, support, feeling of persecution".

16. In terms of factors  likely  to  reduce  the  risk  the  report  states
    [R10.5]:-

         "No drugs or alcohol, engaged with MH services and treatment  plan,
         confirmed a diagnosis, engaged with drug  services  and  agreed  to
         drug testing, stable home  where  there  are  firm  boundaries  and
         structure,  education  and  plan  to  increase   free   time   with
         constructive  activities,  victim  empathy   to   gain   a   better
         understanding of the effect his behaviour has on others".

17. Finally, in  the  summary  sheet  the  OGRS  3  probability  of  proven
    reoffending is 33% in the first year and 15% in the  second.   The  OGP
    probability of non-violent reoffending is 59% in year 1 and 73% in year
    2.

The Law

18. The 2016 EEA Regulations were revoked  on  31  December  2020  but  the
    Immigration and Social Security Co-ordination (EU Withdrawal) Act  2020
    (Consequential, Saving, Transitional  and  Transitory  Provisions)  (EU
    Exit) Regulations (SI 2020/1309)  ("EEA  Transitional  Regs")  preserve
    some (but not all) of the 2016 Regulations as set in out in schedule  3
    to the Transitional Regulations.

19. In addition to EEA Transitional Regs, the 2016 EEA Regulations are also
    preserved for other  purposes  by  the  Citizens'  Rights  (Application
    Deadline  and  Temporary  Protection)  (EU  Exit)  Regulations  2020  (
    "Citizens'  Rights  TP  Regulations")   and   the    Citizens'   Rights
    (Restrictions of Rights of Entry and Residence) (EU  Exit)  Regulations
    ("Citizens' Rights Restriction Regulations") (SI 2020/1210).

20. As the representatives agreed at the hearing, it is not easy to discern
    whether either of these  sets  of  regulations  are  relevant  to  this
    appeal, or indeed what the effect is of the  Transitional  Regulations;
    and, for that reason,  I  gave  directions  for  submissions  on  their
    applicability to be made in  writing.   Ms  Harris  provided  detailed,
    lucid and helpful submissions  which  I  have  taken  into  account  in
    reaching my decision.

21. I am not,  however,  satisfied  that  either  the  Citizens  Rights  TP
    Regulations or the Citizens' Rights Restriction Regulations affect this
    appellant for the reasons set out below.

22. The appellant does not fall within the Citizens Rights  TP  Regulations
    as he was not residing in the United Kingdom and so  cannot  apply  for
    residence status under the Immigration Rules as a person so entitled by
    virtue of the EU Withdrawal Agreement.

23. The Citizens Rights Restriction  Regulations  set  out  in  reg  2  the
    categories of persons to whom them apply. The appellant does  not  fall
    within reg. 2 (2) having neither leave to enter  or  remain  under  the
    relevant immigration rules nor is he present  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Further, he is not a person to whom article 32 (1)(b) of the Withdrawal
    Agreement applies as he is not a person who had requested authorisation
    to receive a course of planned  health  treatment.  Although  he  might
    appear to fall within reg 2(3), he does not as  he  was  not  a  person
    protected by the citizens' rights provisions in  Part  Two  of  the  EU
    Withdrawal Agreement at the time he became subject  to  a  decision  to
    remove him under regulation 23(6)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2016.  That
    is because the appellant was removed to Italy in May 2017 and does  not
    come within the scope of Article 10 or Title III of the  EU  withdrawal
    agreement as he ceased to be resident in the United Kingdom well before
    the end of the transition period.

24. By  operation  of  paragraph  2  of  Schedule  3  to  the  Transitional
    Regulations, deportation orders made by virtue of the  EEA  Regulations
    continue to apply until any time limit placed on  them  is  reached  or
    until revoked.

25. I am also satisfied that be operation of paragraphs 5 and 6 of Schedule
    3 to the  Transitional  Regulations  that,  subject  to  amendments  in
    italics, the following parts of the EEA Regulations continue  to  apply
    as follows:

         27.- Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security
         and public health


         (1)  In this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         ...

         (5)  The public policy and public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

         (a)  the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
         proportionality;

         (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;

         (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;

         (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision;

         (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.).

26. As Ms Harris submitted, although reg. 34 is not include in paragraph 6,
    it is partially preserved by operation of paragraph 2 (5)  as  this  is
    deportation that falls within paragraph 2(1) or (3) of Schedule 3.  Reg
    34 as it applies to this appeal provides.

         34.- Revocation of deportation and exclusion orders

         (1)  ...

         (3)  A person who is subject to a deportation or  exclusion  order
         made on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
         health in accordance with regulation  27  may  only  apply  to  the
         Secretary of State to have it revoked on the basis that  there  has
         been a material change in  the  circumstances  that  justified  the
         making of the order.

         (4)  An application under paragraph (3) must set out the  material
         change in circumstances relied upon by the applicant and  may  only
         be made whilst the applicant is outside the United Kingdom.

         (5)  On  receipt  of  an  application  under  paragraph  (3),  the
         Secretary of State must revoke the order if the Secretary of  State
         considers that the criteria for making such an order are no  longer
         satisfied.

         (6)  The Secretary of State must take a decision on an application
         under paragraph (2) no later than six  months  after  the  date  on
         which the application is received.

27. I am satisfied also that regs. 36 and 37 continue to apply.

28. There is, as Ms Harris submits, a tension in the wording of reg. 34  in
    that regs. 34 (3) and 34(5) presuppose that the making of the order  in
    the first place was justified.  I  accept  that  is  a  material  issue
    insofar as the Upper Tribunal has to consider the circumstances at  the
    date the order was made.  But, the enhanced levels  of  protection  are
    not applicable to assessing  prospectively  the  threat  any  appellant
    poses at the date of the decision to refuse to revoke  the  deportation
    order or after that. That is because of Article  21  of  the  Directive
    which provides:-

         "Article 21 Continuity of residence

         For the purposes of this Directive, continuity of residence may  be
         attested by any means of proof in use in  the  host  Member  State.
         Continuity of residence is broken by any  expulsion  decision  duly
         enforced against the person concerned".

29. That is consistent with Regulation 3(3) of the  EEA  Regulations  which
    provide:-

         "(3) Continuity of residence is broken when -

             (a)  a person serves a sentence of imprisonment;

             (b)  a deportation or exclusion order is made in relation to a
                  person; or

             (c)  a person is removed from the United Kingdom  under  these
                  Regulations".

30. I remind myself that I am here considering whether the decision in this
    case to refuse to  revoke  the  deportation  order  complies  with  the
    provisions of the Directive, in particular article 33 which, so far  as
    is relevant, provides:

         Article 32

         Duration of exclusion orders

         1.   Persons excluded  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
         security may submit an application for  lifting  of  the  exclusion
         order after a reasonable period, depending  on  the  circumstances,
         and in any event after three years from enforcement  of  the  final
         exclusion order which has been validly adopted in  accordance  with
         Community law, by putting forward arguments to establish that there
         has been a material change in the circumstances which justified the
         decision ordering their exclusion.

31. The change must be "material". It is implicit in the reference  to  the
    circumstances "which justified the decision" that the test  applied  at
    the time of the order can no longer been met and, that, bearing in mind
    the free movement rights under  the  Directive,  that  entry  could  no
    longer be refused.

32. Ms Harris submits that the appellant was, at the time of  the  decision
    made, entitled to the benefit of reg 27 (4) (a) in that it was accepted
    that the appellant had (a) acquired the right  of  permanent  residence
    and (b) had been continuously resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period of 10 years.

33. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Graves  did  find  that  the  appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of  15  on  12  October  2000.
    That finding was on the basis that, as the dependant of his mother  who
    had been exercising Treaty rights, he acquired permanent  residence  on
    12 October 2005, as he had  been  under  21  at  that  point.  Although
    permanent residence was not introduced until the 2006 Regulations  came
    into effect, that is not material, given that Schedule 4,  paragraph  6
    of those regulations has the effect  of  deeming  residence  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2000  to  be  residence  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

34. It cannot, however, be argued that there was a sustainable  finding  in
    respect of entitlement to reg 27 4 (a) as the findings at [38] fail  to
    take into account any of  the  relevant  jurisprudence  as  to  whether
    integrating links had been built up and had been broken, nor is this an
    issue pursued at the hearing.

35. I do, however, note that there is insufficient evidence  to  show  that
    the appellant was coerced into agreeing to go to Italy  and  giving  up
    any right of appeal. On the contrary, the evidence from  what  he  told
    probation services is that he was looking forward to a fresh  start  in
    Italy.

36. I am however, satisfied that as at the date of the decision  to  deport
    the appellant he had acquired permanent residence.  It  does,  however,
    need to be recalled that this residence has come to an end, but it  was
    still a circumstance as at the date  the  deportation  order  was  made
    albeit not one  the  respondent  took  into  account  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that deportation was justified.

37. Unlike the First-tier Tribunal I heard evidence from the appellant  and
    from his mother.  The appellant adopted his  witness  statement  adding
    that he was now being looked for by a charity in  Italy,  Caritas,  who
    had assisted him in working voluntarily to keep him occupied and giving
    him the opportunity to do things such as helping other people.  He said
    that he was now free from alcohol and drugs  and  had  been  for  three
    years confirmed in the letter  of  January  2021  but  that  there  was
    nothing newer than that and it was difficult owing to the  pandemic  to
    get in  touch  with  the  doctor.   He  confirmed  that  he  is  taking
    Olanzipine, an antipsychotic.

38. In cross-examination, the appellant said  that  he  had  been  able  to
    access doctors in Rome through  Caritas  and  that  it  was  the  local
    authority that helped him with the testing.  He said he  had  tried  to
    get a job but it was not easy to do so given the economic situation  in
    Italy but he had not been able to  get  anything  other  than  jobs  in
    coffee shops for a short period of six months or less.   He  said  that
    after arriving in Rome he had spent six months on the streets and since
    then had been with Caritas and without them, would still have  been  on
    the street

39. I also heard from  the  appellant's  mother  who  adopted  her  witness
    statement of October 2019 adding that she thought her  son  was  now  a
    changed person.  She said that he helps other people in Caritas and she
    could see the change in him and that he had become a  nice  person  who
    cares for others.  She said that she thought this was because he was no
    longer involved with drugs or alcohol.

40. I also heard evidence from the appellant's former partner  who  adopted
    her witness statement.  She was not cross-examined.

41. I note that the  appellant  was  removed  to  Italy,  having  signed  a
    disclaimer.  Whilst I note that he and  his  mother  gave  evidence  in
    their witness statements from 2019 that in effect, he was not told  the
    truth about the papers he was given or what he was signing, that is  in
    direct contrast to what is recorded in the  OASys  Report  referred  to
    above.  In the circumstances I am not satisfied that his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom was affected by any underhand means and I find  that
    he freely consented to sign a disclaimer.

42. I am satisfied from the medical report now presented  to  me  that  the
    appellant has been, certainly as recently as January  2021,  free  from
    drugs as confirmed from tests carried out on him in Italy.  It  appears
    also that he sleeps at the Caritas shelter and  during  the  day  stays
    inside the centre.  While the report stated  there  has  been  negative
    results for the use of substances in recent months, no  date  is  given
    for when the negative results started.  It is evident from  the  report
    that he had contacted the addiction  service  on  18  April  2018,  had
    several interviews with the physician and  psychiatrist  and  that  the
    "monitoring of urinary metabolisms have been negative for  the  use  of
    substances in recent months" but no more detail.

43. There is no indication here of testing for alcohol abuse of  which  was
    previously a problem, nor is there any indication of over  how  long  a
    period the negative tests have been obtained.  I  note,  however,  that
    the appellant is said to have been  co-operative  keeping  appointments
    and maintaining appropriate behaviour and that his tests applied as  to
    his evaluation showed a positive result with respect to motivation  for
    change.  These are  positive  signs  and  strongly  indicative  of  the
    appellant having again got some stability in his life.

44. I am satisfied also by  the  witness  statement  from  the  appellant's
    mother  and  from  his  former  partner  that  he  maintains  a   close
    relationship with his  mother.   He  is  her  only  child  and  she  is
    understandably distressed at the state he now finds himself in,  and  I
    accept also that he has a relationship, albeit by telephone,  with  his
    son who is approaching 16.

45. I accept that to a significant degree, the appellant's  past  offending
    behaviour was as a result of drug and alcohol abuse.  That  is  evident
    from the OASys report. It is also evident that the  appellant  has  now
    engaged with support from Caritas and also with drug  abuse  monitoring
    and many of the protective factors identified are now in place.

46. But I do not know how he would react if he now returned to  the  United
    Kingdom to live with his mother.   He  does  not  appear  to  have  any
    greater prospect of employment here than he does in Italy given current
    conditions and it is unclear what medical or  drug  monitoring  support
    would be available for him in comparison to what he receives  in  Italy
    which appears  to  be  working  for  him.   He  has,  I  accept,  shown
    significant progress which is to be praised.

47. I accept that the appellant has, recently at least,  been  more  stable
    and no longer reliant on drugs. That he has  managed  to  achieve  this
    through COVID lockdown is impressive. That appears to be largely  as  a
    result of support from an addiction service  and  a  charity,  Caritas.
    How the appellant would react  on  return  to  the  United  Kingdom  is
    unclear.  There is no evidence before me of what support he  would  get
    beyond family, and in particular with respect to his drug misuse  which
    appears to need specialist help and which has clearly been  of  benefit
    to him. I accept that he would have the support of his mother, and  has
    the incentive of developing a better relationship with his son.

48. It is noteworthy that in this  case,  the  appellant's  offending  took
    place over a relatively short period of time when he was clearly out of
    control on account of drug  abuse.   That  is,  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence, no longer a factor given that he is, on the  evidence  before
    me, no longer abusing drugs. He has gained a degree of stability in his
    life and is in a position to take employment.

49. Accordingly, taking all these factors into account, and noting that the
    appellant has progressed recently in Italy, there has been a change  in
    his circumstances. Is that  then  "material"  as  is  required  by  the
    Directive and the Regulations?

50. Given the appellant's circumstances, lack of ties to family, community,
    persistent offending  including  drugs,  a  bladed  weapon  and  sexual
    assault, and risk of reoffending, as set out in  the  OASys  report,  I
    have no hesitation in concluding that at the date of  the  decision  to
    deport the appellant, that decision was justified, assuming that he had
    not met either of the enhanced levels of protection, a finding that the
    respondent was entitled to reach on the basis of  the  evidence  before
    her.

51. Is that test no longer met? In considering  that  issue,  I  take  into
    account the factors set out in Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations.

52. Looking at the evidence in the round, given that the appellant has  now
    accessed proper support and treatment, has engaged  with  support,  and
    would have a stable home with his mother,  that  despite  the  previous
    offending (primarily  drug-driven)  that  he  no  longer  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion, I note no evidence of reoffending, and that  the  appellant
    has now redeveloped and strengthened family ties.

53. While the offending was clearly serious,  it  is  notable  that  it  is
    strongly correlated to drug addiction and lack of treatment for  mental
    health which is no longer the case. The appellant now helps  others  at
    Caritas which has  helped  him  to  gain  a  sense  of  self-worth  and
    stability. He has  the  support  of  his  mother.   The  likelihood  of
    reoffending has, on the basis of the protective factors  identified  in
    the OASys report greatly reduced.

54. In terms of para 7 of Schedule 1, I conclude that in the light  of  the
    lack of the now limited threat that the appellant presents, that  these
    factors do not, either  singly  or  cumulative,  militate  against  the
    appellant  presenting  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat, given the greatly reduced threat of reoffending.  I accept that
    the appellant is still subject to being on the sex offenders  register,
    but that is a function of the offences he committed.

55. Taking all of these factors into account, I  conclude  that  there  has
    been a material change in the appellant's circumstances, such that  the
    deportation order made against him can no longer be justified.

56. For that reason, I allow the  appeal.   Whether  that  will  allow  the
    appellant to re-enter the United Kingdom is a matter on which  he  will
    need to take legal advice.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing it under the EEA Regulations.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 24 August 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00465/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 March 2020                      |                                     |
|Extempore                            |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Efren Alexander Mujica
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Murphy of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 19 December 2019,  allowing  the
    appeal of Mr  Efren  Alexander  Mujica  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made to refuse to revoke a deportation order against
    him, this being a decision made on 28 July 2017.  The appeal was  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016  ("The  EEA
    Regulations")

 2. It is in the circumstances of this case, necessary to set out  some  of
    the detail of the history which led to this decision.  The  respondent,
    who is an Italian Citizen, was convicted of several offences, resulting
    in a deportation order signed on 6 March 2017, though the Secretary  of
    State's case is that the respondent signed a disclaimer on  8  February
    2017 and then on 8 March 2017 waived his right of appeal  against  that
    decision.  That then resulted in the respondent being removed to  Italy
    to put into effect the deportation order.

 3. This appeal was previously allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  but  was
    then appealed by the Secretary of State to  the  Upper  Tribunal  which
    remitted the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision,
    in this case that is the decision of Judge Graves, against  which  this
    appeal lies.

 4. There are set out in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal a  history
    of the facts which led to the deportation order being made.  I  do  not
    consider that there is any dispute as to the crimes which gave rise  to
    that.  Whether or not the respondent was entitled to the medium or  the
    higher level of protection against the decision had he appealed  it  in
    March 2017 is less clear.  In this case the judge heard  evidence  from
    the   respondent's   mother.    He   heard   submissions   from    both
    representatives including Mr Murphy who appeared before me today.

 5. There is a significant difficulty with the approach taken by the First-
    tier Tribunal in this case.  There was  insufficient  consideration  of
    the scope of the appeal which is against  the  decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke an expulsion order which in turn needs to be considered  through
    the prism of Article 21 of Directive 2004/38 which  provides  that  for
    the purposes of that Directive continuity of residence may be  attested
    by any means of  proof,  continuity  of  residence  is  broken  by  any
    expulsion decision duly enforced against the person concerned.

 6. The starting point for the consideration of this decision must  be  the
    grounds of appeal and the appeal which is  set  out  in  Regulation  34
    which permits a person to apply to  have  a  deportation  of  exclusion
    order to be revoked on the basis there has been a  material  change  in
    circumstances that justify the making of the order, sub-paragraph  (iv)
    providing that the application must set out the material change in  the
    circumstances.  There is an appeal against  that  decision  and  it  is
    governed by Regulation 37 of the EEA Regulations.  It  is  not  dispute
    that this is an EEA decision within the meaning of the Regulations.

 7. The judge considered in some detail the  nature  and  duration  of  the
    respondent's residence in the United Kingdom in order  to  assess  what
    would have been the appropriate test with respect to  the  respondent's
    residence in the United  Kingdom.  The  judge  considered  whether  the
    respondent had acquired permanent residence and so was entitled to  the
    medium level of protection under reg 27(2) of the EEA  Regulations  and
    also whether he was entitled to the highest level of  protection  under
    reg 27 (3) of those regulations.

 8. The judge made findings on that issue, but what is  in  issue  here  is
    whether there had been a material change of circumstances such that the
    decision to expel should have been revoked and it is  unfortunate  that
    much of the reasoning has been taken up with  a  concentration  on  the
    position as it would have been had this been an  appeal  made  in  2017
    against the decision to deport.  That is  not  necessarily  a  material
    error, but it is of note that Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal submits
    that the judge had erred in conflating the decision  to  deport  and  a
    decision to revoke a deportation order.

 9. The main thrust of the grounds is this.  It is that  the  finding  that
    there had been a material  change  of  circumstances  is  not  properly
    reasoned and/or is perverse and that the findings that  the  respondent
    does not any longer represent a threat are not made out.

10. At paragraph 18 of the grounds, the Secretary of State  sets  out  five
    specific factors which it is  said  were  not  taken  into  account  in
    reaching the decision as to whether there had been a material change in
    circumstances coupled with the observation at paragraph 21 that a  lack
    of offending for a period of three and a half years  dating  back  from
    date of hearing was taken into account yet did not  take  into  account
    that a substantial part of that was spent whilst the respondent was  in
    prison.

11. In fairness, the factors  set  out  abreast  in  paragraph  18  of  the
    grounds, are repeated in paragraphs  44  to  45  of  the  decision,  in
    particular and the judge at [48] does note that  the  respondent  is  a
    long-term drug user who abused substances giving rise to psychotic  and
    violent tendencies.  It is noted  also  that  his  statement  does  not
    address his circumstances now, or what he has done to address his  risk
    of offending.  There is then at discussion of  the  evidence  from  his
    mother as well as input from social workers.  It was also noted that he
    had been treated as a  missing  person  by  the  police  and  taken  to
    hospital and treated by antipsychotics at [49].  Also, that he had been
    taken to a shelter at [50], the  judge  noting  at  [51]  that  it  was
    unfortunate that the most recent report was not made available.

12.  I  consider  that  there  has  in  this  case  been  an   insufficient
    consideration of the previous offending behaviour in light of a lack of
    evidence directly from the appellant as to his change in  circumstances
    if any.  It was noted that  he  has  not  given  evidence.   I  do  not
    consider that the judge was properly entitled to find  that  there  was
    strong  evidence  that  relates  directly  to  whether  the  respondent
    continues to pose a great risk to public, as found at [52], yet to find
    that he is making significant steps towards rehabilitation.  That  does
    not mean that he is nearly there nor is it a sufficient basis for which
    it could be said that he no longer poses an ongoing risk to the  public
    given how he had behaved in the past.  It is also, I consider  a  valid
    criticism to take into account that there  is  no  offending  behaviour
    when, as the Secretary of State properly points out, a  large  part  of
    that has been the appellant was in prison.

13. Further, there appears to have been little proper concentration of what
    the relevant test would have been as to  whether  the  respondent  does
    continue to represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat  such  that  his  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  can  be
    maintained.  It is unclear  from  the  decision  what  test  the  judge
    applied despite having directed herself in respect of Article 21 of the
    Directive. Given the effect of reg.21, the higher level tests  set  out
    in reg 27(2) and 27(3)  are  not  applicable  Accordingly,  and  as  it
    appears that the judge has also taken  into  account  in  reaching  the
    final conclusion that the decision made previously was flawed, that the
    decision involved the making of an error of law and I set it aside.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The decision will be remade in the Upper  Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be
    fixed.

 3. Any new material on which either party seeks to rely must be served  on
    the other party and on the Upper Tribunal  at  least  10  working  days
    before the date of the next hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 13 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
