
                                                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 November 2015                           |On 04 January 2016                  |
|                                              |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                           MR ABAYOMI JOSEPH OLOWO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel, instructed by Lannex
                    Immigration and Legal Advice Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 4 February 1964.   He  is
    said to have arrived in the UK, according to the respondent's  decision
    letter, on 30 January 2004.  He was granted indefinite leave to  remain
    on 22 May 2009.

 2. On or about 9 May 2014 (the date is not clear) the  respondent  made  a
    decision that the appellant should be  deported,  pursuant  to  section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  That decision was made  in  response
    to the appellant's convictions for  four  separate  offences  of  being
    concerned in the acquisition of  or  the  acquiring  or  concealing  of
    criminal property.  He received a total sentence of four years and  six
    months imprisonment, although that sentence was imposed in relation  to
    one of the offences,  with  concurrent  sentence  of  lesser  terms  in
    relation to the remaining three offences.

 3. His appeal against that decision came before a Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 25 September 2014 whereby the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The grounds as originally drafted make a number of  criticisms  of  the
    First-tier  Judge's  determination.   To  summarise,  it  is  generally
    submitted that the determination betrays a lack of attention to  detail
    and suggests a lack of proper scrutiny of the issues.  It is said  that
    the judge did not clearly set out the burden and standard of proof, and
    erred in referring to the appellant having been convicted "by judge and
    jury" when plainly at a trial in the Crown Court it is  the  jury  that
    decides  guilt  or  innocence.   The  judge  wrongly  referred  to  the
    "Borders, Immigration and Asylum Act 2000" when he should have referred
    to the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 5. It is also asserted that the judge conflated legal tests and failed  to
    recognise that the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  a  wife  and  four
    children,  two  of  whom  are  minors,  does   amount   to   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Immigration  Rules.
    Allied to this is the contention  that  there  was  no  adequate  'best
    interests' assessment.

 6. Lastly, it is argued that there is a perception of bias in terms of the
    judge's comments on the appellant's criminality.

    Submissions

 7. On behalf  of  the  appellant  certain  grounds  were  abandoned,  with
    reliance only being placed on [6]-[9] of the grounds.   At  [6]  it  is
    asserted that the First-tier Judge applied an incorrect legal  test  at
    [6] of the determination where he stated  that  he  found  nothing  "so
    grave and compelling"  which  would  persuade  him  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to deport the  appellant.   It  is  argued  that  that
    phrase is not to be found in  the  Rules  where  the  phrase  is  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above those described in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.

 8. At [5] the judge had said that the appellant had "abused the privileges
    afforded to him by Her  Majesty's  Government"  by  committing  serious
    offences and at [8], with reference to family and private life, he said
    that "perhaps this is a matter that he should have  thought  of  before
    embarking on his criminal activities in the UK."  It was submitted that
    this did not demonstrate a dispassionate assessment of the  issues  and
    created the impression of "unconscious bias."

 9. Furthermore, the judge had made no findings in relation to the evidence
    of the appellant's father or the two children who  also  gave  evidence
    before him.  He  had  not  indicated  what  weight  he  gave  to  their
    evidence.  He should have stated whether he accepted or rejected  their
    evidence.

10. As regards the welfare of the minor children, it was only at the end of
    the determination  at  [21]  where  the  judge  referred  to  the  best
    interests consideration  under  'section  55'  (s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

11. As a general proposition, it was argued that the determination  is  not
    set out logically.

12. On behalf of the respondent Mr Avery submitted that there was no  error
    of law in the judge's decision.  It was accepted that the determination
    is not as well structured as it might be, but the grounds on behalf  of
    the appellant in reality amount only to a disagreement with the judge's
    findings.

13. In terms of the judge's use of the expression "grave  and  compelling,"
    the actual test in the Rules is "very compelling."   However,  that  is
    not a material error.  If anything, the judge  was  applying  a  higher
    test than he was required to.  The appellant would need to  demonstrate
    something over and above paragraphs 399 and 399A.  The evidence was not
    such that he could demonstrate that that threshold had been reached.

14. As regards credibility, and the evidence of the witnesses, there was no
    real issue in relation to credibility.  The judge  concluded  that  the
    family would be upset by the appellant's deportation,  but  that  would
    not be sufficient.  This is nothing more than one would normally expect
    in a deportation case.  He clearly had in  mind  that  there  would  be
    disruption for the family and  that  it  would  be  upsetting  for  the
    children.

15. As  regards  the  comments  made  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's criminality, he was entitled to take  a  dim  view  of  the
    appellant's offending and to express that view.

16. There was a consideration of the best interests of the minor children.

    My assessment

17. It does seem to me that in a general sense there is some merit  in  the
    criticisms made of the First-tier Judge's decision, at least  in  terms
    of its structure.  It was more  or  less  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent in submissions that the way the  judge  had  structured  his
    determination did leave something  to  be  desired.   In  my  view  the
    determination as a whole  does  suffer  from  the  lack  of  a  logical
    structure, and the assessment is  diffuse  in  the  sense  that  it  is
    unfocused in many respects.

18. What the judge  should  have  done  was  to  set  out  the  legislative
    framework in a coherent and  logical  fashion,  applying  the  relevant
    deportation Immigration Rules and relevant statutory provisions.

19. It is only after  certain  findings  of  fact  that  one  sees  (brief)
    reference to the Immigration Rules,  at  [14].   Indeed,  although  not
    raised in submissions before me it appears that the  judge's  reference
    at [14]-[15] to "exceptional  circumstances"  under  the  Rules,  is  a
    reference to the former manifestation of the Rules  at  398(c)  whereas
    the version of the Rules substituted from 28 July 2014  refers  to  the
    need for "very compelling circumstances" over and above those described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  To repeat, this was not an argument relied
    on either in the grounds or in submissions before me.

20.  Because  of  what  I  describe  as  the  'diffuse'   nature   of   the
    determination, it is necessary to consider it in a  linear  fashion  in
    order to determine whether the essential legal and factual issues  have
    been addressed.

21. The judge recognised that this was  an  'automatic'  deportation  under
    s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Reference is made in  the  opening
    paragraphs to the Exceptions that apply in order for the  appellant  to
    resist deportation.  At [2] the judge referred to having heard evidence
    from the appellant and his family members, including his  wife,  father
    and daughters, with the exception of his 8 year  old  son.   He  stated
    there that he had concluded that the appellant does not fall within any
    of the exceptions to automatic deportation.

22. At [4] the appellant's immigration history is set out, and  his  family
    circumstances described, including with reference to his  children  and
    their ages.

23. At [6] there is reference to the evidence that the  appellant's  father
    is  in  ill-health,  referred  to  in  more  detail  at  [16]  of   the
    determination.  Findings are made at [6] on the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant's family were able to manage without him  whilst  he  was  in
    prison, including in terms of his father being looked after  by  family
    members and the appellant's wife.  There is reference to  the  children
    having been "going about their studies" and being looked after by their
    mother whilst the appellant was in prison.  The conclusion at  [6]  was
    that it had not been established that  the  children's  best  interests
    made his removal disproportionate.

24. Again, at [7] there is a  reference  to  the  best  interests  "of  the
    children both minor and adult" and those of the rest of the family.

25. In that same paragraph the judge referred to s.117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (albeit  that  the  Act  is  wrongly
    described, referring to it as the Nationality  and  Asylum  Act  2002).
    That  said,  the  essential  elements  of  s.117C  are  set  out.   The
    conclusion was that the evidence did not establish that  the  appellant
    had developed any "meaningful social and cultural ties to  the  UK  and
    has integrated in the UK", indeed the reverse given his integration for
    some time with undesirable and "the wrong kind of people".

26. Again, in [7]  the  conclusion  was  that  there  were  "no  compelling
    circumstances that I have found over and above any  lawful  social  and
    cultural ties and any integrations in UK society that  there  may  have
    been."  The judge repeated that he could see "nothing  compelling  over
    and above this exception" (in s.117C).  At [8] consideration was  given
    to the appellant's relationship with his partner  and  children,  again
    the conclusion being that there are no  compelling  circumstances  over
    and above Exception 2 (in s.117C(5)).

27. The judge concluded at [8] that there was nothing to prevent the family
    in the UK maintaining contact with the appellant from the UK  and  even
    going to Nigeria to see him, commenting that  the  appellant  ought  to
    have thought of the implications for his family and private life before
    committing his offences.

28. He did accept  that  there  would  be  an  effect  on  the  appellant's
    children, and the  rest  of  the  family  (see  [10]).   In  that  same
    paragraph the judge made reference to evidence which  established  that
    he has a close relationship with his children and they with him.

29. The circumstances of the offence are described at [11] and the  judge's
    sentencing  remarks  are  referred  to.   In  effect,   the   appellant
    participated in a scheme to launder 2.3 million pounds that was  stolen
    from  the  Olympic  Delivery  Authority.   The  offence  included   the
    appellant drawing his "aged father" into the offences.   The  appellant
    used his money transfer business to give legitimacy to the movement  of
    the principal sums in the case.

30. The First-tier Judge then turned his attention to Article 8 of the ECHR
    outside the Rules.  He referred at [13] to the interference that  there
    would be with the appellant's family and private life  in  his  removal
    and concluded that that may  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  his
    children.  He then returned at [14] to the Immigration Rules, referring
    to "Section (sic) 398 of the immigration rules" and  "Sections  399  or
    399A."

31.  There  was  further  consideration   of   the   appellant's   family's
    circumstances from [16], the ages of the children (the  elder  children
    being adults and the younger being aged 16 and 8), the health issues of
    the appellant's father, and the extent to which  family  members  could
    readjust to life in Nigeria if they returned there with the  appellant.
    In the same paragraph  there  is  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the
    children are British and that the appellant's wife is the primary carer
    of the children.

32. With reference to his adult children, the conclusion was  reached  that
    their relationship with the appellant did not  extend  beyond  "normal"
    emotional ties.  The appellant was described as  a  resourceful  person
    who had a business in the UK and in  Nigeria  and  that  there  was  no
    reason why he would not be in a position to set up a business on return
    there, and to be able to send funds to the UK if required.

33. The fact that the appellant  still  maintained  his  innocence  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Judge was a matter that was  referred  to
    at [19], as well as the fact that he  had  shown  no  remorse  for  his
    offences, being keen to blame others.  The judge in that same paragraph
    then  reverted  to  a  consideration  of   the   appellant's   father's
    circumstances, whereby he is looked after by Social Services and by the
    appellant's wife and family.  Evidence of the children was referred  to
    in terms of the significance that he plays in their lives.

34. In the next paragraph  the  judge  rejected  any  suggestion  that  the
    appellant would be in danger on return to Nigeria, in the light of  the
    evidence given by the appellant's wife, albeit that  that  was  not  an
    issue raised by the appellant.  It is not a matter that is relied on in
    the grounds of appeal.

35. Lastly, at [21] the judge  stated  that  he  had  considered  the  best
    interests of the children "under section 55 of the Borders, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2000 (sic)" (the statute correctly entitled the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009) but  concluded  that  those  best
    interests did not outweigh the public interest in  deportation  of  the
    appellant.

36. That narration of the contents of the First-tier Judge's  determination
    serves  to  illustrate  what  I  have  described  as  its  diffuse  and
    unstructured  nature.  That  is  apart  from  the  obvious  errors   in
    nomenclature.

37. Nevertheless, it does seem to me that it is possible to identify in the
    determination a consideration of all the essential issues  that  needed
    to be determined.  At various points the judge referred to the evidence
    that he had heard, that evidence to a large  extent  focussing  on  the
    effect on various family members of the appellant's removal.   Although
    it was submitted that the judge did not make findings on  the  evidence
    that he had heard, I was not directed to any specific  feature  of  the
    evidence which had been left undetermined by the  judge.   He  accepted
    that the relationship  between  the  various  family  members  and  the
    appellant was  close  and  that  his  removal  would  have  an  adverse
    emotional impact on them.  He made findings on the extent to which  the
    appellant and other family members would be able to return  to  Nigeria
    with him and integrate into society there.  He noted the health  issues
    of the appellant's father and  the  extent  to  which  the  appellant's
    absence would affect him.

38. In relation to the specific grounds which  were  relied  on  before  me
    which, to repeat, are confined to [6]-[9] of  the  grounds,  I  do  not
    consider that the judge's use of the expression "grave and  compelling"
    at [6] of the determination reveals an error of law.  More than once at
    [7]  the  judge  referred  to  there  being  no  compelling   or   very
    circumstances over and above the exceptions to be found at S.117C  such
    as to make his removal disproportionate.

39.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  judge's  comments  on  the  appellant's
    criminality reveal any actual or apparent bias.  The extent to which  a
    judge thinks it appropriate to comment on an individual's  criminality,
    as distinct from a mere recitation of the circumstances of the offence,
    is a matter for individual judgement depending on the circumstances  of
    the case.  It does seem to me that the judge was entitled to point  out
    that although the  appellant  had  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, he had abused the  advantages  of  that  status  by  committing
    serious offences.  That was relevant to the public interest issue.

40. Similarly, he was entitled to  observe  at  [8]  that  the  appellant's
    family and private life was a matter that  the  appellant  should  have
    considered before committing the offences.  Stating that the  appellant
    only had himself to blame for the position he found himself in was,  in
    reality, nothing more than a statement of fact.  I do not consider that
    in this  case  the  judge  overstepped  the  boundaries  of  legitimate
    observation or comment on the appellant's offending.

41. I have already indicated that in my view there is no arguable merit  in
    the ground alleging a lack of credibility findings in  respect  of  the
    evidence of the witnesses.

42. So far as the best interests of the children are concerned, this issue,
    as is clear from my summary of the determination, is not evidently self-
    contained in the determination.  However, the phrase  "best  interests"
    is used at  [6],  [7],  [13]  and  [21].   In  various  paragraphs  the
    children's  situation  is  considered  with  reference  to  their  best
    interests.  The position in relation to the family members  in  general
    is considered in terms of the proportionality of  removal,  as  already
    explained.

43. The judge's assessment of the 'best interests' issue could  undoubtedly
    have been undertaken in a way that was  much  clearer  to  the  reader.
    That is not to say however, that the  way  in  which  this  matter  was
    addressed reveals any error on law on the part of the First-tier Judge.

44. The determination contains many  deficiencies,  as  already  explained.
    However, I am not satisfied that  there  is  any  error  of  law  which
    requires the  decision  to  be  set  aside.   The  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offences is manifest. His circumstances in the  UK  and  as
    they would be on return to Nigeria, and his  family  circumstances  and
    the children's best interests, are not revealed by the evidence  to  be
    such as to mean that the appellant's  is  able  to  resist  deportation
    under the Immigration Rules or with reference to  s.117C  of  the  2002
    Act.  No amount of restructuring, refocusing, re-ordering or correcting
    of errors in the determination would reveal this to be a case where the
    appellant could succeed in his appeal.

45. Notwithstanding the deficiencies  of  the  determination,  the  judge's
    factual findings are findings which he was entitled to reach.   On  the
    basis  of  those  findings  he  was  entitled  to  conclude  that   the
    appellant's deportation was proportionate.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            21/12/15



