
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00239/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 October 2014                               |On 17 October 2014         |
|Extempore judgment                              |                           |


                                   Before

                       The Honourable Mr Justice King
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J E COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr Damion Anthony Wilson
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Christopher, Kings Legal Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, brought  with  permission,
    against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Elliman)
    promulgated on 18 August 2014 following a  hearing  on  31  July  2014.
    That decision allowed the appeal of the present Respondent against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State that he was somebody to whom section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and that he  accordingly  fell
    to be automatically deported.  There was  and  is  no  issue  that  the
    Respondent is a foreign criminal as defined in Section 32 of  the  2007
    Act, he having been convicted on 9 July 2012 of possession of  class  A
    drugs with intent  to  supply,  possession  of  criminal  property  and
    dangerous driving  and  sentenced  to  three  years  and  nine  months'
    imprisonment.  The appeal before the First-tier Judge succeeded on  the
    Judge's finding that one of the exceptions allowed for in  the  Borders
    Act applied, and that therefore  Section  32(5)  did  not  apply,  that
    exception being that his removal would  breach  his  Convention  rights
    under Article 8.

2.    On the face of his Determination  it  is  clear  that  the  First-tier
    Judge applied  the  material  statutory  provisions  and  the  material
    provisions of the Immigration Rules  applicable  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  The Rules, amongst other things, require that  the  Secretary
    of State in assessing the claim will consider whether paragraph 399  or
    399A applies and if it does not, the Rules (see paragraph 398)  further
    provide that the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed
    by other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  In this case however
    the First-tier Tribunal found that paragraph 399, in particular 399(a),
    did apply and that it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in
    the UK without the person who is to be deported.  This was in reference
    to a number of children from a number of different relationships  which
    the Respondent has formed while in the United Kingdom.

3.   This appeal now comes before us seeking to establish a  material  error
    of law on grounds which in our judgment cannot succeed as a  matter  of
    principle.

 4.      The principal ground is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law
    in finding that the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the  applicable
    Rules were made out.  The sole material error of law identified in  the
    Grounds in support of this ground is  that  there  was  another  family
    member who was able to care for the children in the United Kingdom  and
    as such therefore the requirements of 399(a) could not  be  met.   This
    however is a complete misreading of  the  material  provisions  of  the
    Rules applicable at the date of the hearing.  It is correct that  prior
    to 28 July 2014 the  then  version  of  paragraph  399(a)  did  have  a
    requirement that there was no other family member who was able to  care
    for the child in the United Kingdom.  That requirement however, by Rule
    Amendment, has been deleted and had been deleted as at the time of  the
    hearing and the decision against which the Secretary of State seeks  to
    appeal.  These  amendments  reflected  the  statutory  changes  to  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 introduced by  section  19
    to the Immigration Act 2014 which inserted into the 2002 Act a new Part
    5A headed 'Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest  Considerations'  and
    in  particular  a  new  section  117C  headed  'Article  8:  additional
    considerations in cases involving foreign criminals'.

5.   There can in these circumstances be no basis upon  which  we  can  find
    any material error of law as identified by the Secretary  of  State  in
    her grounds and in respect of which leave  to  appeal  was  given.   It
    would appear that leave to  appeal  was  given  on  the  same  mistaken
    understanding as to the requirements  of  paragraph  399(a).   This  is
    clear from paragraph 3 of the Decision to grant permission  which reads
    as follows:

         "Given  that  the  judge's  finding  in   paragraph   30   of   her
         determination  that  paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         applied  was  inconsistent  with  her  earlier  finding  that   the
         appellant's partner assisted by  her  elder  child  cared  for  the
         appellant's children then the judge's finding that paragraph 399(a)
         applied arguably amounted to a material error  of  law  which  also
         rendered her finding that it would be unduly harsh (which  is  also
         arguably the wrong test) to deport the appellant unsafe."


6.   Mr Deller has attempted to persuade us to give him the  opportunity  to
    argue that the First-tier Tribunal did not correctly apply the test  of
    'unduly harsh' now appearing in 399(a),  but  such  argument  does  not
    appear anywhere in the grounds of appeal before us and we  consider  it
    to be far too late now on the morning of the hearing of the appeal  for
    the Secretary of State to seek to change course in this  way.   We  can
    deal only with the grounds of appeal in respect of which leave has been
    given.  There has never been any application on behalf of the Secretary
    of State to seek permission to appeal on amended grounds.

7.   There is an additional ground in support of a  material  error  of  law
    identified in paragraph 7 of the Grounds,   namely  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to identify good reasons as to why the appellant's circumstances
    were exceptional and outweighed the public interest in  deporting  him.
    However this again is an alleged error of law which cannot fit in  with
    the current version of the Rules.  We summarise the current  effect  in
    paragraph  2  above.    The   requirement   of   'exceptionality'   has
    disappeared.  There is, it is true, in its  place  the  requirement  of
    'very compelling circumstances' where it is found paragraph 399 or 399A
    does not apply, but in this case the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    399(a) did apply and we have already found that there is before  us  no
    ground of appeal which can succeed in  challenging  that  finding.   It
    must follow that any ground of appeal based  by  reference  to  a  non-
    existent test of exceptionality, or even by reference  to  the  current
    version of paragraph 398, cannot succeed.

8.   It follows in our judgment that in  the  circumstances  in  which  this
    appeal has come before us, this appeal must be and is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 17th October 2014


Mr Justice King

