
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00448/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 11 December 2018    On 09 January 2019


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE COCKERILL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 O'NEIL [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Eagle Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,
    from the decision of the First-tier Judge, Judge Aujla, dated  11  June
    2018, by which the judge allowed an appeal under the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
    27 July 2017 to make a deportation order in relation to  the  appellant
    in that case who is now the respondent to this appeal, Mr Smith.

 2. The decision was made by the Secretary of State  that  in  view  of  Mr
    Smith's  criminal  conviction  he  posed   a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests of  public  policy  if  he
    were allowed to remain in the United Kingdom, and that his  deportation
    was therefore justified under Regulation 27.  The  criminal  conviction
    in question was that on  17  September  2015  at  the  Crown  Court  at
    Snaresbrook. Mr Smith was convicted of taking a  child  without  lawful
    authority from 12 April 2015 to 15 April 2015.   He  was  sentenced  to
    four years' imprisonment, being released on licence on 31  August  2017
    having served half the period of his sentence.

 3. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was brought on the basis that the
    deportation would be disproportionate and in breach of the  appellant's
    rights under the Regulations, as well as being in breach of his  rights
    under Article 8  and  Article  3,  though  the  Article  3  ground  was
    abandoned during the course of that argument.

 4. Following  oral  evidence,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  at
    paragraph 42 of the decision that the appellant had  committed  a  very
    serious offence for which he was sentenced to four years'  imprisonment
    and then reflecting on the test says: -

         "In determining that issue, I have  taken  all  the  evidence  into
         account  including,  in  particular  the  OASys  report  which  was
         completed on 09 May 2017  before  the  Appellant  was  released  on
         licence  after  serving  half  the  sentence.   Risk  was  assessed
         generally at high-level to children.  However,  since  his  release
         from custody the Appellant's situation has  improved.   The  letter
         from probation on page 255 of the  Appellant's  bundle  stated  the
         following which I find helpful and  relevant  to  my  consideration
         ..."

    He then went on to quote  that  e-mail  which  deals  with  Mr  Smith's
    compliance with his supervision licence,  his  acknowledgement  of  the
    offence and the impact on his  victim  which  it  was  said  "he  fully
    acknowledges" and reiterates his regret regarding the commission of the
    offence.  It reflects the fact that he had obtained employment  working
    as a chef in a restaurant and has regular contact with his children and
    it acknowledges that there has been no current intelligence or concerns
    reported in relation to Mr Smith or his bail address.

 5. The First-tier Judge went on to say: -

         "I assess the risk as on the date of the hearing before me.  Whilst
         not forgetting that the Appellant  had  committed  a  very  serious
         offence which is clearly demonstrated by the length of the sentence
         that he was given, I  find  that  at  present  there  is  no  clear
         evidence to suggest  that  the  Appellant  represented  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat ..."

    The judge then went on to deal with the question of proportionality  on
    the basis that there might, nonetheless, have been a serious threat. At
    paragraph 44 that is considered, and at paragraph 50 he concludes: -

         "I have balanced the Appellant's personal circumstances against the
         need to deport him on account of his criminality.   Having  carried
         out a careful balancing  exercise,  I  find  that  the  Appellant's
         deportation would in the circumstances be disproportionate."

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal, which was initially  turned
    down by the First-tier Judge but was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen on 1 November 2018, on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the
    judge erred in the evaluation of risk in that, although  he  noted  the
    appellant had been assessed as being generally at high level of risk to
    children, that was not factored into the evaluation of  the  threat  to
    society and proportionality.

 7. The Secretary of State contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in relation to the assessment of risk and that in  turn  affected
    the  proportionality  assessment  which  was   carried   out   in   the
    alternative.  In relation to the first point, the  Secretary  of  State
    says that the judge refers to the OASys Report  but  demonstrates  very
    little real engagement with that report. Rather, there is a focus  upon
    one e-mail which was quoted at [42]. The judge appears to give  primacy
    to that, albeit that it was just an abridged e-mail update  and  not  a
    comprehensive further assessment.  The Secretary of State contends that
    the OASys report was a comprehensive assessment and that the judge,  in
    giving primacy to the e-mail assessment, did  not  as  he  should  have
    done, look at the documents in the round.

 8. In relation to the second point, the Secretary of  state  submits  that
    the question of proportionality is one which is necessarily infected by
    the question of the approach which the judge took on risk and that  the
    approach to proportionality is erroneous in that it does not deal  with
    the question of the children not residing with Mr Smith, which it  said
    is a highly material factor.  At [46] it also does not  deal  with  his
    ability to transfer to work in Jamaica as a healthy adult male  and  it
    appears at [49] to descend into speculation as to other  factors  which
    are not material.

 9. On behalf of Mr Smith, it was submitted before  us  that  there  is  no
    error of law and this is all a question of weight which the  judge  was
    entitled to  put  on  various  factors.   Following  the  authority  of
    Vasconcelos, the judge was not bound by  the  risk  assessment  in  the
    OASys Report and was entitled to  depart  from  it  and  to  take  into
    account other matters, which is what he did.  We were reminded  of  the
    authority of Greenwood, in particular paragraphs 15 to 16 and the  need
    to be scrupulous as to whether there  is  an  error  of  law.   It  was
    submitted that this is essentially a perversity challenge and that,  in
    fact, the First-tier Judge could perfectly  well  have  concluded  that
    there was no genuine risk  based  solely  on  the  OASys  Report  given
    various factors within that such as the fact that  his  offending  took
    place  during  an  estrangement  from  his  wife  to  whom  he  is  now
    reconciled, and that there appear to be  signs  of  engaging  with  the
    offending behaviour.

10. It was also submitted that  when  it  comes  to  the  question  of  the
    proportionality assessment that Mr Smith is in  fact  entitled  to  the
    highest level of protection under the Regulations.   It  was  submitted
    that it was immaterial to the question of proportionality  whether  the
    First-tier Judge got the question of risk wrong,  as  the  exercise  of
    proportionality was not something which could be said to be infected by
    the question of the historical assessment.

11. We have listened carefully to the submissions which have been  advanced
    before us.  We will deal first with the question of this top  level  of
    protection because that is a simple point which can be cleared  out  of
    the way straightaway. We conclude that the argument based on  Mr  Smith
    being entitled to the top level of protection is erroneous.  Apart from
    the fact that it was not argued in front  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, it is misconceived on the wording of the Regulations  where  the
    imperative of the protection applies only to EEA  nationals,  which  Mr
    Smith is not.

12. So far as the more substantive arguments, which  were  advanced  before
    us, we concur with the submissions which were advanced on behalf of the
    Secretary of State.  It appears to us that the FTT  Judge  did  err  in
    that he did not engage fully with  the  OASys  Report.   There  was  an
    assessment of high risk of harm in relation  to  children.,  which  was
    noted. However, the judge did not note the medium risk  to  the  public
    and known adults as well.  That is a matter  which  would  need  to  be
    considered  carefully  in  the  context,  albeit  that  the   risk   of
    reoffending being determined  as  low.   The  double  nature  of  risk,
    pursuant to the authority of Kamki [2017] EWCA Civ 1715,  is  something
    which needs to be taken into account, and so all those factors need  to
    be properly engaged with.  The second point relates to the email.  When
    one reads paragraph 42 of the determination, it does not read as if the
    First-tier Judge, with the greatest of respect to him,  has  looked  at
    the OASys Report and informed himself as to how the assessment of  high
    risk came to be made. Although noting the fact of high risk, the  judge
    nevertheless seems to assume that the email has displaced  the  report.
    That is a conclusion, which it seems to  us,  is  not  a  rational  one
    given, that when one reads that e-mail, it does not deal  at  all  with
    the question of the risk of reoffending or with the particular risks of
    serious harm to children or medium risk to the  public  which  are  the
    material parts of the OASys Report. Thus,  it  may  be  said  that  the
    learned judge's reasoning did not follow from the materials before him,
    or one may  say  that  it  evidences  an  irrational  approach  to  the
    evidence.  We find that if one were to engage with the OASys Report, it
    is hard to see how one could rationally  conclude  that  there  was  no
    evidence of risk.

13. We also find that the learned judge's approach was erroneous,  in  that
    he did not appear to have given weight to how one assesses the question
    of serious harm as indicated by Kamki, which requires the judge to look
    both  at  the  likelihood  of  reoffending  and  the   seriousness   of
    consequences if such reoffending occurs.  In addition, the approach  of
    the judge also failed to resolve the key issue as to whether  Mr  Smith
    accepted the verdict of the jury.  That is a question  which  obviously
    has some direct relevance to the ongoing assessment of risk.  This  is,
    it seems to us, a matter  which  is  required  to  be  dealt  with,  in
    particular given that this was a very serious  offence,  preying  on  a
    vulnerable child, with the potential for serious long-term harm to  her
    and her family. As such, any  reoffending,  were  it  to  occur,  would
    present a very serious possibility of long-term harm to others.

14. We also note  that  the  probation  report  makes  it  clear  that  the
    acceptance by the appellant of his guilt, or not, is  relevant  to  the
    risk of future reoffending. It appears  that  the  appellant  does  not
    accept his guilt in his evidence. Although  the  First-tier  Judge  did
    refer to the risk to children, he did so in  broad  terms  and  without
    alluding to the nature  of  the  risk.   We  conclude  that  there  was
    effectively no basis upon such evidence as was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, for him to rationally conclude that the risk of harm to
    children had changed and also there was no evidence of change. There is
    little indication  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  brought  the
    potential consequences of reoffending into consideration. The result is
    that the judge erred in his approach, by failing to give proper or  any
    weight to important factors in the assessment of whether the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. We find
    that there was irrationality in his approach, as well as a  failure  to
    give proper consideration to relevant and important evidential matters,
    such as to amount to a material error of law.

15. We are also concerned that the First-tier Judge may  not  have  engaged
    fully with the facts of the appellant's  conviction.   That  conviction
    was taking a 12 year old girl, who is not a family member, for  reasons
    which the sentencing judge found to be entirely sexual.  This was a  12
    year old girl who had been abandoned by her mother.  The appellant, who
    was at the time the best part of 40 years of age,  approached  her  and
    gained her trust, asking her completely inappropriate sexual questions,
    and then induced her to go with him and kept her with  him  for  twelve
    hours, releasing her only after the news carried items indicating  that
    she was being searched for by the police.

16. Although, Judge Aujla, notes that this was a serious offence, the level
    of criminality and the details of that criminality do not seem to us to
    have been fully engaged with.

17. We accept the submission  that  when  one  comes  to  the  question  of
    proportionality it is  impossible  to  divorce  the  question  of  risk
    entirely from the question of proportionality.  Although  there  are  a
    number  of  factors  which  require  to  go  into  the  proportionality
    equation, it is a matter which cannot be determined in the  absence  of
    some consideration of the (ex hypothesi) risk.   That,  the  First-tier
    Judge does not seem to have done.  There are also a number  of  matters
    which  one  would  expect  to  be   determined   if   a   comprehensive
    proportionality assessment were to be conducted.  Such relevant matters
    include the appellant's personal circumstances, his age, his  state  of
    health, his family and economic circumstances, his length of  residence
    in the United Kingdom, the social and  cultural  integration  into  the
    United Kingdom and the extent to which he had links with his country of
    origin.

18. We are concerned that not all such factors  have  been  dealt  with  or
    fully considered. There would seem to  be  no  real  balancing  of  the
    public interest  in  relation  to  the  question  of  risk.  There  are
    questions over the conclusions in relation to  Mr  Smith's  ability  to
    integrate in Jamaica because there is no real reason on the evidence to
    see why he could not secure accommodation, employment or rehabilitation
    programmes in Jamaica, and that is not really dealt with.  The issue of
    integration in Jamaica is a live one, given that he had spent  most  of
    his life until 26 years of age there is also not grappled with.

19. As  to  rehabilitation,  there  was  little  evidence  to  support  the
    proposition that such prospects were better in  the  UK.   Further  the
    assertion  that  there  was  substantial  evidence  that  he  had  been
    successfully rehabilitated does not entirely fit with the fact that  he
    seems to have failed to accept responsibility for  his  actions  or  to
    engage with programmes in prison to address his offending.

20. The judge's assessment as to the best interests of the  children  seems
    not to overtly recognise that Mr Smith has not been resident with their
    mothers.  They did not  visit  him  in  prison.   The  social  worker's
    report, which was relied on in relation to the effect on the  children,
    is not in fact particular to Mr Smith but sets out generic comments  as
    to the general importance of black father figures  where  the  children
    are of mixed race. Although clearly a  relevant  factor  such  must  be
    placed  in  the  overall  context  of  the  appellant's   contact   and
    relationship with his children.

21. For all the reasons set out above we allow the appeal by the  Secretary
    of State to the extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  be
    set aside to be remade.

22. Our view is that, given the multiplicity  of  issues  that  are  to  be
    canvassed, it would  be  appropriate  to  go  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a proper reconsideration of all the evidence and  to  make
    the necessary findings.  We  are  mindful  of  the  Senior  President's
    practice direction.

23. Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal will give such directions  as  are
    required.

24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date 4 January 2019
[pic]
The Hon. Mrs Justice Cockerill DBE
