
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 17 April 2014                              |On 8 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              EGIDIJUS Kajackas

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Adewoye, Prime Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   The Appeal

   1. For the purposes of this determination I refer to Mr Kajackas  as  the
      appellant and to the Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,  their
      positions before the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania and was born on 28 May 1968.


   3. This is a re-making of the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
      decision dated 8 April 2013 to  deport  him  to  Lithuania  under  the
      Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   EEA
      Regulations).

   4. The error of law decision setting aside the  determination  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Colyer and Dr J O de  Barros  is  appended  and  I
      refer to the reasoning below where relevant.

   Background

   5. The following matters are common ground. The appellant came to the  UK
      in May 2004 and has remained here since then,  other  than  two  short
      holidays in Lithuania. He found work in factories and for a number  of
      agencies. From 2005 to 2010 he was convicted of eleven offences  which
      included theft from shops, driving with excessive alcohol,  drunk  and
      disorderly behaviour and using threatening  words  and  behaviour.  He
      received a prison sentence of 16 weeks in 2007 for driving when drunk,
      disqualified  and  without  insurance  but  his  sentences   otherwise
      comprised fines and conditional discharges.

   6. In 2008, the appellant met Tina Kerr, a British national, and began  a
      relationship with her. In November 2011 he inflicted  grievous  bodily
      harm and a battery on Ms Kerr and on 22 March 2012 received a sentence
      of 3 years and 4 months imprisonment respectively, the 4 months  being
      ordered to run consecutively to the 3  years.  It  is  those  offences
      which led the respondent to make the  deportation  order  against  the
      appellant on 8 April 2013. The appellant and Ms  Kerr  remained  in  a
      relationship, however, and married on 23 May 2013.

   The Law

   7. It is expedient to set out the law here as it is relevant to both  the
      preliminary issue I was asked to determine  and  the  substantive  re-
      making of the appeal.


   8. Where the respondent proposes to deport  an  EEA  national,  Directive
      2004/38/EC provides  a  hierarchy  of  levels  of  protection  against
      expulsion based on criteria of increasing stringency, depending, inter
      alia, on the extent of residence (see recital 23):

         (i) a Union citizen/ EEA national or their family  member  who  has
         not acquired permanent residence in  the  UK  may  be  deported  on
         grounds of public policy or public security or public  health  (the
         "basic" level of protection under Article 27(1) and Article  28(1)/
         regulation 21(1))  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 (hereafter "the 2006 Regulations"));


         (ii) a Union citizen/EEA national or their  family  member  with  a
         permanent right of residence  may  only  be  deported  on  "serious
         grounds of public policy or public  security"  (the  second-highest
         level of protection; Article 28(2)/regulation 21(3));


         (iii) a Union citizen/ EEA national who has resided in the  UK  for
         (at least) a 10 year period previous to  the  deportation  decision
         may only be deported on "imperative  grounds  of  public  security"
         (the highest level  of  protection;  Article  28(3)(a)/  regulation
         21(4)(a)).

2. Article 28 of the Directive provides as follows:

        Article 28
        Protection against expulsion
        1. Before taking an expulsion decision on  the  grounds  of  public
        policy or public security, the host Member State shall take account
        of considerations such as how long  the  individual  concerned  has
        resided on its territory, his/her age, state of health, family  and
        economic situation, social and cultural integration into  the  host
        Member State and the extent of his/her links with  the  country  of
        origin.
        2. The host Member State may not take an expulsion decision against
        Union  citizens  or   their   family   members,   irrespective   of
        nationality, who have the  right  of  permanent  residence  on  its
        territory, except on serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
        security.
        3. An expulsion decision may not be taken against  Union  citizens,
        except if the decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of  public
        security, as defined by Member States, if they:
        (a) have resided in the host Member  State  for  the  previous  ten
        years; or
         (b) are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the best
        interests of the child, as  provided  for  in  the  United  Nations
        Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989.




3. Those provisions are incorporated in domestic law  by  regulation  21  of
the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (the   EEA
Regulations). Regulation 21 states:

        Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
        grounds


        (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA  decision
        taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
        health.


        (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


        (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in  respect  of  a  person
        with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
        serious grounds of public policy or public security.


        (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
        grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


           (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
           at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


           (b) is under the age of 18,  unless  the  relevant  decision  is
           necessary  in  his  best  interests,  as  provided  for  in  the
           Convention on the Rights of the Child  adopted  by  the  General
           Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.


        (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
        or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
        preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
        with the following principles-


           (a)  the  decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
           proportionality;


           (b) the decision must  be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
           conduct of the person concerned;


           (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent
           a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
           of the fundamental interests of society;


           (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision;


           (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do   not   in
           themselves justify the decision.


        (6) Before taking a relevant decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
        policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
        in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
        his country of origin.

Preliminary Issue

  6. As the error of law decision appended at the end of this determination
     indicates at [7] one of the respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
     Upper Tribunal was that the appellant did not have permanent residence
     so should not benefit from the higher, "serious" level  of  protection
     from  deportation  provided  by  Regulation  21(3).  The   respondents
     arguments at that time were on the basis of what she maintained was an
     incomplete work record. The Upper Tribunal  found  no  error  in  that
     regard at [10] of the error of law decision.


  7. By the time of this re-making the Court of  Justice  of  the  European
     Union had issued the  decisions  of  Onuekwere  (Case  C-378/12)  CJEU
     (Second Chamber), 16 January  2014  and  MG  (Case  C-400/12)  (Second
     Chamber) 16/1/14.

  8. Based on Onuekwere and MG the respondent argued at a previous  interim
     hearing that  the appellant no longer fell to benefit from  Regulation
     21(3) as his periods of imprisonment in 2007  and  from  2013  onwards
     broke any 5 year period of residence.

  9. In Onuekwere the CJEU found that it  was  clear  from  the  terms  and
     purpose of Article 16 (2) of  Directive  2004/38/EC  that  periods  of
     imprisonment could not be taken into consideration for the purposes of
     the acquisition of a right of permanent residence. Such acquisition in
     terms of a family member of a Union Citizen who was  a  third  country
     national, i.e. not a national of a Member  State,  was  dependent  not
     only on whether the Union citizen concerned satisfied  the  conditions
     laid down in Art 16 (1) but also that the family  member  had  resided
     legally  and  continuously  with  that  citizen,  for  the  period  in
     question. In considering the grant of enhanced protection, even  where
     the person concerned resided in the host Member State for the 10 years
     prior to imprisonment, such a period of  residence  could  however  be
     taken into consideration as part of the overall assessment of  whether
     the integrating links previously forged with the host Member State had
     been broken.

 10. In MG, the CJEU found, as in Onuekwere that time  in  prison  did  not
     count for residence purposes. However, what had been acquired was  not
     lost by a period in prison, if a  right  of  permanent  residence  had
     already been established. Conversely, if that right had not  yet  been
     acquired, then periods of imprisonment would interrupt the  continuity
     of residence. Of particular importance was the ruling that, unlike the
     requisite period for acquiring a right of permanent  residence,  which
     began when the person concerned commenced lawful residence in the host
     Member State, the 10 year period of residence necessary for the  grant
     of the enhanced protection provided for in Art  28  (3)  (a)  must  be
     calculated by counting back from the date of  decision  ordering  that
     person's expulsion. It had been thought previously  that  one  counted
     back from the  date  of  that  person's  conviction  and  sentence  of
     imprisonment.

 11. The relevant chronology for the appellant is as follows:

            May 2004              Entered UK and exercised Treaty rights


            6 December 2007       Sentence of imprisonment for 16 weeks


            14 November 2011            Arrest and remand for index offence


            22 March 2012         Sentence of imprisonment for 3 years and 4


                                  months


           8 April 2013                 Deportation Order


 12. As I saw it, the difficulty for the respondent concerning  the  prison
     sentences depriving the appellant of permanent residence was  not  the
     correctness of the submission but whether it  was  justiciable  before
     me, the Upper Tribunal having decided the point against the respondent
     in terms in the error of law decision.


 13. I therefore put the parties on notice in a direction  dated  17  March
     2014 and requested skeleton arguments from both sides on the point.  I
     was grateful to Mr Mills and Mr Adewoye for their compliance with that
     direction.


 14. Mr Adewoye conceded at [6.5] of his skeleton argument that the  effect
     of Onuekwere and  MG  was  that  the  appellant  had  not  established
     permanent residence  whilst  maintaining  that  the  appellant  should
     benefit from Regulation 21 (3) as the point was  no  longer  at  large
     before me.


 15. It was my view, however, that as the parties had good notice  of  this
     issue and it being uncontentious that the appellant could no longer be
     regarded as having established permanent residence, it  would  not  be
     correct to proceed on an erroneous basis, leaving it open for  further
     decisions and challenges, potentially incurring  further  public  cost
     and leaving the parties without finality.

 16. I determined that the appeal could be decided  fairly  and  justly  by
     applying the lower test, that of "grounds of public policy  or  public
     security" and that the appellant did not fall to benefit  from  higher
     protection of Regulation 21(3).


 Re-making of the Deportation Appeal

 17. Following on from my preliminary decision above, I must assess whether
     the personal conduct of the appellant represents  a  genuine,  present
     and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
     interests  of  society.  I  must  consider  the  factors  set  out  in
     Regulation 21(5), whether the decision complies with the principle  of
     proportionality, is based exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the
     appellant, does not  take  into  account  matters  isolated  from  the
     particulars of the case or which relate to considerations  of  general
     prevention and that  the  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
     themselves justify deportation.

 18. My decision must also take into  account  the  factors  identified  in
     Regulation 21 (6), that is, considerations  such  as  the  appellant's
     age, state  of  health,  family  and  economic  situation,  length  of
     residence, social and cultural integration the extent  of  links  with
     Lithuania.


 19. I turn first to the issues that are at the heart of this  matter,  the
     appellant's difficulties  with  alcohol  and  how  those  difficulties
     relate to his offending.

 20. The appellant maintains that he does not pose a present  risk  of  re-
     offending whether  medium  (as  suggested  in  the  National  Offender
     Management (NOMS) report) or otherwise as he has addressed his problem
     with alcohol and will not offend again. His wife and his mother-in-law
     gave evidence to the same effect.

 21. It remained my view that it has not been shown that the appellant  has
     addressed his problems with alcohol to the extent that I can accept on
     the balance of probabilities that he will not abuse alcohol again when
     he leaves prison and that  he  does  not  remain  at  medium  risk  of
     reoffending, including offences of violence against his wife.

 22. The appellant committed  16  offences  prior  to  the  index  offence,
     beginning with theft in 2005, and including driving  a  motor  vehicle
     with excess alcohol, disorderly behaviour, use of threatening, abusive
     or insulting  words  with  intent  to  case  fear  or  provocation  of
     violence, or cause harassment, alarm or distress.  The  full  list  of
     offences is set out at [12] to [13] of the  respondent's  reasons  for
     deportation letter and the NOMS report.

 23. His history of offending after abusing alcohol shows  that  he  has  a
     long standing  and  serious  problem.  That  history  requires  cogent
     evidence to show that the appellant will not return to that pattern of
     behaviour. I did not find that the evidence before me  was  sufficient
     to do so.

 24. The sentencing remarks set out the index offences which occurred  over
     14 May 2011 and 15 May 2011.  The  appellant  attacked  his  wife  and
     forced her into an airing cupboard. That attack left her with  serious
     damage to her right eye,  the  natural  lens  being  forced  into  the
     vitreous and leaving her needing to use a contact  lens.  It  was  not
     clarified to me whether  the  possible  surgery  referred  to  in  the
     sentencing remarks was required. She sustained numerous other injuries
     including cuts inside her mouth and a fractured finger and hair  being
     pulled out. She was too afraid to come  out  of  the  airing  cupboard
     until the appellant was asleep. After she attended a probation service
     meeting the next day, on her return home the appellant  assaulted  her
     again, striking her on the back of the head.

 25. The sentencing remarks show that this was a "dreadful" and "sustained"
     attack on the appellant's wife.  It  was  far  from  being  the  first
     assault that she suffered, their  relationship  being  "peppered  with
     incident  of  violence"  and  the  appellant  assaulting  her  "fairly
     regularly". The sentencing judge stated that  "I  am  quite  satisfied
     that there is a proven history of violence or threats by  you  towards
     her".

 26. The appellant pleaded guilty to the offences but "very, very late".

 27. The NOMS report found  that  the  appellant  was  at  medium  risk  of
     reconviction and medium risk of causing serious harm to others. He was
     assessed as requiring MAPPA level 1  supervision  after  release.  The
     risk factors were directly linked to the appellant's abuse of  alcohol
     or association with "bad friends".

 28. The appellant told the NOMS officer that "he likes a drink but  it  is
     not a problem". He drank "mainly beer and only  has  about  4  cans  a
     week." The report goes on to state, however,

           "With referral to Mr Kajackas' previous  conviction  records  it
           would imply he had an issue with alcohol before being  sentenced
           which was reinforced by the victim, but this is  something  that
           he denies. He does however acknowledge that he drank heavily  in
           the past and that  alcohol  has  played  a  major  part  in  his
           offending history, he appears to minimise his previous offending
           behaviour saying that it was all to  do  with  bad  friends  and
           drink (my emphasis)."

 29. The NOMS report also states that:


           "He appears to minimise his past offending behaviour saying that
           it is all alcohol related and influenced by these people  he  no
           longer has contact with."


 30. In stark contrast to the sentencing remarks and information  elsewhere
     in the NOMS report, the appellant told the NOMS officer that "he  only
     struck" Ms Kerr once.


 31. The appellant also told the Probation Service that  "he  only  pleaded
     guilty in court on the direction of his solicitor".


 32. The notes from the alcohol course  that  the  appellant  undertook  in
     early 2013, a year after being in prison and a year and a  half  after
     the index offences, state that he had identified his long-term  target
     as only drinking at weekends and limiting his intake to no  more  than
     23 units per week. He identified his confidence in achieving  his  aim
     as only "6 out of 10". He accepted that the real challenge would  come
     when he was released. He identified that in a typical drinking day  he
     would consume 32 units.

 33. The appellant's stated aim even at the end of  the  alcohol  awareness
     course was not to abstain entirely, therefore, but to drink up  to  23
     units a week, mainly at weekends and he was not overly confident  that
     he could achieve that aim.

 34. At the hearing the appellant maintained that his time  in  prison  had
     changed him and that he would never drink again and would never offend
     again. He wanted to get a job and look after his  wife  when  he  left
     prison. Friends would help him find a job. He would not start drinking
     again even if he was earning a wage. He had not had a drink  for  2  �
     years. His alcohol course in prison had given him an understanding  of
     his problem and he would not touch alcohol again, it was "poison".

 35. The sentencing remarks, NOMS report and  alcohol  course  notes  show,
     however, that the appellant did not fully accept that he had a serious
     problem with alcohol, denied that he had a long  history  of  violence
     towards his wife, minimised the index  offence,  pleaded  guilty  very
     late and not because he accepted his guilt but on  legal  advice,  and
     showed a very different intention as regards  using  alcohol  to  that
     expressed at the hearing.

 36. Mr Adewoye was right to point out that the NOMS report is not a recent
     document. It is the only formal assessment of risk before me, however.
     When considered against the evidence as a  whole,  I  found  that  its
     contents remained reliable, there being nothing that I could accept as
     showing that the level of risk of reoffending had changed.

 37. In short,  I  did  not  find  that  I  could  accept  the  appellant's
     statements that he would never drink again and would never  offend  or
     threaten or harm his wife again.  His  statements  about  alcohol  and
     reoffending are, when considered against his history and what  he  has
     said the in past, wholly unrealistic and unreliable.

 38. I found the evidence of the appellant's wife and mother-in-law  to  be
     equally unrealistic and unreliable.

 39. I have set out above the information in the sentencing remarks on  the
     history of violence during the relationship of the  appellant  and  Ms
     Kerr. The sentencing remarks also referred  to  the  appellant's  wife
     having "clearly underplayed the true situation" and "watered down  the
     evidence".

 40. The sentencing  remarks  refer  to  the  "immeasurable"  psychological
     damage from the history of assaults, the index  offences  and  to  the
     appellant's wife as being like other  victims  of  domestic  violence,
     "trapped not only by their situation of sharing a house  but  also  by
     their feelings for the perpetrator of such violence."

 41. The sentencing remarks also comment on the  index  offence  coming  to
     light only because of what was observed  when  Ms  Kerr  attended  the
     Probation Service on 15 November 2011, "and but for that it  may  well
     be that she would not have said anything to the  authorities  but  the
     probation officers were becoming more and  more  concerned  about  her
     appearing to do her course having fresh injuries." It refers to  other
     assaults, "unreported or withdrawn, ... a common feature in  cases  of
     domestic violence."

 42. The NOMS report indicates that Ms Kerr stated that  "Mr  Kajackas  has
     been increasingly violent towards her for 3 � years". It also  states,
     as in the sentencing remarks, that it was the Probation Service  staff
     who saw Ms Kerr on 15 November 2011 who referred  the  matter  to  the
     police, not Ms Kerr who went home only to face further attack.

 43. The sentencing remarks also referred to:

           "... the statement of the complainant's mother  which  tells  me
           that you were on occasions very volatile and abusive to Tina and
           her mother describing Tina as being frightened to death  of  you
           when you are in drink and abusive... ."

 44. The full statement prepared for the criminal trial of the  appellant's
     mother-in-law, Mrs Pamela Kerr, was before  me  and  stated  that  the
     appellant was "very volatile and abusive" at  times,  "to  the  extent
     that I would describe him as a 'mad man'." She saw her daughter  after
     the first index offence on 14 November 2011, stating that she:


        "did not ask what had happened as this is such a regular occurrence
        and I knew exactly how she had received these injuries  as  I  have
        been present on many occasions in the past when [the appellant] has
        punched and beaten her in front of my very eyes."


 45. She went on to state:


        "I am very worried about my daughter and the physical abuse she  is
        receiving at the hands of this male. Tina  is  not  the  same  girl
        since she met this man and she is frightened to death of  him  when
        he is in drink and abusive. I fear that 1 [sic] day this  will  all
        go too far and will be too late and I will get a phone call or find
        my daughter has been killed by the hands of this 'mad man'. "


 46. The appellant's wife and her mother gave evidence at the hearing  that
     the appellant had definitely changed in prison, that he was  genuinely
     remorseful and had a genuine intention to  abstain  from  alcohol  and
     from offending. He knew that if he offended again  he  would  have  to
     return to Lithuania and this would act as a significant factor in  his
     good behaviour in future. The index offences and drinking had occurred
     at a particularly difficult time after the couple had been  living  on
     the streets after he had lost his job.


 47. The appellant's wife was asked whether he had been violent towards her
     several times. Her response was that he had been violent  towards  her
     twice, the index offences being only the second time.


 48. The other evidence before me, however, shows the views expressed by Ms
     Kerr and her mother to be very different from those of the  sentencing
     judge and NOMS officer and, as regards Mrs Pamela Kerr, very different
     indeed from her earlier evidence. It was also my view that, as in  the
     criminal   proceedings,   the   appellant's   wife   downplayed   very
     significantly the seriousness of  the  appellant's  violent  behaviour
     over  a  period  of  years.  I  found  that  these  matters  seriously
     undermined  the  reliability  of  their   evidence   including   their
     statements on the appellant's ability  to  abstain  from  alcohol  and
     likely behaviour towards his wife when he is released from prison.

 49. Ms Kerr is to be commended for seeking to address her own difficulties
     with alcohol by attending an organisation called Addaction, a drug and
     alcohol recovery service. She spoke of having already  discussed  with
     them the possibility of the appellant going there on his release  from
     prison. The appellant did not refer to an intention to attend  such  a
     programme. Even if he  had,  it  is  my  view  that  his  history  and
     inconsistent statements concerning his abuse of alcohol and intentions
     on release did not support such an intention.

 50. Both the appellant's wife and her mother spoke of the appellant having
     had a difficult time when he committed the index offences, having lost
     his job, having little money, being under stress. Both appeared to  me
     to be unrealistic as to  the  similarly  stressful  circumstances  the
     appellant will face on his release on his release,  there  being  less
     chance of his being employed  now  that  he  has  a  serious  criminal
     record.

 51. I  must  also  take  into  account  the  other  factors  contained  in
     Regulation 21 (6). The appellant is now 45 years old. Other  than  his
     difficulties  with  alcohol  I  had  no   evidence   of   any   health
     difficulties. I do not dispute the genuine nature of the marriage. The
     appellant's wife has made very regular visits and, indeed, married the
     appellant after he was convicted. I also accept that she would not  go
     to Lithuania as her mother, children and grandchildren are in the  UK.
     If the deportation proceeds, the couple will be separated, therefore.

 52. The appellant maintained that  his  economic  situation  in  Lithuania
     would be more difficult than in the UK. I had no country  evidence  to
     show that to be so and, as above, his employment  prospects  here  can
     only but be negatively affected by his extensive and serious  criminal
     record.

 53. The appellant has been in the UK since approximately May 2004. That is
     a substantial period of time but it is significantly less than the  36
     years that he spent in Lithuania before coming here. There was  little
     evidence before me of social and cultural integration of the appellant
     in the UK, certainly in a positive sense, other than his work  record.
     I accept that his record in prison  is  very  good  and  that  he  has
     completed other courses, been employed in prison workshops and  is  an
     enhanced prisoner.

 54. The appellant stated that he had not heard from his family,  had  lost
     touch with his mother whom he last saw in 2007 and  had  no  idea  how
     she was and that his father had died last year. I did  not  find  that
     evidence was not reliable as he later confirmed that he learned of his
     father's death from his mother, had spoken to her two or  three  times
     since going to prison and his wife stated that the appellant's  mother
     would ring when they were living in the  flat  together  and  that  he
     would his mother ring from prison.  The evidence  about  contact  with
     his mother having been shown to be unreliable, I did not  accept  that
     the appellant would not be able to obtain any support from  any  other
     relative or former friends and colleagues  in  Lithuania.   I  do  not
     accept that he would be  without  any  family  or  other  contacts  or
     support in Lithuania.

 55. The appellant also stated that he  would  not  drink  if  returned  to
     Lithuania. My views on the likelihood of his abstaining  from  alcohol
     are set out above and equally applicable to a return to  Lithuania  or
     remaining in the UK. It is my view that he has not shown that  he  has
     addressed his difficulties with alcohol and so will be at  risk  of  a
     relapse and offending whether he is in the UK or Lithuania. It did not
     appear to me that the prospects for rehabilitation were better in  the
     UK than in Lithuania. There was  no  country  evidence  before  me  on
     alcohol treatment programmes in Lithuania, and looking at the risk  of
     reoffending pragmatically, at least he will have less  opportunity  to
     resume his violent behaviour towards his wife there.


 56. I did not find any merit in Mr Adewoye's argument that the matter  was
     less serious as the appellant's  offence  was  against  an  individual
     rather than the general public. The offence is no less serious or less
     a matter of public  concern  because  it  was  committed  against  the
     appellant's wife in private.

 57. It was also suggested that the risk of reoffending was reduced as  the
     appellant's licence did not permit him to live with his wife  when  he
     is released from prison. Both he and his wife made it clear that  they
     intend to live together as soon as they are able, are asking  for  the
     licence to be varied and that they will see each other  a  very  great
     deal even if they are not formally residing at the same address. I did
     not find the risk of reoffending would be significantly reduced  as  a
     result of the  accommodation  proviso  contained  in  the  appellant's
     licence.

 58. In conclusion, therefore, I found that the appellant's deportation  on
     the grounds of public policy or  public  security  was  justified  and
     proportionate  and  that  he  represents  a   genuine,   present   and
     sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
     of society.

 59. I  should  also  indicate  that  my  concerns  about  the  appellant's
     likelihood of returning to alcohol abuse and the offending that  would
     follow were sufficiently significant  that  even  had  I  applied  the
     higher, "serious" test from Regulation 21(3), I would have found  that
     he should be deported.

 Article 8

 60. It was  also  my  view  that  the  matters  set  out  above  made  the
     deportation of the appellant proportionate notwithstanding the  family
     life that he has with his wife and his private life  in  the  UK.  The
     public interest carries more significance in the Article 8  assessment
     as the need to express public revulsion at the offence and to act as a
     deterrent weigh must be taken into account. Put simply, in the Article
     8 proportionality assessment, the index offence is  too  serious,  the
     history of offending too extensive, the medium risk of reoffending too
     high  and likelihood of continued alcohol abuse such that  his  family
     life with Ms  Kerr  and  the  limited  private  life  could  not  show
     deportation to be  disproportionate.


 Decision

 61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  disclosed an error on a point
     of law and was set aside to be re-made.


 62. I re-make the appeal as refused under the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and
     under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Signed: [pic]                                Date: 6 May 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                    [pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Royal Courts of Justice

On:  9 September 2013                        Decision Promulgated:



                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Egidijus Kajackas



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Goldborough of Cleveland & Co Solicitors



                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION


The Appeal

This is an appeal against the decision dated  26  June  2013  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Colyer and Dr J O de Barros which  allowed  the  respondent's
appeal against the appellant's decision dated  8  April  2013  refusing  his
appeal against deportation.

For the purposes of this decision, we shall refer to the Secretary of  State
as the respondent  and  Mr  Kajackas  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background


The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania and he was born on 28 May 1968.

The appellant came to the UK in 2004 and has remained here  since  then.  He
found work in factories and for a number of agencies. From 2005 to  2010  he
was convicted of eleven offences which included theft  from  shops,  driving
with  excessive  alcohol,  drunk  and   disorderly   behaviour   and   using
threatening words and behaviour. He received a prison sentence of  16  weeks
in 2007 for driving when drunk, disqualified and without insurance  but  his
sentences otherwise comprised fines and conditional discharges.

In 2008, the appellant met Tina  Kerr,  a  British  national,  and  began  a
relationship with her. In November 2011 he inflicted  grievous  bodily  harm
and a battery on Ms Kerr and on 22 March  2012  received  a  sentence  of  3
years and 4 months imprisonment respectively, the 4 months being ordered  to
run consecutively to the 3  years.  It  is  those  offences  which  led  the
respondent to make the deportation order against the appellant  on  8  April
2013. The appellant and Ms Kerr remained in  a  relationship,  however,  and
married on 23 May 2013.

The Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal contained three main challenges  to  the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal.

The first ground was that the First-tier Tribunal was in  error  in  finding
that the appellant had been a qualified person for 5 years in line with  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA  Regulations)
and therefore had permanent  residence.  It  followed  that  the  panel  had
incorrectly considered the proportionality of his  deportation  against  the
more  demanding  test  of  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
security" contained in Regulation 21 (3)  rather  than  merely  "grounds  of
public policy, public security or public  health"  which  apply  to  someone
without permanent residence.

The second ground maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  their
assessment of the evidence. The panel failed to take into account  the  risk
of future harm, whether the appellant had  addressed  his  alcohol  problem,
that his licence would preclude him living with his wife when  his  sentence
ended, that his wife also had alcohol problems, that  he  was  a  persistent
offender and that the index offence showed an escalation  in  his  offending
behaviour.

The third ground argued that the panel  had  failed  to  take  into  account
whether the appellant  and  his  wife  could  be  expected  to  relocate  to
Lithuania and continue their family life there.

Discussion

Ms Horsley sought to persuade  us  that  the  first  ground  had  merit  but
without any success. The First-tier Tribunal clearly addressed the  evidence
of  the  appellant's  employment  at  [39].  That  evidence  included   HMRC
documents showing national insurance contributions in every year  from  2004
to 2011. They also had before them the written  and  oral  evidence  of  the
appellant and his wife which was consistent  and  to  the  effect  that  the
appellant had worked continuously bar a few weeks since coming  to  the  UK;
see [5], [6] and  [9]  in  particular.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore
considered the relevant evidence that was before  it  and  was  entitled  to
find that the appellant had worked for 5 years, had been a qualified  person
for 5 years and had permanent residence as defined in Regulation 15.

We also found no merit in the third ground. Ms Kerr is  a  British  national
who has lived in the UK all her life. She has never been to  Lithuania.  Her
immediate family are here and her unchallenged evidence was that her  mother
offered her support after the  assault  and  the  appellant's  imprisonment.
There is clearly an issue in this appeal as to whether the appellant  should
return to Lithuania. It was not our view that any assessment of  his  return
could reasonably include assessment of whether Ms Kerr could be expected  to
go with him. She cannot. This is therefore not a factor that could have  any
materiality in the outcome of the assessment  conducted  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

However, quite sensibly in  our  view,  Mr  Goldborough  conceded  that  the
second ground of appeal had merit. The First-tier Tribunal erred at [43]  in
stating that the appellant's risk of reoffending was "low" and  that  "there
is little chance of his reoffending". The Probation  Service  report  before
the First-tier Tribunal stated on  page  4  that  the  appellant's  risk  of
serious harm to others was "medium", that point being  repeated  on  page  8
together with a statement that  the  likelihood  of  reconviction  was  also
"medium". It is now  well  understood  that  in  EEA  deportation  cases  an
assessment of future  conduct  is  of  importance,  Regulation  21  (5)  (e)
indicating  that  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions   cannot   in
themselves justify the decision to deport and Regulation 21 (5) (c)  setting
down that it is the  "present"  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
interests of society that must be assessed.

We found an error of law in the  incorrect  assessment  of  the  appellant's
risk of reoffending and causing serious harm,  both  material  matters  when
considering the proportionality of deportation, that error being  such  that
the assessment of the First-tier Tribunal  of  the  proportionality  of  the
appellant's deportation must be set aside and re-made.

For completeness sake, we  should  indicate  that  that  the  other  matters
raised in the second ground appeared  to  us  to  be  points  of  weight  or
advocacy and therefore disagreement rather than errors of law.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal under the EEA Regulations  2006  and
Article 8 of the ECHR discloses an error on a point of law such that  it  is
set aside in order to be to be re-made.

Directions:

a. The appeal will be re-made on Monday 14 October.

b. Within 14 days of the date of issue of this direction, the  parties  must
file with the Tribunal and serve on the other party any additional  evidence
they wish  to  be  considered  pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A).  That  additional
evidence should include updated  witness  statements  for  any  witness  who
intends to give evidence.

c. The parties should be aware that the failure  to  comply  with  the  time
limit in this direction may  lead  the  Tribunal  to  refuse  to  admit  any
further evidence.




Signed:                                 Date: 23 September 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


