
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00351/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2014                      |On 26 November 2014               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                               mr kibron hayle
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant appeals with leave against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  M  R  Oliver  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse to revoke a deportation  order  against
    him and to refuse him asylum in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant
    claimed that his deportation would breach his rights under Article 8 of
    the ECHR.

2.   Both parties at the hearing accepted that the judge made errors of  law
    in his decision.

3.   The respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  accepted  that  the
    appellant is Eritrean.  As a consequence the judge also  accepted  that
    the appellant is Eritrean.  In spite of  this  the  judge  accepted  an
    undertaking from the HOPO who undertook on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    that the appellant would not be returned to Eritrea  but  to  Ethiopia.
    Consequently the judge found  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  asylum
    failed and with it his claim to protection under Articles 2 and  3.   I
    accept the  argument  in  the  grounds  that  this  conclusive  finding
    provided no dispositive answer to the  protection  claim  made  by  the
    appellant where the judge adopted the Secretary of  State's  acceptance
    that the appellant is Eritrean. It is also argued in the  grounds  that
    the judge improperly recorded the  undertaking  which  was  conditional
    upon the appellant making a request to be returned  to  Ethiopia.   The
    appellant has not made such a request.   On this evidence I  find  that
    the judge erred in law in relying on the undertaking made by  the  HOPO
    and this led to an error of law in his decision.

4.   I find that the judge's findings in respect of the appellant's  Article
    8 appeal are wholly inadequate.  The appellant has  a  wife  and  three
    children who are British nationals.  The judge failed to consider  this
    evidence in his assessment of proportionality.

5.   The errors are such that the judge's decision cannot stand.

6.   The appellant's appeal is to  be  remitted  to  Hatton  Cross  for  re-
    hearing on all issues.



Signed        Date: 24 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


DIRECTIONS

The appellant is to be listed for CMR hearing at Field House in 4  weeks  to
    ascertain whether the respondent  maintains  the  same  destination  in
    respect of the removal directions i.e. Eritrea.

