

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00737/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2013                     |On 25 November 2013      |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

              The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President UT (IAC)
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                              SALH RAHIM TWANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Stull, of Lloyds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Iraq born on 6 May 1980,  has  been
      granted permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier  Judge
      Lever, sitting with a non-legal member of  that  Tribunal  who,  by  a
      determination promulgated on 6 June 2013, dismissed his appeal against
      the respondent's decision to refuse to revoke a deportation order made
      as a consequence of his having committed criminal  offences  including
      wounding, such offending being during  the  currency  of  a  suspended
      sentence of imprisonment imposed for an earlier offence offences of  a
      not dissimilar nature.


   2. In granting permission to appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  made
      unambiguously clear that he had been persuaded to do so on one  narrow
      point, advanced in the grounds. Indeed, he  extended  time  so  as  to
      admit this out of time application because  a  serious  oversight  had
      been alleged on the part of the judge:

           "... I am concerned by the fact that in the grounds it  is  said
           that the appellant's brother gave testimony in  court  and  said
           there was regular contact between the appellant's child and  the
           appellant, whereas  there is  no  indication  from  the  judge's
           determination that the brother gave evidence and, indeed, it  is
           said at paragraph 37 of the determination that he did  not  give
           evidence. Bearing in mind the significance of the best interests
           of the child it is important that the matter be  clarified.  The
           judge and the Presenting Officer will be asked to provide  their
           record of proceedings."

   3. Directions were issued to that effect which established that which the
      appellant knew all along to be the case which was that  the  assertion
      made in the grounds was simply untrue. The appellant's brother had not
      given evidence, either orally or in the form of a witness statement.


   4. The appellant had been  unrepresented  at  that  hearing  and  so  the
      grounds for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  prepared  by
      his representatives instructed after that  hearing,  were  based  upon
      instructions received from him.

   5. Therefore, the only basis upon which permission to appeal was  granted
      has now fallen away, it being confirmed by Ms Stull  in  her  skeleton
      argument, prepared for this hearing, that  the  appellant's  assertion
      that his brother had given evidence at the hearing before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal was "factually incorrect". That  means  that  the  judge
      made no error in not referring in the determination to  evidence  that
      was not given before him.

   6. That being the case, there is nothing left within  the  scope  of  the
      grant of permission to appeal to argue and so we  dismiss  the  appeal
      and direct that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  to
      stand.

   7. We should, however, add this. In her skeleton argument Ms Stull  seeks
      to raise fresh challenges to the fairness of the hearing, based  again
      upon the appellant's instructions as to what occurred at  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal. She complains that:

           "[The] Appellant did have witnesses that could have testified as
           to the relationship between appellant and his son  but  was  not
           allowed to call them as witnesses."


      Again, this allegation by the appellant of unfairness in  the  hearing
      and determination of his appeal is simply untrue. It is plain from the
      record of proceedings of both the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the
      Presenting Officer that the judge asked the  appellant,  at  the  very
      beginning of the hearing, whether he wished to call any witnesses  and
      he said that he did not. The note of the Presenting Officer,  produced
      for examination at the hearing before us, records this as follows:


           Judge:      Calling  any  witnesses?  People  at  the  back  not
                       witnesses?


           Appellant:  Give evidence myself only - no witnesses...

   8. Further, this fresh allegation of unfairness  emerges  for  the  first
      time in the skeleton argument. No mention of this was made  either  in
      the handwritten grounds  of  the  appellant  in  his  application  for
      permission to appeal submitted by him to the First-tier Tribunal or in
      the grounds in  support  of  the  renewed  application  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, those grounds running to six closely typed paged  and  being
      prepared  by  the  appellant's  solicitors.  In  our  judgment  it  is
      inconceivable that had there been any truth at all  in  the  complaint
      that the judge prohibited the  appellant  from  calling  a  number  of
      witnesses he would have mentioned that before.


   9.  The  skeleton  argument  complains  also  that  the   appellant   was
      unrepresented and so ill-prepared to present his case. But  the  judge
      dealt with  that  carefully  at  paragraph  8  of  his  determination,
      explaining that the appellant had ample  time  to  arrange  for  legal
      representation. He had instructed  other  solicitors  to  act  on  his
      behalf in previously. Those  solicitors  withdrew  in  February,  some
      three months or so before the  substantive  hearing,  explaining  that
      they  had  been  unable  to  obtain  adequate  instructions  from  the
      appellant. It is unambiguously clear that the judge  was  entitled  to
      proceed with the hearing even though the appellant was unrepresented.


  10. For those reasons we  are  satisfied  that  not  only  are  the  fresh
      complaints about unfairness in the proceedings beyond the scope of the
      permission granted, they are, in  any  event,  wholly  unarguable  and
      should not have been raised.

      Summary of decision:

  11. The judge made no error of law. Therefore  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed.




                               Signed




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date


