
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00322/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 May 2015                                 |On 22 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                 IZZAD MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Machanda & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore promulgated on  25  September  2014  in
    which he dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision of 5 May 2014 to make a deportation order against him.

 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing before  Judge  Moore  but  was
    represented by Counsel.  An application for an adjournment was made  on
    the basis that the appellant was unable to attend for  health  reasons,
    having had to attend the Accident And Emergency  Department  at  Newham
    Hospital who had referred him to his GP.

 3. The appellant's wife and children did not attend the hearing either, it
    being explained to the judge that there was in  place  a  Family  Court
    order, due to expiry on 17 September 2014, which made  contacting  them
    difficult.

 4. The respondent objected to the adjournment and Judge Moore refused  the
    application  to adjourn the hearing concluding [8] that  there  was  no
    reliable evidence that the  appellant  could  not  attend  the  hearing
    because he was unfit to do so and that no members of his family were at
    the hearing to support his claim for the hearing to be adjourned;  that
    he would have expected the family to attend to support the  application
    to adjourn [9] and for the  family  to  provide  comprehensive  witness
    statements.  The judge concluded

         "I am satisfied that the appellant for his own reasons  has  chosen
         not to attend this hearing.  I do not propose  to  further  adjourn
         this hearing, but even if I was to do so, there  is  no  reasonably
         likelihood that this appellant and/or members of his  family  would
         attend any future hearing.  I am satisfied that  it  would  not  be
         unjust to proceed with the hearing and that any further delay would
         be unwarranted.  I am satisfied that it  is  in  the  interests  of
         justice that this matter should proceed and accordingly I  informed
         both legal representatives."

 5. Mr Dhanji who represented the appellant below withdrew at this point as
    he was without instructions to proceed in the appellant's absence.

 6. The judge went on to consider the  appeal,  after  hearing  submissions
    from the respondent. He concluded, materially, [31] that the  appellant
    did not have a family life with his spouse or  with  his  children  and
    thus could not meet the exceptions set out  in  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that the judge:-

      i) had failed to identify and apply the correct  test  and/or  provide
         sufficient reasons as to  why  the  appellant  could  have  a  fair
         hearing in his absence;

     ii) had failed to resolve one of the arguments advanced in  support  of
         the application, the judge failing to address the difficulties  the
         appellant faced in obtaining evidence from members of  his  family,
         there being in  place  until  17  September  2014  a  Family  Court
         preventing him from any contact with his wife or  children  despite
         the fact that they wished to reconcile and support  his appeal;

    iii) had failed to give sufficient  weight  to  the  hospital  discharge
         summary.

 8. On 18 December 2014 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted  permission
    stating:-

         "It is arguable  that  the  FFTJ's  consideration  of  whether  the
         appellant would be  deprived  from  a  fair  hearing  by  the  case
         proceeding in its absence failed to address adequately the  medical
         and family circumstances.  The case will  be  listed  with  a  time
         estimate intended to ensure time for the decision to be  remade  if
         it is found that the judge materially erred in law and both sets of
         representatives should prepare on that basis."

 9. I heard submissions from both parties.  Mr Sellwood was  aware  of  the
    relevant Family Court order and, although it had expired, was unwilling
    to produce it, the  explanation  being  that  the  Family  Court  Rules
    prohibit the production of its orders and  similar  documents,  without
    permission of the Family Court.  Mr Sellwood did, however, explain that
    he had  already  sent  a  copy  of  this  to  Mr  Whitwell.  No  proper
    explanation was given for the failure to approach  the  relevant  Court
    for directions permitting disclosure of what was clearly a relevant and
    vital document. The appellant's representatives have had ample time  to
    obtain such permission. It is wholly unacceptable to  place  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a position where it is being  asked  to  reach  conclusions
    about a document not produced to it.

10. I am, however, satisfied by what both representatives told me, that the
    order from the Family Court did prevent the appellant  from  contacting
    his wife and their children directly.  It also appears from the hearing
    notes kept by Judge Moore that the order and the summary of its  effect
    was put to him but it is unclear from the whether he was shown  a  copy
    of the order.

11. The judge's observations about the failure of the family to attend, and
    the absence of reasons for this, give no indication that he  took  into
    account the explanation that there was in  place,  until  17  September
    2014, a court order preventing contact between the appellant, his  wife
    and their children.  Such an order would inevitably  cause  significant
    difficulties in communicating any ability to attend or when the hearing
    was due to take place.  It may well be that the judge did not  properly
    appreciate the significance of the order; it may well be  that  it  was
    not sufficiently  brought  to  his  attention  by  Counsel  but  it  is
    nonetheless evident that the judge did not take the difficulties caused
    by the order, or its existence, into account when  concluding  that  he
    should not adjourn the appeal.  Indeed, he drew significant  inferences
    adverse to the appellant's case from  the  failure  of  the  family  to
    attend and support and reached conclusions about  a lack of family life
    between the appellant and his wife and children.

12. There is less merit in the submissions that the judge  failed  properly
    to have regard to the medical evidence adduced.  The  judge  was  aware
    from the records on file that the appellant  had  had  a  heart  attack
    after the Case Management Review which had taken place  in  March.   It
    appears that the appellant had been hospitalised  again  on  12  August
    2014 and discharged and that he was again taken  into  hospital  on  13
    September 2014.  In  neither case does there appear  to  have  been   a
    letter from a  GP or any other doctor stating that  the  appellant  was
    unfit to attend the hearing.  Whilst in the circumstances it  may  have
    been open to the judge to proceed with the hearing in  the  appellant's
    absence, this cannot be taken in isolation from  the  difficulties  set
    out above.  I consider that in failing to take into account the  reason
    given for the non-attendance by the family, that the judge permitted  a
    procedural unfairness capable of amounting to an error of law in  that,
    when considering whether to adjourn the matter,  he  did  not  consider
    whether the difficulties caused by the court order  had  prevented  the
    family from attending court.

13. I am satisfied that this error was material in that it is  evident  now
    that the appellant's wife and children, who attended court as  did  the
    appellant, when the matter came before me, can support his case.

14. In the circumstances, as there will now have to be  fresh  findings  of
    fact on all material issues, I consider that the appropriate course  of
    action is to remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
    decision on all issues.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision.
       For the avoidance of doubt, none of the findings made by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Moore are preserved.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul







