
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Stoke                            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 September 2014                      |On 13 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ABIMBOLA OGUNMOLA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O'Ryan, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of a panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Somal and Mrs S Singer ("the panel").  For reasons given
    in their determination dated 23 May 2014 they allowed the appeal by the
    respondent (referred to in this determination as the claimant)  against
    the decision dated 25 February 2014 refusing to  revoke  a  deportation
    order.  Such order had been made in response to an application made  by
    the claimant's solicitors on 2 January 2014.  The deportation order  in
    question was made on 11 March 2008 triggered by the conviction  of  the
    claimant on 12 September 2006 for possession of a false instrument.

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria.  His claim is that he arrived in
    the United Kingdom lawfully in 1992.  The false instrument was a forged
    passport.  The sentencing judge, His Honour Judge Carroll, give  credit
    for the claimant's guilty plea entered at the earliest opportunity  and
    considered that he  was  of  previous  good  character.   He  concluded
    however that an immediate custodial sentence was justified if  only  to
    send out a message to others.  The least  possible  sentence  he  could
    impose was thirteen months' imprisonment.

 3. The regime of automatic deportation orders was not then  in  force  and
    the Secretary of State therefore made a decision to make a  deportation
    order on 16 March 2007  which  the  claimant  appealed  unsuccessfully.
    Another panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising  Immigration  Judge
    Flynn and Mrs S Hussain dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.
    In this regard the claimant had relied on having two  children  in  the
    United Kingdom aged 8 years and 7 months and mental health issues.  The
    panel concluded there was no evidence that the claimant had been living
    continuously in the United Kingdom for fourteen years  nor  that  there
    was any evidence of companionate or compelling circumstances  and  thus
    dismissed the appeal. The decision under appeal had also taken  account
    of an application dated 11 December 2006 that the claimant had made via
    his former  solicitors  for  permanent  residence  based  on  the  then
    fourteen year concession policy.

 4. The decision of the later panel refers to the history of the claimant's
    relationship with his partner whom he had met in 2005.  Apart from  his
    time in prison, the couple had lived together until October 2011  until
    the claimant had lost his cleaning job.  His partner believed  she  was
    pregnant.  A row ensued and his partner and the children were  evicted.
    Dialogue was re-established in March 2012.  A further child was born in
    December 2012 and they moved in together again from November 2013.  His
    partner gave evidence that the claimant was close to the  children  and
    was their primary carer as she worked part- time and studied full-time.

 5. The claimant's partner who originates from Nigeria has refugee  status.



 6. The panel made these findings :

    (i)  There was fresh evidence to enable them to go behind the  findings
         of fact of the previous panel; these included the strength  of  the
         family and private life in the United Kingdom and the fact  of  the
         claimant's family having been granted refugee status  in  September
         2013.

    (ii)     It was noted that the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  the
         claimant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner
         and the two children and that they could not return to Nigeria.

    (iii)    The claimant had "not resided in UK with valid leave since  he
         arrived illegally in 1992" observing  that  he  had  absconded  for
         several years and worked unlawfully.

    (iv)     The sentence to imprisonment for thirteen months was a serious
         matter but "... not of the most serious type".   The  claimant  had
         not offended since his release from prison which demonstrated  that
         he had changed his offending behaviour.

    (v)  There were insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's partner  and
         children continuing their family life with them outside the  United
         Kingdom in the light of the grant of refugee status.   The children
         had never been to Nigeria.

    (vi)      The  best  interests  of  the   children   were   a   primary
         consideration and separating the claimant from them  would  have  a
         profound and long  term  impact  reflected  in  evidence  from  the
         claimant's partner, a witness and testimonials from friends.

 7. Having set out these findings  the  panel  concluded  that  there  were
    "sufficiently  compelling  reasons  (exceptional  circumstances)  which
    outweighed the public interest in favour of deportation".

 8. The ground of challenge by the Secretary of State is lengthy from which
    the following can be distilled:

    (i)  The panel had erred in law by failing to give genuine  and  proper
         regard  to  the  government's  view   on   what   are   exceptional
         circumstances.

    (ii)      The  panel  had  failed  to  identify  why   the   claimant's
         circumstances were exceptional and  had  failed  to  consider  that
         family life had been established  in  the  full  knowledge  of  her
         precarious immigration status and the knowledge that  the  claimant
         was subject to deportation.

    (iii)    The claimant's role as primary carer had been whilst he worked
         illegally.

    (iv)     There was no evidence that the  claimant's  deportation  would
         have a profound and long term impact on the children and there  was
         no reason why that contact could not be made from abroad.

    (v)  The fact of the  claimant  working  in  2008  and  2009  when  not
         permitted to do so demonstrated that he had not  reformed  and  may
         reoffend in the future.  His partner had been unable to  exert  any
         sufficient influence over him.

    (vi)     There was a strong public interest in favour of the claimant's
         deportation and the panel  had  failed  to  carry  out  a  thorough
         assessments  taking  into  account   consideration   of   society's
         revulsion against serious crime.

 9. In sum, the Secretary of State considered that the public interest  had
    not been  properly balanced in the proportionality assessment.

10. A detailed Rule 24  response  argues  otherwise.   There  had  been  no
    misdirection on the multi-dimensional nature  of  public  interest  and
    that there had been a correct treatment on  exceptional  circumstances.
    The other errors of law  identified  in  the  grounds  were  not  well-
    founded.

11. It was clarified before me that  the  claimant's  partner  had  claimed
    asylum in August 2012 and although refused,  she  had  been  successful
    before a judge.  That determination was not before the panel.   I  also
    queried whether the deportation dated 11 March 2008 had been served  on
    the claimant.  His case was that  it  had  not  been.   Nevertheless  I
    observed that the point had not been  raised and it was not a ground of
    appeal.

12. In the course of her submissions, Miss Johnstone acknowledged that  the
    Secretary of State's challenge was a perversity one as a consequence of
    a material misdirection of law by the panel when reaching its findings.
     She acknowledged the high standard of such a challenge.

13. For his part Mr O'Ryan argued that if I was of the view that the  panel
    had properly directed itself as  to  the  law,  the  challenge  to  the
    findings would be a disagreement. He was unsure whether the grounds  by
    the Secretary of State could be properly articulated  as  a  perversity
    challenge.

14. Candidly, Miss Johnstone accepted that the panel had correctly directed
    itself as to the law.  I consider that she was  correct  to  make  that
    concession; the panel had referred to Devaseelan  [2003]  ImmAR  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 and to the decision of the Court of Appeal in MF  (Nigeria)
    v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  In doing so, the panel had  set  out  the
    observations by the Master of the Rolls on what was to be understood by
    exceptional.  Otherwise the panel directed itself with reference to the
    familiar European law authorities including Boultif, Uner and Maslov as
    well as decisions of the  United  Kingdom  in  Beoku-Betts  and  Razgar
    giving a correct summary of the effect of those decisions.

15. Miss Johnstone clarified  her  grounds  as  discussion  developed  that
    although the panel had correctly directed itself as to the law  it  had
    misapplied the facts on the basis that  no  reasonable  Tribunal  could
    have come to the conclusion that this had.

16. By way of response, Mr O'Ryan reminded me of the nature of the  offence
    and contrasted that offence and sentence with those considered  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AM v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 and AD  Lee  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  348.   In
    addition he invited comparison with the sentence and offence considered
    in MF (Nigeria).  He contended that it had not been  perverse  for  the
    panel to have concluded  there  would  be  an  adverse  impact  on  the
    children  and  also  clarified  of  the  three  children,  he  was  the
    biological father of those born in 2007 and 2009.  He  contended  there
    was an evidential basis for the conclusion reached.

17. By  way  of  response,  Miss  Johnstone  observed  that  there  was  no
    independent evidence regarding the   impact  and  reminded  me  of  the
    period of time that the applicant had been  working unlawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom.

18. I reach these conclusions. In the light of it the acceptance  that  the
    panel had correctly directed itself as to  the  law,  I  must  consider
    whether the panel had made findings open to it on the evidence. If  so,
    it is then necessary to consider whether its conclusion on those  facts
    was within the permissible range having regard to the  public  interest
    which in appeals of this nature is weighted in favour of the  Secretary
    of State.

19. Such loading however is not fixed; the more  serious  the  offence  the
    greater the pull of the public interest.  The  panel  was  entitled  to
    observe in [27] that the offence was "not of the most serious type"  in
    the context of its analysis that the offence was for a serious  matter.
    As reminded by Mr O'Ryan, the appellant in AM was convicted of  a  drug
    trafficking offence for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  years'
    imprisonment but reduced on appeal to twelve years.  The  appellant  in
    Lee was also convicted of a Class A  drugs  offence  and  sentenced  to
    seven years'  imprisonment.   MF  was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment and in contrast with the other appellants in this trio  of
    cases, that appellant was successful before the Upper Tribunal.

20. The Court of Appeal considered in MF that there had been  a  meticulous
    assessment of the facts weighing in favour  of  deportation  and  those
    against.  There was no basis for the court to interfere.  The Master of
    the Rolls noted the concession by the Secretary of State in MF that  it
    would not be "a reasonable option" for the family members  to  relocate
    with the appellant to  Nigeria  and  that  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.

21. Each case must turn on its own facts. An  inescapable  feature  in  the
    appeal before me is the refugee status of the  claimant's  partner  and
    thus the insurmountable obstacles  of  relocation  with  the  claimant.
    Such obstacles  should  not  of  themselves  be  determinative  of  the
    proportionality exercise but it cannot be said that the panel  regarded
    them as such.

22. In my view it was rationally open to the panel  to  conclude  that  the
    circumstances  being  those  obstacles,  the  best  interests  of   the
    children, the length of time  the  claimant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the absence of re-offending  since  the  one  offence  were
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest.  Its findings on the  facts
    were properly open to it and, as accepted, the panel correctly directed
    itself as to the law. Its conclusions on  proportionality  demonstrated
    an understanding of the public interest and the decision was  within  a
    permissible range of responses to the competing  factors.   It  may  be
    that another tribunal might have taken a different view but that is not
    the test.  I am not persuaded that the panel made a legal error in  its
    decision of the kind asserted in the grounds.







23. The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.





Signed                                                     Date 12  November
    2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson




