
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00290/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2017                           |On 21 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     P T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Wawrzynczak,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated  on  20  September  2017  in
    which she allowed  the  appeal  of  PT  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to make a deportation order against him pursuant  to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  It  is,  we
    consider, unnecessary to set out in any detail the  factual  background
    to this case as it is not disputed that he has a history of convictions
    for drugs which is set out at paragraph 2 of the  decision  the  First-
    tier Tribunal nor is it in dispute that the index offence in this  case
    was the supply of Class A controlled drugs for which the respondent was
    sentenced to 24 months' imprisonment.  It is on the basis of that index
    offence that the Secretary of State took the decision to deport him.

 2. It appears that the initial consideration of the case by the  Secretary
    of State was under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 which were in force at the time that the respondent was invited to
    make representations.  It is however, we consider, uncontroversial that
    the decision letter in this case is clearly made pursuant to  the  2016
    Regulations.  Indeed these are referred to in significant  detail.   It
    is also apparent from the  decision  notice  that  that  it  was  taken
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.



 3. The judge for whatever reason does not appear to have appreciated  that
    there had been a change in the Regulations and at  no  point  does  she
    refer to the 2016 Regulations referring instead to the 2006 Regulations
    at paragraph 9.  That is clearly an error.  It is also noted  that  the
    error in this could not have been a  slip  of  the  pen  as  the  judge
    clearly sets out  at  paragraph  10  Regulation  21(6)  from  the  2006
    Regulations.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the ground  first
    that the judge had made a material misdirection of law in that she  had
    failed to apply the correct Regulations and as a result she had  failed
    properly to assess the fundamental interests of society as  defined  in
    Schedule 1 of the 2016 Scheme Regulations and in addition had failed to
    consider properly  the  requirements  of  Regulation  27  of  the  2016
    Regulations.

 5. The second ground is  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    material matters, firstly in that she had  erred  in  not  taking  into
    account the fact that  the  appellant  was  still  serving  a  criminal
    sentence when assessing his ability to reoffend  and  thus  had  failed
    properly to apply the decision in Restivo  (EEA  -  prisoner  transfer)
    [2016]  UKUT  449  (IAC);  and,  second  that  the  assessment  of  the
    reoffending in the OASys Report had been overlooked and that the  judge
    had materially erred in failing to make a complete assessment  of  risk
    posed by the respondent to society as a whole.

 6. We consider it is clear that the judge made an error  in  applying  the
    2006 Regulations rather than the 2016 Regulations.   We  are  satisfied
    also for the reasons which we now give that this  error  was  material.
    We consider that whilst Restivo is not directly relevant to  the  facts
    of this case it is significant in that what the judge  did  not  do  is
    consider what was likely to happen were the respondent to be  released.
    We consider that there is no sufficient consideration of those  matters
    and we consider also that there was no comprehensive  consideration  of
    the factors which may or may not affect the respondent's propensity  to
    reoffend, if released.  There was no consideration of how he was  going
    to live, where he would live and that he would not lapse into  criminal
    behaviour again, given that he has a history of drug  abuse  which  had
    escalated in seriousness. There  was  no  indication  that  these  were
    considered in assessing his propensity  to  reoffend.   Further,  there
    appears not to be a proper assessment of  the  general  harm  which  is
    caused by dealing with drugs in particular to society as a whole rather
    than an identification of harm to an individual.

 7. Taking these matters  together,  we  consider  that  dealing  with  the
    decision as a whole, that the error which began with the  direction  to
    follow a previous set of the Regulations which were no longer in  force
    and on which the decision has not been reached, was material in that it
    could not be said that the outcome would be the same.  Further, for the
    reasons given, the  judge  failed  properly  to  make  the  assessments
    necessary.

 8. We have considered therefore to set the decision  aside  on  the  basis
    that it involved the making of an error of  law.   We  have  considered
    whether in the circumstances we should remake the decision in the Upper
    Tribunal.  There is we consider a difficulty in doing so  and  that  is
    that the appellant has now  been  released.   That  is  we  consider  a
    significant change of circumstances and it is of course inevitable that
    there will have to be evidence as to how he has behaved,  where  he  is
    living, those he has associated with and support which would form  part
    of the picture as to whether the factors which had led  him  into  drug
    offending in the past were no longer present.  It would also inevitably
    involve the reassessment in the propensity to reoffend given the change
    of circumstances.  We consider that there  would  have  to  be  such  a
    wholesale remaking of this case that the appropriate course of  actions
    would be, bearing in mind the relevant guidance, to remit the  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. We have considered in doing so whether we should exercise a  discretion
    to make directions preserving findings of fact.  Whilst  we  note  that
    the appellant's representative has  indicated  the  factors  should  be
    found will not be preserved we are not satisfied that the circumstances
    of this case would be appropriate  to  make  such  findings  given  the
    substantial change in the circumstances which we find has  occurred  in
    this case and accordingly we  remit  the  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal without making any further directions as to  the  preservation
    of findings of fact.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 2. We remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision
    on all issues.


Signed                                  Date:  15 February 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



