
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00002/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 August and  21 October 2013             |On 25 November 2013          |
|Prepared  19 August and 22 October 2013       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            DwighT Anthony Walsh

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     (On 19 August 2013) Mr A Khan, Counsel, instructed
                    by    Kings Court Chambers
                                          (On 21 October 2013)Mr H Davies,
                    Counsel, instructed by Kings Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


On 19 August 2013 , sitting alone, I  heard the appeal of the  Secretary  of
State against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appeal  of
Dwight Anthony Walsh against a decision  to  deport.   I  found  a  material
error of law therein and therefore set aside that decision.  As my  decision
that there was an error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal was lengthy, I start  this  determination  with  that  decision  in
paragraphs 1 through 32 of the determination.  In paragraphs  3  through  12
of my decision I set out the appellant's history in Britain, details of  his
relationships and his children, and the details  of  his  convictions  which
led to the decision to deport.  At paragraph 7  I  set  out  the  sentencing
remarks of Her Honour Judge Mowat, who had sentenced  the  appellant  on  22
December  2011  to  three  years'  imprisonment  on  a  charge  of  unlawful
wounding.

At the end of  my  decision  I  set  out  directions  that  the  appellant's
representatives  would  serve  an  indexed  and  paginated  bundle  of   all
documents on which they wished to rely and also stated that  the  respondent
should serve a copy of  any  OASys  report  or  presentence  report  on  the
Tribunal and on the appellant's representatives.  I  also  stated  that  the
respondent should serve the evidence of the  concerns  expressed  by  Social
Services about the  involvement  of  the  appellant  with  his  children  as
asserted in ground 5 of the grounds of appeal.


Error of law decision
1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla and  Mr
    A  P  Richardson  J  P  (non-legal  member))  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 28 June 2013 allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Dwight  Anthony
    Walsh  against  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    deportation order against him under the provisions of Section 32(4)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.   The  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in the  appeal  before
    me I will, for ease of reference, refer to her as the respondent as she
    was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, although
    Mr Dwight Anthony Walsh is the respondent in the  appeal  before  me  I
    will, for ease of reference, refer to him as the appellant  as  he  was
    the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  23  February  1971.   He
    came to Britain in 2002 and in October that year  made  an  application
    for leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen.  He was granted
    indefinite leave to  remain  in  that  capacity  in  March  2004.   The
    appellant and his  then  wife,  Mrs  Kelly  Louise  Walsh,  have  three
    children, Kyeisha Jennifer  Walsh  born  on  23  September  2003,  Troy
    Anthony Passion Walsh born on 3 January 2005 and Latisha Natasha  Leona
    Walsh born on 10 February 2007.  The children live with their mother.

4.   In 2007 the appellant started a relationship with Ms Jane  Brooker  who
    is a British citizen.  They have cohabited for three years.  Ms Brooker
    has four children, the eldest three  of  which  have  left  home.   The
    evidence before the  Tribunal  was  that  the  appellant  had  a  close
    relationship with Ms Brooker's children and, moreover, that he saw  his
    own children regularly before he was imprisoned.

5.   In July 2011 the appellant was convicted  at  Reading  Crown  Court  of
    common assault on Mrs Kelly Walsh, his ex-wife and given a  conditional
    discharge for twelve months.

6.   On 22 December  2011  he  was  convicted  at  Reading  Crown  Court  of
    unlawful wounding and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.

7.   On sentencing the appellant, Her Honour Judge Mowat stated:-

         "The jury have convicted you of wounding, the  lesser  of  the  two
         offences open to them to convict you upon, so I bear that in  mind.
         You did not have the intent to do really serious bodily  harm;  you
         did, however, quite deliberately, slash a man across the head  with
         knife.  The injury in my opinion can properly be described  as  one
         amounting to greater harm.  It is, within the context of woundings,
         a bad wound.  It took thirteen stitches  to  put  it  all  together
         again, just about the man's hairline, and we  have  seen  from  the
         photographs some of the residue  of  blood  splattered  around  the
         house.   Witnesses  said  there   was   blood   everywhere.    Your
         culpability  is  high  because  it  was  a  completely  deliberate,
         unprovoked attack upon an absolutely innocent and unsuspecting  man
         because he had in your view disrespected you.


         So I have absolutely no  doubt  in  placing  this  offence  in  the
         category 1, and category 1 according to the current guidelines  for
         sentencers, and the starting  point  sentence  after  a  trial  for
         someone without previous convictions was three years.  In  my  view
         that is  the  appropriate  sentence  in  this  case,  three  years'
         imprisonment.  As things stand, as the current regulations are, you
         spend half of that time in custody and  you  will  be  released  on
         licence subject to recall if you reoffend or breach  the  terms  of
         your licence."

8.   A decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007  applied  was
    thereafter served on the appellant.  In the reasons  for  the  decision
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant were considered,  initially  with
    reference to paragraphs 398 and paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.



9.   Details of the appellant's children in Britain  were  noted,  it  being
    pointed out that Mrs Walsh had cared for the children since  birth  and
    while  the  appellant  was  in  prison,  and   that   the   appellant's
    relationship with her was not subsisting.

10.  The decision stated that there were no exceptional facts  raised  which
    warranted  departure  from  the  decision  to  deport  the   appellant,
    reference being made in the to the judgements of the Court of Appeal in
    SS (India) [2012] EWCA Civ 388, N (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094  and  DS
    (India)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  544.   Reference  was  also  made  to   the
    determination of the Tribunal in Omotunde [2011]  UKUT  247  (IAC)  and
    Sanade (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048  (IAC).
    With regard to the disruption of family life reference was made to  the
    judgment in AD Lee [2011] EWCA Civ  348.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    children could not be expected  to  relocate  to  Jamaica  but  it  was
    considered that the appellant could maintain contact with them  through
    modern methods of communication.

11.  The deportation order against the appellant was  made  on  16  November
    2012.

12.  The Tribunal noted the appellant's evidence at  the  hearing  that  his
    relationship with his ex-wife had broken down in  2005  and  his  claim
    that his removal would affect both his own children  and  those  of  Ms
    Brooker.

13.  With regard to the offence the appellant told the Tribunal that he  was
    acting in self defence and that he would not use a knife and  he  could
    not explain how the wound to the victim happened.  He claimed  that  he
    had been attacked but the jury had not believed him.   With  regard  to
    his conviction of common assault he said that he had not assaulted  his
    partner but had pleaded guilty because he was advised to do so  by  his
    solicitor.  He said that he could not remember what two cautions he had
    received for criminal damage.  He claimed that the incident of wounding
    had happened at a party but he had not been  there  and  did  not  know
    where the offence occurred.

14.  In paragraphs 26 onwards of the  determination  the  Tribunal  set  out
    their findings of fact.  They accepted the  appellant  had  been  in  a
    relationship with Ms Brooker for some considerable time.  They referred
    to the provisions relating to the rights of the appellant under Article
    8 as set out in the Immigration Rules  and  found  that  the  appellant
    could not benefit from those provisions.   However,  they  went  on  to
    consider the rights of the appellant under the ECHR.  They  found  that
    he had established family life with his three children as  well  as  Ms
    Brooker and took into account that he had lived and worked  in  Britain
    since he had first arrived in 2002.  They found that there would be  an
    interference with his private and family life if he were  removed,  but
    accepted that that would be in accordance with the law.  They, however,
    did  not  consider  that  the  removal  of  the  appellant   would   be
    proportionate.  They noted the two convictions against  the  appellant.
    They noted that the appellant had denied the offence in evidence before
    them despite, in his witness statement stating that he had "committed a
    serious violent crime".  They went on, in paragraph 40,  to state:-

         "Had the appellant denied the offence in his witness  statement  as
         well, that clearly would have indicated to us  that  the  appellant
         was not remorseful.  Having clearly admitted  the  offence  in  his
         witness statement and indicated his remorse, he denied the same  in
         his oral evidence.  That was puzzling for us to hear.   It  may  be
         the appellant is confused or he felt  that  he  could  advance  his
         claim by denying the offence in evidence.  Be that as  it  may,  we
         are prepared to give the appellant the benefit of the  doubt  about
         his assertions in oral evidence and accept that his assertions were
         not demonstrative of lack of remorse."

15.  Having then referred to the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  N
    (Kenya) they stated that it was clear that the appellant had  committed
    a very serious offence, that he had engaged in an unprovoked attack  on
    an innocent person and that a knife had been  used.   In  paragraph  44
    they stated that all the details of the offence  "would  indicate  that
    the public interest demanded that the appellant be  deported  from  the
    United Kingdom in the  interests  of  maintaining  law  and  order  and
    prevention of crime."

16.  They went on to state in paragraph 45 that:-

         "On the other hand, we note the sentencing judge acknowledged  that
         the appellant had not committed the offence intentionally, although
         it was an unprovoked attack on someone who the appellant considered
         had  disrespected  him.   The  appellant  was  given  three  years'
         custodial sentence which  he  has  served.   There  is  nothing  to
         suggest that the prison service  had  any  complaints  against  him
         whilst he was serving his sentence.  The appellant was assessed  as
         at low risk of reoffending and  medium  risk  of  serious  harm  to
         members of the public and those known to  him.   Whilst  we  accept
         that it was a serious offence of violence, it  was  however  not  a
         premeditated behaviour.  It was committed on the spur of the moment
         because, as the judge  noted,  the  appellant  perceived  that  the
         victim had disrespected him.   Leaving  aside  the  common  assault
         conviction which we have not considered to be a serious  matter  in
         view of the sentence that the appellant was  given,  the  appellant
         had in effect committed one serious offence during his eight years'
         residence in the United Kingdom from 2002 until  August  2010  when
         the offence was committed.  We accept that he was remorseful  about
         the matter."

17.  They then stated that the appellant had a strong relationship with  the
    children, that he had been in continuous contact with them and provided
    for them, and stated that the welfare of the children was an  important
    matter and that the appellant was an integral part of  the  process  of
    bringing up the three children together with his ex-wife.  They  stated
    that he had a genuine subsisting relationship  with  the  children  and
    with Ms Brooker who was  still  standing  by  him.   It  would  not  be
    reasonable, they considered, for her to be expected to go with  him  to
    Jamaica.

18.  In paragraph 47 they stated that  they  had  carried  out  a  balancing
    exercise between the public interest in removing the appellant  in  the
    interests of maintaining law of order and  preventing  crime,  and  the
    appellant's and his family's compassionate circumstances.  They  stated
    they were satisfied the appellant's case had  exceptional  features  to
    enable them to consider the matter on Article  8  grounds  outside  the
    Rules, and went on to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

19.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed.   The  grounds  of  appeal  first
    asserted, at some length, that the Tribunal were wrong to apply a  two-
    stage test in effect stating that the determination of the Tribunal  in
    MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) was incorrect.

20.  The second ground of appeal stated that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    give "reasons or adequate reasons" for  their  findings,  stating  that
    they failed to give their own assessment of  the  appellant's  risk  of
    harm and reoffending.  It was also claimed that  the  Tribunal,  having
    noted the appellant's lack of remorse at the hearing, had found that he
    be given the benefit of the doubt as he had expressed  remorse  in  the
    witness statement.  Moreover, he had failed to  show  remorse  for  the
    assault on his partner (I consider that this  is  a  reference  to  the
    assault on Mrs Walsh).   The  grounds  went  on  to  say  that  it  was
    submitted that it was "almost perverse" to suggest that the appellant's
    offence was  acceptable  because  he  has  perceived  someone  to  have
    disrespected  him.   The  grounds  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's
    escalating offences had been ignored  and  it  was  submitted  that  he
    remained a serious risk of harm to the public and those he knew.

21.  It was also argued that the findings regarding the  best  interests  of
    the appellant's children were inadequate given that the appellant's ex-
    partner had had to cope while he was in prison.

22.  The fifth ground stated that:

         "It is submitted that the appellant has failed to provide  adequate
         reasons as to why it is in his children's best interests for him to
         remain here to have direct contact  with  them  given  that  social
         services have expressed concerned about his involvement  with  them
         due to the impact on them of the assault on his partner."

23.   Before  the  hearing  the   respondent   submitted   further   written
    submissions which emphasised that the Tribunal had failed to follow the
    principles set down in Masih (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC)  or  to
    give explanation for the weight attached  to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation of those who met the criteria set out in legislation.

24.  They referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  SS  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 which referred to the weight which should be  given
    to primary legislation such as that in the UK Borders Act 2007.

25.  At the hearing of the appeal on  error  of  law  before  me  Mr  Melvin
    relied on the grounds of appeal, spending some time  referring  to  the
    terms of the new Rules.  He  emphasised  that  the  appellant  was  not
    living with his own children and asserted that  the  Tribunal  had  not
    properly set out the future risk posed by the appellant.

26.  In reply Mr Khan stated that the Tribunal's approach to the  Rules  was
    correct - they were entitled to follow  a  two-stage  approach  and  he
    argued that they had produced a detailed  and  rational  decision.   He
    referred to a letter written by  Mrs  Walsh  in  July  2012  where  she
    referred to the role which the appellant fulfilled in the lives of  his
    children and his closeness to them.  He emphasised  that  the  Tribunal
    had accepted that the appellant had committed a serious offence and had
    this in mind when they were  considering  the  proportionality  of  the
    deportation of the appellant.  The appellant had accepted,  he  argued,
    that he had committed a horrific crime, but Mr Khan emphasised that the
    appellant had done so on the spur of the moment.

27.  He stated that the appellant's ex-wife now had another partner and  was
    about to give birth to their child.  He argued that the conclusions  of
    the Tribunal were fully open to them on the evidence and  asked  me  to
    find that there was no error of law in the determination.

28.  I considered the determination, the  submissions  and  the  documentary
    evidence before me.  I found that there are material errors of  law  in
    the determination of the Tribunal.  Although I considered that they did
    properly consider the issue of the  rights  of  the  appellant  in  two
    stages: firstly under the Rules and secondly  under  the  Convention  I
    considered that they erred in their evaluation of  the relevant factors
    which  should  have  been  taken  into  account  when   assessing   the
    proportionality of removal.

29.  Although in paragraph 47 they stated that  they  had  carried  out  the
    balancing  exercise  between  the  public  interest  in  removing   the
    appellant against maintaining law and order and preventing crime on the
    one  hand,  and  the   appellant   and   his   family's   compassionate
    circumstances on the other, and did refer to the judgments of the Court
    of Appeal in N (Kenya) and that in OH (Serbia) in paragraphs 41 and  43
    of the determination, they did not set out why  they  had  ignored  the
    fact that the UK Borders Act 2007 makes it clear that  when  a  foreign
    criminal is sentenced to a period of imprisonment for at  least  twelve
    months the Secretary of State must make a deportation order in  respect
    of that foreign criminal.  As Laws LJ states in  SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 that:-

         "53.     ... An  Act  of  Parliament  is  anyway  to  be  specially
             respected; but all the more so when it declares policy of this
             kind. In this case, the policy is general and overarching.  It
             is circumscribed only by five carefully drawn  exceptions,  of
             which the first is violation of a person's  Convention/Refugee
             Convention rights. ... Clearly, Parliament in the 2007 Act has
             attached very great weight to the policy as a  well  justified
             imperative for the protection of the public and to reflect the
             public's proper condemnation of serious wrongdoers. Sedley  LJ
             was with respect right  to  state  that  'in  the  case  of  a
             'foreign criminal.  the  Act  places  in  the  proportionality
             scales a markedly greater weight than in other cases.


         54.  I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained
             in s.33(7): 'section 32(4) applies despite the application  of
             Exception  1...',  that  is  to  say,  a  foreign   criminal's
             deportation   remains   conducive   to   the    public    good
             notwithstanding his successful reliance on Article 8.  I  said
             at paragraph 46 that while the  authorities  demonstrate  that
             there is no rule of exceptionality for Article  8,  they  also
             clearly show that the more pressing  the  public  interest  in
             removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim  under
             Article 8 if it is to prevail.  The  pressing  nature  of  the
             public interest here is vividly informed by the fact  that  by
             Parliament's  express  declaration  the  public  interest   is
             injured if the criminal's deportation is not effected. Such  a
             result could in my judgment only be justified by a very strong
             claim indeed."

30.  The judgment in SS (Nigeria) was issued  on  22  May  2013  -  that  is
    before the hearing of this appeal.  Nowhere in the determination do the
    Tribunal acknowledge the weight to be placed on the decision to  deport
    under Section 32 of the 2007 Act.  That is, I consider, a  clear  error
    of law.

31.  Moreover, the fact that the Tribunal accepted that  the  appellant  was
    remorseful about his  offence  is  hardly  a  mitigating  factor,  when
    particularly, as in this case, the appellant acted, as  they  say,  "on
    the spur of the moment" because the appellant perceived that the victim
    had disrespected him.  It appears moreover that the appellant's assault
    on his wife was also unpremeditated. It is difficult to  reconcile  the
    conclusion that the appellant was remorseful with the  fact   that  the
    appellant  appeared to  claim  that he had   acted in self  defence  or
    was not present at the  party where the offence took place. There is no
    indication, I considered, that the  appellant  would  not  commit  such
    similar crimes in the future.  There is no indication that he has taken
    steps to ensure self-control. Moreover, the  comment  of  the  Tribunal
    that the sentencing Judge had acknowledged that the appellant  had  not
    committed the offence intentionally did not reflect what the Judge said
    in her sentencing remarks. I  further find that the Tribunal  have  not
    given any  adequate reason for concluding  that   it  is  in  the  best
    interests  of the children  for  the  appellant  to    continue  having
    contact with them given that he had assaulted their mother. The lack of
     adequate reasons for  the findings made by the  Tribunal  is  a  clear
    error of law. I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

32.   I gave  directions that the respondent  copies of any OASys report  or
    any pre-sentence report as well as the evidence  that  social  services
    had expressed concerns  abut the involvement of the appellant with  his
    children as asserted in  ground 5 of the  grounds of appeal.

Determination

33.  At the hearing on 21 October I sat with Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede.
    Mr Melvin informed us that there was no evidence from  social  services
    and that there had been no pre-sentence report.  The onus had  been  on
    the prison to prepare an OASys report but they had not done so.

34.  Mr Davies stated that there was an error in paragraph 5 of my  decision
    when I had said that the appellant had been convicted in July  2011  of
    common assault on his ex-wife.  He stated that that was incorrect.  The
    conviction had been for common assault on the appellant's  partner,  Ms
    Jane Brooker.  It appears that the fault was mine, as I had  noted  the
    letter from the duty social work assistant at Reading  Borough  Council
    dated 29 June 2012 which stated:

         "December 12 2011


         Kelly Walsh disclosure


         Ex-partner had come around to help out with the children, and while
         he was here he tried to grab some of her  stuff.   She  had  become
         angry and exploded and hit him.  He  had  retaliated  and  hit  her
         across the face.  She had called the police who had  him  arrested.
         At some point he had come around to the house  again  in  the  last
         week (the children let him in through the back door whilst mum  was
         upstairs) and managed to hit her again."

35.  It is, of course, correct that the conviction of common assault was  in
    July 2011, not in December that year.  The assaults referred to in  the
    letter from Reading Borough Council took place very shortly before  the
    appellant was imprisoned. It was therefore not the assault on Mrs Walsh
    that had resulted in the conviction.

36.  At the hearing before us the appellant gave evidence.  He  stated  that
    he was a changed person and that he recognised that he had let himself,
    his children and his partner down.

37.  Mr Davies put to him that it had been stated that he went  to  his  ex-
    wife's home and had assaulted her.  He  first  said  that  he  had  not
    assaulted her and then said that he was with Ms  Brooker  and  she  had
    needed somebody to pick up his children from school.  She (his ex-wife)
    had started an argument but she had not turned up at court.   She  said
    that that had not led to a conviction and that the judge had found that
    his ex-wife was not telling the truth.

38.  He was then asked about the conditional discharge in 2011.   He  stated
    that Ms Brooker had been beaten up by someone and returned home when he
    was in bed.  They had been arguing and the police had  been  called  by
    her daughter.  The appellant had opened the door  and  the  police  had
    spoken to Ms Brooker and she said that she and two girls had got into a
    fight.  The police had not listened to her  and  had  taken  him  away.
    That incident had not involved Mrs Walsh.

39.  With regard to the charge for wounding he first said that  he  was  not
    guilty and there had been only one offence.  He was then asked what his
    position was today and he said that he was sorry,  he  was  hardworking
    and he was sorry that his reputation had been spoiled, he had  lot  his
    job and his children.  He was asked  if  he  accepted  that  he  had  a
    problem with self-control and he  said  that  he  had  learned  by  his
    mistakes.  To show that he  was  trying  to  get  self-control  he  had
    attended various courses - he had been to a maths class, and classes in
    first aid and painting and decorating: he said  that  he  worked  in  a
    kitchen at Maidstone prison.

40.  He had only had one adjudication which was  when  he  was  being  taken
    back from the kitchen and he had not wanted to go into his cell  for  a
    few minutes so that it could be aired.  The officer had  said  that  he
    was refusing to get into his cell.  Since his sentence finished  on  22
    June 2013 he had been in detention.   He  had  been  asked  if  he  had
    undertaken any courses in self-control and he said that in Maidstone he
    had tried to learn about controlling his  feelings  and  how  to  treat
    people.

41.  He stated that his relationship with Ms  Walsh  was  now  neutral  and,
    having given the names and dates of birth of his children, he said that
    he loved them so much and they had come with Ms Brooker to see  him  in
    prison the day before the hearing and that he was worried about  Keisha
    who had now become very large and had been in tears.  She had said that
    she did not want him to get into trouble.  He said that he would  never
    let them down again.  If he were deported he did not know how he  would
    be able to keep in contact with them and did not think that they  could
    cope without him.

42.  He stated that Ms Brooker was always there for him and  would  come  to
    see him in the detention centre and they loved each  other  very  much.
    He wished to have a chance  to  show  that  he  had  learned  from  his
    mistakes.

43.  There was no cross-examination.

44.  Ms Brooker then gave evidence, stating that she had been together  with
    the appellant for seven years and they had lived together for three and
    a half years.  She has four children aged 18, 21, 23 and 25, and  three
    grandchildren.  Her youngest grandchild has Down's  syndrome.   She  is
    very close to her children and if the appellant were deported she would
    not be able to go with him, particularly because  of  the  support  she
    needed to give to the grandchild with Down's syndrome.   She  described
    her relationship with the appellant as being  very  strong  and  stated
    that his relationship with her children was also strong.  He had had an
    important role in their lives and had been the one to discipline them.

45.  She said that she would be destroyed if the appellant were removed.

46.  With regard to the conviction for assault she had said she had been  in
    conflict with someone and had gone home.  The appellant had been in bed
    and wanted to know what had happened and the police had been called  by
    her daughter.  The police had not accepted anything that the  appellant
    had said and it had gone on from there.

47.  With regard to the offence which had led to  the  decision  to  deport,
    she stated that this had happened after the appellant's father had died
    and the appellant had self-destructed at that stage, but that he was  a
    good man.

48.  There was no cross-examination from Mr Melvin.

49.  In summing up Mr Melvin relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter  and
    written submissions,  stressing  the  ratio  of  the  decisions  in  SS
    (Nigeria) and in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   He  stated
    that the appellant's crime was such that the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation outweighed any other factors, including that  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  In any event he pointed to  the  fact  that
    there were no letters  from  either  doctors  or  from  the  children's
    schools regarding the role the appellant might play in their lives.

50.  In his written submissions he had referred to  relevant  case  law  and
    stated that there was nothing  exceptional  to  the  appellant's  case.
    With regard to the children, the skeleton argument  stated  that  there
    was little evidence that the appellant's son Troy  was  suffering  from
    autism or ADHD and there was no medical evidence that he was  receiving
    medication.  Latisha had no particular problems  and  although  it  was
    alleged that Keisha missed her father  and  that  she  was  putting  on
    weight and suffered bullying from school there was no letter from a  GP
    or medical person to confirm any of her problems.

51.  In his summing up Mr Davies asked us to allow the  appeal.   He  stated
    that the appellant had accepted that he had some  problems  with  self-
    control, but that he was now in a better position to  deal  with  those
    problems.  He referred to the support from Ms Brooker and  referred  to
    what he called the appellant's "complex family situation".  He  pointed
    out that Ms Walsh now had a baby by another partner and  was  a  single
    parent with four children.

52.  He referred to the judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39 and  emphasised  the  need  to  take  into  account  the
    interests of other  members  of  the  family,  and  in  particular  the
    appellant's children.  He emphasised that the appellant had stated that
    he had a good relationship with the children of Ms Brooker  and  indeed
    they had seen him in detention.  He stated that every child required  a
    father and a mother, and by deporting the appellant  his  influence  on
    his children's upbringing would be excluded.

53.  He referred to a consideration of the appellant's rights under  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules and argued  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant would damage the interests of the children, and that this was
    an exceptional circumstance that required that the  appellant's  appeal
    be allowed.  He asked therefore that we allow the appeal.

Discussion
54.  In considering the appeal we  have  taken  into  account  the  evidence
    before us as well as that in the appellant's bundles of documents which
    were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the  appellant's  initial
    statement he stated that he had been in a serious relationship with  Ms
    Brooker for the past six years (that is, since 2007) and that they  had
    lived together with her four children.  He stated that he had seen  his
    children on a "weekly to fortnightly  basis"  and  they  had  come  and
    stayed with him and Ms Brooker.  In that statement  he  stated  he  was
    completely remorseful for what he had done, and said that he had  never
    before committed such a crime and  promised  that  he  would  never  do
    anything such as that again.  He claimed that he had always  worked  in
    Britain.  The bundle of documents shows that the appellant  had  worked
    during 2007 for J P Moran  Company  Limited  on  a  subcontract  basis.
    There is some indication that he has worked  from  time  to  time  with
    George Wimpy and Taylor Woodrow.

55.  In the second bundle there are  wage  slips  for  Ms  Brooker  and  her
    statement in which she stated her marriage had broken up  after  twenty
    years and she emphasised that  she loved  the  appellant.   She  stated
    that the appellant had worked since they met and she  referred  to  his
    love for his own children.  There are also letters  from  Ms  Brooker's
    brother and her son Keiren Brooker and other friends of Ms Brooker.  In
    a small bundle of documents lodged for the  hearing,  there  are  other
    letters of support.  In the core bundle is a statement  from  Ms  Walsh
    dated 14 July 2012 stating that they had not been together for four and
    a half months (sic)   and that the appellant had not  lived  with  them
    prior to his imprisonment as he had been living  with  his  girlfriend.
    She  stated that the  appellant  had  a  close  relationship  with  his
    children.  In particular the letter referred to the difficulties Keisha
    was having worrying about her father.  The letter however  stated  that
    all the children were doing well at school,  and  they  had  a  lot  of
    support from the school to help if any problems arose.  She stated that
    she did not know what the impact  of  deportation  would  have  on  the
    appellant's younger children but it would be difficult for her to  deal
    with all three children by herself. In the further bundle lodged before
    the hearing there is a further letter from Mrs  Walsh  dated  9  August
    2013 in which she writes about the difficulties that the  children  are
    having  and states that Keisha meets with  a  woman  called  "Flic"  at
    school for, I presume,  therapy to deal with  the troubles in her  life
    and states that  Troy suffers from ADHD and is autistic and that she is
    trying to get him into a  special  school.  In  the  bundle  there  are
    letters from Ms North of Reading Borough Council,  Dr  Kate  Martin  of
    Bath and North East Somerset  NHS  and  Berkshire  Healthcare  NHS  all
    referring to Troy's problems. Mrs Walsh refers to her  current  partner
    who also has children and doesn't live with her. She also refers to her
    own mother's illness.

56.  In considering this appeal we turn to the  position  of  the  appellant
    under the Rules, noting the terms of the  judgement  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA 1192.  We first, therefore, consider
    the new Rules, paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of HC 395.   The  appellant
    has been convicted of an offence for which he has been sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but  at  least  twelve
    months (398(b)).

57.  The appellant does have a parental relationship with a child under  the
    age of 18.  Indeed, his children are British.  It would  certainly  not
    be reasonable to expect them to leave Britain, but the reality is there
    is another family member who is able to  care  for  the  children:  Mrs
    Walsh has been looking after the children throughout  their  lives  and
    indeed the appellant has not lived with them for some years.

58.  The appellant does have a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner (Ms Brooker), a British citizen who is settled here, but he has
    not had valid leave continuously for at least fifteen years.  Given  Ms
    Brooker's statement and given the gloss that has been put on  the  term
    "insurmountable"  by  the   Court,   we   conclude   that   there   are
    insurmountable factors that would mean that she could not leave Britain
    to live with the appellant in Jamaica.  However, the terms of paragraph
    399(b)(i) and (ii) are, of course, in the alternative.   Therefore  the
    appellant's  relationship  with  Ms  Brooker  does  not  lead  to   the
    appellant's claim succeeding under the Rules.

59.  Paragraph 399A of course does not apply to the appellant.  The  reality
    therefore is that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules to avoid deportation unless  "exceptional  circumstances"  exist.
    We note the terms of paragraph 398(c) where it states that:-

         "...  the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that   claim   (the
         deportation of a person from the UK  is  conducive  to  the  public
         good) would consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if
         it does not, will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
         public  interest  in  deportation  would  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors."

         We also note the guidance in paragraph 13  of  MF  (Nigeria)  which
    quoted from the Explanatory Memorandum to the new rules.

60.   We  have  therefore  considered  whether  or  not   there   are   such
    "exceptional factors".  In considering whether there are such  factors,
    we note the terms of the discussion in MF (Nigeria)  in  paragraphs  35
    onwards  and  consider  that  the  guidance  therein    mean   that   a
    consideration of the exceptional factors in this case  is  an  exercise
    akin to a consideration of the proportionality  of  removal  under  the
    Convention.

61.  It is therefore relevant to set out our findings of fact in this  case.



62.  The appellant has lived in Britain since 2003 with leave.   It  appears
    that for most of that time he has been in work.   He  married  and  had
    three children, now aged 10, 8 and  6.   His  relationship  with  their
    mother broke down.  The interests of the children is a primary  concern
    but in assessing those interests we have to take into account the  fact
    that the appellant has never been the  primary carer of those  children
    and has been in a relationship with his current partner, Ms Brooker now
    for some years, effectively, it appears since around the time that  his
    third child was born.   There  are  assertions  by  the  appellant,  Ms
    Brooker and in Mrs Walsh's letters of July 2012 and 9 August 2013  that
    indicate that the appellant continued to be involved with his children,
    but of course that involvement had virtually  ceased  once  he  was  in
    prison.  In the correspondence from Reading Borough Council, North East
    Somerset NHS and Berkshire Healthcare Trust there is  nothing  directly
    linking his difficulties or those of Keisha  to  the  fact  that  their
    father might be deported.  There is no indication  that  the  appellant
    plays or has played for many years a central part in their lives.   Mrs
    Walsh has never given evidence in court in support of the appellant.

63.    It is also relevant that the  children  did  see  him  assault  their
    mother on two occasions.  Although the appellant has appeared  to  deny
    that that was the case, we place weight  on  the  letter  from  Reading
    Council regarding the incident in December 2011.  Given the appellant's
    conduct in the index offence and indeed his conviction for  assault  on
    Ms Brooker, we have concluded that, although no conviction  arose  from
    that incident, it is the case that he did lash out at Ms Walsh. We note
    the terms of the judgment of Sedley LJ in AD Lee  where  he  emphasised
    that the reality is that criminality can  lead  to  the  breakup  of  a
    family. We cannot conclude that the removal of the appellant  would  be
    such an interference with the rights of the appellant's children, which
    we acknowledge is a primary concern in the consideration of the  rights
    of the appellant and the children under Article 8 of the ECHR, that his
    removal   would  be  disproportionate  nor   that   in  deporting   the
    appellant the respondent would be in breach of her duties under Section
    55 of the Borders Act 2007.

63.  Turning to the appellant's relationship  with  Ms  Brooker,  we  accept
    that it is a close relationship and indeed that she would be devastated
    if he were deported.  However, though she referred to  his  involvement
    with her children, the reality is that three of them have left home and
    one at least has his own children.  The child remaining at home is aged
    18.

64.  We now turn to the index offence and  refer  again  to  the  sentencing
    remarks of her honour  Judge  Mowat  and  to  the  NOMS  report.   That
    referred to the appellant posing a medium risk of serious harm  to  the
    public and to known adults including partners.  He was described  as  a
    violent offender, and his offender reconviction  scale  indicated  that
    the probability of his being reconvicted within one year was  23%,  two
    years at 38% although the banding category is low.

65.  Although the appellant states that he has changed his ways and that  he
    is undertaking a number of courses in prison, none of these  relate  to
    anger management or the ability to empathise with the victims of  crime
    or indeed to indicate that he would be able to stop himself lashing out
    at other individuals if he felt "disrespected" or that  they  would  in
    other ways not comply with his wishes.

66.  We note the  weight  that  must  be  placed  on  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State when deciding that it is appropriate that a criminal
    should be deported.  We follow the guidance of the Court of  Appeal  in
    SS (Nigeria) which  is quoted in  paragraph  29  above.   We  conclude,
    having weighed up all these factors and indeed taking into  account  in
    particular the provisions of the Rules that the Secretary of State  was
    entitled to decide to deport this appellant.

67.  While we have placed weight on the distress the decision will cause  to
    Ms Brooker and indeed the effect that the deportation of the  appellant
    might have on his own children, and accepting that their welfare  is  a
    primary concern, we consider that the nature of the  appellant's  crime
    is such that his removal is proportionate  and  therefore  that  it  is
    appropriate to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

68.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  having  been  set  aside,  we
    dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision to deport  on  both
    immigration and human rights grounds.

Decision.
This appeal is dismissed on both immigration and human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date: 19 November 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
