
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
DA/00392/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 7 August 2013                       |On 6 September 2013       |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             mr Ibrahim Mohamed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr J Parkinson


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.       The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 9 January  1984.   He
    has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  a  panel
    consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Verity  and  Mrs  S  E  Singer,
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 14
    February 2013 seeking to deport  him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    deportation order was signed on 11 February 2013 because the respondent
    took the view that the appellant was a foreign criminal  whose  removal
    was conducive to the public good.   The  appellant  has  a  history  of
    offending and criminal convictions dating from October 2000 to  October
    2010.  On 7 October 2010 he was sentenced to a custodial sentence of  6
    months for failing to comply with his community order; and was  further
    sentenced to 32 months imprisonment  for  robbery.    The  decision  to
    remove the appellant was made under Section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act
    2007 in conjunction with section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

2.       The appellant was born on 9 January 1984 in  Burao  in  Somaliland.
    The appellant left Somaliland when he was 4 and travelled  to  Ethiopia
    where he resided for seven years.  He entered the UK on 20 January 1995
    at the age of 11 to join his father, Mohamed  Ali  Abdi  for  a  family
    reunion.  He was accompanied by his two siblings Master Abdirisaq Keyse
    Mohamed and Miss Hawo Keyse Mohamed.  The second brother arrived in the
    UK later.  The appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in  the
    UK on 28 March 1996 when he was 12 years old.

3.       The appellant lived with his father and  the  family  and  attended
    school and college.  He was then put into local authority care  by  his
    father from the age of 15 to 21.

4.       The underlying cause of his criminal  behaviour  seems  to  be  his
    addiction to drugs and alcohol. He was released from  detention  on  27
    June 2013 and is now residing with his father.

5.       Counsel accepted that his first ground could  not  succeed  when  I
    pointed out to him that  paragraph  397  deals  with  a  case  where  a
    deportation order is  yet  to  be  made.   In  this  case  however  the
    deportation order has already been signed.

6.       Counsel relied on his second ground in which  he  argued  that  the
    panel failed to lawfully consider the issue of proportionality  in  its
    consideration of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.    Counsel  relied  on  three
    issues; the first was that the Tribunal wholly and  utterly  failed  to
    apply the factors set  out  in  Maslov  and  emphasised  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal President in Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) and by the Court of
    Appeal in JO Uganda in their conclusions at paragraph 35.

7.       The  second  issue  was  that  the  panel  only  quoted  the  first
    paragraph of the sentencing judge's remarks and not the  remarks  which
    were helpful to the appellant.  Counsel argued that whilst that was not
    an  error  per  se,  it  flowed  into  the  consideration  of   further
    reoffending by the appellant.  It was put before the panel efforts made
    by the appellant to address his drugs and  alcohol  addiction  and  the
    fact that he had been drug tested in prison and found  to  be  negative
    and the appellant's personal evidence  that  he  wished  to  put  drugs
    behind him.  None of this evidence according to Counsel was  considered
    by the panel.

8.       The third issue was that the panel  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant has been in the UK since the  age  of  11.   He  was  granted
    indefinite leave at the age of 12.  He is a person lawfully present  in
    the United Kingdom for eighteen years.  The panel's  finding  that  the
    appellant is not integrated  is  concerning.   It  goes  towards  their
    failure to consider Maslov.

9.       Mr Parkinson submitted  that  paragraph  74  of  Maslov  says  that
    Article 8 provides no absolute protection  against  expulsion  for  any
    category of aliens, including those who are born in the host  state  or
    moved there in early childhood.  At paragraph 75 the  court  considered
    that for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part
    of his or her childhood and youth in  the  host  country  very  serious
    reasons are required to justify expulsion.  He submitted that the facts
    of this appellant's case do not fall into the  "very  serious  reasons"
    category.

10.      Mr  Parkinson  submitted  that  the  factors  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant are that he arrived in the UK at the age of 11.  However,  he
    spent the majority of his youth outside the UK and only seven years  of
    his youth in the UK.  The extract from  JO  Uganda  relied  on  in  the
    grounds does not refer to Maslov per se.  If it refers to some  of  the
    appellant's past in  the  UK,  then  the  Tribunal  dealt  with  it  at
    paragraph 34 where they found that the appellant had  serious  problems
    with his family.  He spent barely three years with his  father.   Since
    the age of  14  he  has  lived  separately  from  his  father  and  his
    siblings.  He said that Maslov is relied on because  that  there  is  a
    presumption that for people who are integrated and have become  a  part
    of this country, removal will have significant effect on their  private
    life.   At  paragraph  30  the  panel  found  that  family   life   was
    exceptionally limited and this was conceded by Counsel.   At  paragraph
    34  the  panel  listed  little  factual  matters  in  respect  of   the
    appellant's private life.  The panel's conclusion at paragraph  35  was
    appropriate because, following the consideration of the right  factors,
    they found that the appellant was not a person who fell into Maslov  as
    requiring very serious reasons for his expulsion.

11.     With regard to the panel's failure to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    sentencing remarks, Mr Parkinson submitted that the panel included  two
    extracts from the sentencing remarks both of which were damaging to the
    appellant and assisted him at the same time.  It was not  incumbent  on
    the Tribunal to put in every word  of  the  sentencing  remarks.   This
    would place an impossible burden on the panel.   The  panel  took  into
    account the appellant had previously failed to take  advantage  of  the
    probation services. Basically the judge said it was up to the appellant
    to re-engage with the probation service.  It was  appropriate  for  the
    panel to conclude that there would be no disproportionate  interference
    if the appellant were to be deported. Mr.  Parkinson  argued  that  the
    grounds amounted to a disagreement of the findings which were  open  to
    the Tribunal.

Findings

12.     I find that the panel materially erred in law for  the  reason  that
    they did not factor into  their  consideration  a  key  requirement  in
    Maslov, which is that the appellant is a person lawfully present in the
    United Kingdom, and has been since he was 11 years old.  If Maslov  did
    not apply because it was considered that the appellant  had  not  spent
    all or a major part of his childhood in the UK, the panel  should  have
    said so and given reasons for their finding.  Mr  Parkinson  sought  to
    argue that because the appellant had spent seven years of his youth  in
    the UK, he had not spent all or most of his childhood  in  the  UK  and
    therefore the panel were not required to give serious reasons  why  his
    expulsion was justified.  This is a novel argument because it  requires
    the panel to determine whether the time spent in the UK amounted  to  a
    major part of the appellant's childhood and  youth  in  the  UK.   This
    point was not taken by the Court of Appeal in the cases  of  JO  Uganda
    and JT Ivory Coast.  JO had arrived in the UK when he was 4  years  old
    and had been granted indefinite leave to remain when he was 13.  JT had
    arrived in the UK when he was approximately 5 years old and  was  never
    granted leave to remain.  In both JO and JT the Court of Appeal applied
    the principles in Uner and Maslov.  In allowing JT's appeal  the  Court
    of Appeal held

                   "that although very serious reasons were not required  to
         justify the expulsion of an alien who had spent his life in the  UK
         unlawfully, the fact that he had been here  since  childhood  would
         still be  a  weighty  consideration  in  the  Article  8  balancing
         exercise."

          It seems to me that the key issue in cases of this nature  is  not
    apportioning the time spent in  the  UK  as  a  youth  but  giving  due
    consideration to the fact that an applicant has been in  the  UK  since
    childhood.  In this appellant's case he has been lawfully  present  and
    lawfully settled in the United Kingdom since the age of seven  when  he
    was still a child. I find that the panel failed to give due  weight  to
    this factor in their consideration of Maslov and the proportionality of
    the appellant's removal.  Their failure to consider  this  key  element
    was a material error of law.

13.     I do not find that there is any mileage in  the  argument  that  the
    panel failed to consider  two  paragraphs  of  the  sentencing  judge's
    remarks which were favourable  to  the  appellant.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Parkinson that the Tribunal does not have to record every word  of  the
    sentencing judge's remarks as that would place an impossible burden  on
    the panel.  I do accept however  that  the  panel  were  silent  as  to
    whether the appellant was taking steps  to  address  his  addiction  to
    drugs and alcohol.  As a  consequence  the  panel  failed  to  consider
    whether the appellant was at risk of reoffending.

14.     I also agree with Counsel's  submission  that  the  panel's  finding
    that "the appellant appears not to have integrated into  the  community
    and although he has a private life in this country has only  undertaken
    limited  integration"  was  rather  concerning.   The  appellant  is  a
    lawfully settled migrant.  I therefore agree  with  Counsel's  argument
    that to  find  that  the  appellant  has  not  integrated  through  his
    residence and schooling in the UK leads to a flawed consideration as to
    the appellant's private life.

15.     For the above reasons I find that the panel made  a  material  error
    of law and their decision cannot stand.

16.     The appellant's appeal is remitted to be reheard  by  a  differently
    constituted panel of the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

17.     The appellant's solicitors are required to inform the  Tribunal  how
    many witnesses the appellant intends to call at the next hearing.

18.     Whether an interpreter is required and in what language.

19.     The limited findings of fact at paragraph 34 are to stand  with  the
    exception of the finding that he has not integrated into the  community
    and  has  only  undertaken   limited   integration.   The   appellant's
    immigration history is not also disputed.

20.     The appellant's appeal under Article 8 is to be reheard.


Signed
       Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


