
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  DA/00419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2014                |On 17th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr ndricim hoda
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Well (Malik & Malik, Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State  in relation to a Determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Oliver and Mr J H Eames) promulgated on 25th June 2014.

 2. The Secretary of State made a decision to deport the Appellant after he
    was sentenced to  two-years  imprisonment  following  a  conviction  of
    wealth    conceal/advising/converting/transferring/removing    criminal
    property. The Appellant was apprehended with 250,000 Euros in a vehicle
    he was seeking to take out of the country. It was  his  appeal  against
    that order which came before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds.  Her  reasons  for  granting
    permission were as follows:-


        "Whilst the panel set out the provisions of Regulation  21  of  the
        2006 Regulations at [42], it is arguable in their findings at  [43]
        and [44] the panel failed to  have  regard  to  the  principles  of
        proportionality  in   accordance   with   those   Regulations.   In
        particular, whether the Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present
        and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental
        interests  of  society  including  the  issue   of   rehabilitation
        identified in Essa. The panel  also  appeared  to  conflate  issues
        under the EEA Regulations with Article 8."


 5. Before me Ms Isherwood also relied upon the Court of Appeal's  decision
    in Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718. The Court of Appeal remitted  the  matter
    to be decided by the Upper Tribunal but in its deliberations  [12]  and
    [13] the Court of Appeal decided that the  question  of  rehabilitation
    under the Regulations  and  the  Article  8  assessment  were  separate
    matters to be to considered separately.

 6. It is clear that Essa [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC) has established  that  when
    considering deportation the question of whether a potential  deportee's
    rehabilitation will be prejudiced by the deportation and the effect  it
    will have on the other member State must be taken into account.

 7. Mr Well sought to defend the determination, while  conceding  that  the
    reasoning was brief, but arguing that  it  contained  enough  and  that
    paragraph 44 contained a consideration  of  all  matters  contained  in
    Regulation 21.

 8. I find that I am unable to uphold the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Despite the determination's length (12 pages),  the  findings
    occupy only two paragraphs on the  final  page.  At  paragraph  42  the
    Tribunal set out Regulation 21 but then in paragraphs 43 and 44  failed
    to deal with any of the  matters  contained  therein.  They  completely
    failed to deal with the issue of  rehabilitation  and  failed  to  give
    proper reasoning as to why it was they concluded that the Appellant did
    not constitute a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. Furthermore, the
    panel  did  not  give  reasons  or  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's wife cannot be expected to reside with him in  Albania.  In
    short, the findings and reasons are wholly inadequate. I set aside  the
    determination in its entirety.
 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and I  direct  that  it  be
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal de novo by a  differently  constituted
    panel.



Signed                              Date 17th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
