
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00448/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                 |
|On Wednesday 18 December 2019                |On Friday 10 January 2020   |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             O'NEIL GEORGE SMITH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Ms R Chapman, Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   BACKGROUND

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  However,  for  ease  of
       reference we refer to the parties as they were before the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge S Taylor promulgated on 9 August 2019 ("the Decision")
       allowing the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
       dated 27 July 2017 making  a  deportation  order  against  him  under
       Regulation 23(6)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
       Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

    2. The Appellant, although a national of Jamaica, is the  family  member
       of a Polish national who he married on 15 June 2009.  He  was  issued
       with a residence card on that basis on 23 September  2010  which  was
       renewed in 2015 for a further five years. The Respondent disputed the
       Appellant's continued entitlement to reside under EU law  as  it  was
       not accepted that the Appellant's wife had been exercising her Treaty
       rights in the  UK  throughout  the  period.   However,  having  heard
       evidence and submissions, the Judge concluded at [26] of the Decision
       that the Appellant had acquired a permanent right  of  residence  and
       therefore that the Respondent had to show  that  there  were  serious
       grounds justifying the Appellant's deportation.  That finding is  not
       challenged by the Respondent.

    3. The issue which  the  Judge  had  to  determine  therefore,  applying
       regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations is whether  there  were  serious
       grounds  of  public  policy  and  public   security   requiring   the
       Appellant's deportation on the basis that the Appellant constitutes a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  fundamental
       interests of society.  The Judge concluded at [30]  of  the  Decision
       that the Appellant does not present a genuine and present threat  and
       allowed the appeal on that basis.

    4. The Respondent's grounds assert a material misdirection in  law.   As
       we come to in more detail below, she submits that the Judge failed to
       take account of certain relevant factors and case law and that  there
       is therefore an error of law disclosed by the Decision.

    5. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Povey
       on 30 September 2019 in the following terms:


           "... 3.     The Appellant was subject  to  a  deportation  order
           issued under the EEA Regulations 2016.  He had been convicted of
           taking a child without authority and  sentenced  to  four  years
           imprisonment in September 2015.   By  the  time  of  the  appeal
           hearing, the Appellant had  been  released  on  licence  for  18
           months.  The Appellant had a permanent right to  reside  in  the
           UK.  The Judge directed  himself  correctly  on  the  applicable
           legal tests under Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations 2016.  In
           assessing whether the Appellant posed  a  genuine,  present  and
           serious threat, regard  was  had  to  recent  letters  from  the
           Probation Service and an updated OASYS report  (at  [29]).   The
           Judge concluded that whilst the Appellant was assessed as posing
           a medium risk, this, according to the Probation  Service,  would
           only crystallise into serious harm  if  there  were  a  material
           change of circumstances.  The Judge found that the Appellant was
           in a stable relationship, his partner was about to give birth to
           their child, there was  no  evidence  of  any  drug  or  alcohol
           issues, the Appellant had not re-offended since release and  had
           complied fully with his probation and  licence  conditions.   On
           that basis, the Judge was entitled to find that  the  applicable
           test under Regulation 27 was not met and gave clear reasons  for
           that conclusion at [30].
           4.    As such, the grounds disclosed no arguable errors  of  law
           and permission to appeal is refused."

    6. Following renewal of the application for permission to appeal to this
       Tribunal, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Jackson  on
       14 November 2019 in the following terms:


           "The  grounds  of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
           materially erred in law in failing to consider  the  Appellant's
           past conduct as an indicator of future risk; failing  to  attach
           sufficient weight to the Probation Service's assessment that the
           appellant  presents  a  serious  risk;  failing  to  assess  the
           seriousness of the consequences of reoffending  and  failing  to
           attach sufficient  weight  to  the  Judge's  sentencing  remarks
           showing the public revulsion and  aggravating  circumstances  of
           the offence.  These errors were material to  the  assessment  of
           whether the appellant poses a genuine, present and  sufficiently
           serious threat to  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  and
           whether his deportation  is  justified  on  serious  grounds  of
           public policy.
           The grounds are all arguable.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal
           has expressly referred to the  seriousness  and  nature  of  the
           offence as well as the  consequences  for  the  victim  and  her
           family, and the assessment that the  Appellant  posed  a  medium
           risk; these are matters which are arguably  not  properly  taken
           into account in  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  did  not
           represent a genuine and present  threat;  nor  that  there  were
           serious grounds of public policy and  public  security  for  the
           purposes of deportation.  The  first  of  those  conclusions  in
           particular is arguably contrary to the risk assessment from  the
           Probation Service and lacks reasons as to why despite  that,  he
           does not represent a genuine and present threat.
           The First-Tier Tribunal's decision does contain arguable  errors
           of law capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and
           permission to appeal is therefore granted."

    7. The appeal comes before us to determine whether there is  a  material
       error of law in the Decision and if so either to re-make the decision
       or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   RESPONDENT'S GROUNDS AND APPELLANT'S RESPONSE

    8. The Respondent's  grounds  appear  under  one  heading  of  "Material
       misdirection in law" and are discursive in nature.  Ms Fijiwala  very
       helpfully grouped those under two headings which we  come  to  below.
       We note also that, in response to our question, Ms Fijiwala confirmed
       that it was no  part  of  the  Respondent's  case  that  the  Judge's
       conclusions are perverse or irrational.

    9. We had the benefit of a Rule 24 statement from the Appellant dated  3
       September  2019  which  Ms  Chapman  adopted  as  the  basis  of  her
       submissions.

   Ground One

   10. The Respondent's ground one is as pleaded at paragraphs [7], [8]  and
       [14].  In summary, Ms Fijiwala submitted that the Judge had failed to
       take into account the seriousness of the Appellant's offence and  his
       failure to accept responsibility  for  that  offence  when  assessing
       whether he posed a threat, had failed to consider the seriousness  of
       the threat if the risk of reoffending did occur (relying on  what  is
       said by the Court of Appeal at  [18]  of  its  judgment  in  Kamki  v
       Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1715:
       "Kamki") and failed to appreciate that the OASys report and Probation
       Service letters on which reliance was placed still indicated that the
       Appellant presents a medium risk.

   11. In response, the Appellant submits in his Rule 24 statement that  the
       Respondent's  grounds  are  misleading  as  to  the  risk  which  the
       Appellant presents which had been downgraded to medium from high.  Ms
       Chapman drew our attention to certain parts of the  risk  assessments
       to which we refer below.  She also directed our attention to [27]  of
       the Decision which she said showed that  the  Judge  had  taken  into
       account the seriousness of the offence.  As to the judgment in Kamki,
       she pointed out that [18] of the judgment records a  concession  made
       by the appellant's  Counsel  in  that  case  and  the  issue  is  not
       thereafter considered by the Court.  In any event,  she  repeats  her
       submission that the Judge  has  considered  the  seriousness  of  the
       offence and the Appellant's failure to take  responsibility  for  it.
       Although we were not taken to it, [14] of the grounds refers  to  the
       case of MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 163 which held that even a low risk is relevant to  a
       deportation decision.  As the Appellant points out  in  his  Rule  24
       statement, MA (Pakistan) does not involve deportation in the  EU  law
       context.  We do not need therefore to consider that case.  We have no
       difficulty with the proposition that even a low risk is  material  to
       an assessment of threat level but that is encompassed within the test
       whether the risk is a genuine one in this  context  and  the  Judge's
       conclusion here is that it was not.  The issue for us remains whether
       the Judge has  materially  misdirected  himself  when  reaching  that
       conclusion.

   Ground Two

   12. Turning then  to  the  Respondent's  ground  two,  this  concerns  an
       asserted failure by the Judge to take into account  public  revulsion
       at the nature of the offence in this case which, as we come to below,
       involved the abduction of a child with sexual motive.  Of course,  in
       the EU law context, such factors as deterrence and revulsion are  not
       ordinarily relevant because the assessment of risk must be  based  on
       the current threat and the deportation decision cannot be founded  on
       the basis of past criminal conduct alone.   However,  the  Respondent
       draws attention to the case of R v Bouchereau  [1977]  EUECJ  R-30/77
       (27 October 1977) ("Bouchereau").  The Court of Appeal  has  recently
       held that the principles set out in Bouchereau continue to apply  (in
       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Robinson  (Jamaica)
       [2018] EWCA Civ 85: "Robinson").   Public revulsion can therefore  be
       relevant in certain types of cases.  Ms Fijiwala  accepted  that  the
       Respondent had not relied on this in her  decision  letter  (although
       that pre-dates the judgment in Robinson).  She submitted however that
       the Judge should have been on notice as to the need to consider  this
       issue due to the nature of the offence. That was therefore a separate
       error.

   13. Ms Chapman pointed out that, prior to the Court of Appeal's  judgment
       in Robinson, it had been thought that the principles in Bouchereau no
       longer applied.  The Court of Appeal concluded at [80] to  [84]  that
       the Tribunal's judgment  to  that  effect  in  CS  had  been  wrongly
       decided.

   14. Ms Chapman pointed out that, in any event, the offence in  this  case
       did not fall  within  the  exceptional  type  of  case  envisaged  in
       Bouchereau.  Whilst  she  accepted  that  the  sentencing  Judge  had
       referred to  the  Appellant's  motivation  as  sexual,  it  had  been
       accepted that there was no sexual activity involved.  She also  noted
       that the Respondent had not raised this issue and there  was  nothing
       on the face of the facts which required the Judge to consider  it  in
       the absence of such reliance.

   15. With that summary of the issues between the parties, we now  turn  to
       look at the Decision and the evidence before the Judge.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

   16. The relevant section of the Decision to which we  were  taken  is  at
       [27] to [30] as follows:


           "27.  My starting point for the consideration of this appeal  is
           the nature of the offence.  The nature of the offence  has  been
           outlined earlier in this decision and there is no doubt that the
           appellant committed a very serious  offence  for  which  he  was
           imprisoned for a period of four years.  The grievous  nature  of
           the offence is reflected in the  length  of  the  sentence.   As
           stated in the decision letter, taking a child without  authority
           is among the very worst kind of offences and the public  rightly
           expects children to be protected.  As  stated  in  the  decision
           letter, it is not only the victim who suffers as the  result  of
           the crime, which may have lasting effects on the child, but  the
           offence also causes considerable  distress  to  members  of  the
           child's family and fear in society.  The appellant took a  young
           girl, aged 12 or 13, who was in a  vulnerable  position  on  the
           streets, late at night and took her to his home, she was missing
           for a period of around 12 hours.  One can only begin to  imagine
           the distress and panic of the  child's  parents,  knowing  their
           young child had been missing on the  streets  of  London  for  a
           whole night.  It was only when the appellant  realised  that  he
           had been on television with the child that he thought to  report
           the matter to the police, after her  parents  had  reported  her
           missing and CCTV footage of the child  with  the  appellant  was
           broadcast.   I  consider  that  the  offence  committed  by  the
           appellant strikes at the very core  of  society,  one  in  which
           parents have confidence that their children can go  out  and  be
           safe.  In considering this appeal I must apply the  factors  set
           out in Regulation 27(5), where at (5)c I must  consider  if  the
           offence is one which affects one of the fundamentals of society.
            I am satisfied that the offence committed by the  appellant  is
           one  which  affects  the  fundamentals  of  society,  and  I  am
           additionally concerned that the appellant still does not  appear
           to appreciate the gravity of his  offence,  and  just  considers
           that he 'made a mistake' by not reporting the child  missing  to
           the police.  If the appellant was  not  being  considered  as  a
           family member of an EEA citizen, he had been sentenced  to  four
           years and it would only be in highly  exceptional  circumstances
           that deportation could be avoided, especially for an offence  of
           this nature.
           28.   In deciding  this  appeal  I  am  required  to  apply  the
           criteria set out in Regulation 27(5), where at (5)c the  conduct
           of  the  appellant  must  represent  a  genuine,   present   and
           sufficiently serious  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamentals  of
           society.  As stated above, I am satisfied that the offence was a
           threat to one of the fundamentals of  society,  however  I  must
           also be satisfied that the threat is genuine and present. I note
           that the decision to deport was made in  July  2017,  while  the
           appellant was nearing the end of serving  his  prison  sentence,
           and the decision was made  on  the  basis  of  information  then
           available.  For various reasons, including that this appeal  has
           been heard once and sent back to this Tribunal for a re-hearing,
           it is now two years later and the  appellant  has  been  out  of
           detention for over a year and  a  half.   I  must  consider  the
           position as it is currently, including the reports as to how the
           appellant has progressed and managed  since  his  release.   The
           appellant has submitted  a  very  long  40  page  report  by  an
           independent psychologist which  concludes,  at  paragraph  9.0.5
           that the appellant has never presented a high  risk  of  serious
           harm to the public, adults or children.  I attach little  weight
           to this report as I consider that this report flies in the  face
           of the known facts that the appellant was convicted of a serious
           offence of abduction of a minor as well as assaulting an  adult.
           However I attach weight to the updated OASys report  dated  July
           2019, and two letters from the National Probation Service  dated
           9th July 2019 and 10th December 2018.
           29.   The letter from the Probation Service dated 9th July  2019
           advises that the appellant continues to be of medium risk to the
           public.   Medium  risk  is  briefly  defined  as   there   being
           identifiable indicators of risk of serious  harm,  potential  to
           cause serious harm but unlikely unless  there  is  a  change  of
           circumstances, for example failure to take medication,  loss  of
           accommodation or relationship.  The appellant is scored  at  low
           risk of reoffending and a low risk of violent re-offending.  The
           letter advises that the appellant has been motivated to  address
           his  offending  behaviour  and  recently  started  a  structured
           programme.  At his first session he understood the material  and
           received  positive  feedback.   Since  his  release   into   the
           community there had been  no  further  offences  and  no  police
           intelligence reported  against  the  appellant.   There  was  no
           evidence of substance or alcohol misuse and no current  evidence
           of a safeguarding issue.  The probation  officer  was  satisfied
           that the appellant's risk was stable.  His current  licence  was
           due to expire on 31st August 2019 and  he  would  no  longer  be
           subject to statutory supervision.  The appellant had been  fully
           compliant with his supervision  licence,  he  was  in  a  stable
           relationship with his wife,  they  were  expecting  their  first
           child and he stated that he wished to  focus  on  being  a  role
           model  for  his  children.   The  probation  report  dated  10th
           December 2018 reported that the  appellant  had  fully  complied
           with his weekly supervision  appointments.   During  his  weekly
           reporting no concerns were raised and a police  check  confirmed
           that there was no police concerns or  intelligence  against  the
           appellant.  He continued to  address  his  offending  behaviour,
           there was no escalation of risk and  no  safeguarding  concerns.
           He continued to have stability and was employed as a chef  in  a
           local restaurant.  The appellant was re-assessed as medium risk.
            The OASys report confirmed a reassessment of medium risk.
           30.   Noting the  conclusions  of  the  OASys  report,  and  the
           probation letters, I find  that  the  appellant  was  no  longer
           assessed as a high  risk  but  was  medium  risk,  which  was  a
           category which assessed that he was unlikely  to  cause  serious
           harm unless there was a change of circumstances.  The  appellant
           had no issues with drugs, alcohol or medication,  he  was  in  a
           long term relationship being married  10  years  and  they  were
           expecting a baby.  He had not committed offences since 2015  and
           there was no  adverse  police  intelligence,  he  had  now  been
           employed for over a year with  the  same  employer  and  he  had
           complied with all requirements of the probation service.   Given
           the contents of the probation reports I cannot be satisfied that
           the appellant  represents  a  genuine  and  present  threat,  as
           required by  Regulation  27,  notwithstanding  the  serious  and
           disturbing nature of the index offence.  Applying Regulation  27
           I cannot find that the  appellant  meets  the  test  of  serious
           grounds of public policy  and  public  security.   Even  if  the
           appellant did not have permanent residence, given the conclusion
           of the probation reports I could not find that even the tests of
           the lower requirement of public policy and public  security  had
           been met, as Regulation 27 applies to both tests."

   17. The OASys report and letters from the Probation Service to which  the
       Judge refers at [29] of the Decision are to be found at  pages  [108]
       to [145] of the Appellant's bundle.  Ms Chapman drew our attention to
       the risk scores as set out in those documents.  In the letter dated 9
       July 2019, the Appellant risk of reconviction is low (13%  within  12
       months and 24% within 24  months).   Assessment  under  the  Violence
       Predictor which predicts reoffending  involving  non-sexual  violence
       leads to a score of 6% within 12 months  and  11%  within  24  months
       which is a low risk.  In relation to General Predictor which predicts
       general offending the Appellant scores 6% within 12  months  and  10%
       within 24 months and is also ranked as low.   Those scores appear  in
       the OASys report at R11.12 under the heading of "Current  Situation".
       That report concludes that the Appellant "is  currently  assessed  as
       posing a medium risk to the public, known adult and children" because
       of the nature of the offence.  The Appellant's licence expired on  31
       August 2019.  The Probation Service letter  dated  10  December  2018
       confirms the downgrading of the risk posed by the Appellant from high
       to medium.

   18. We make the  following  observations  about  this  evidence.   As  Ms
       Chapman pointed out and we accept, the evidence,  in  particular  the
       letter dated 9 July 2019, is a very full and detailed  assessment  as
       to risk.  Second, the summary of that evidence as considered  by  the
       Judge at [29] of the Decision is not challenged.  What is at issue is
       whether the assessment reached based on that evidence contains errors
       due  to  failures  to  consider  certain  factors.  Third,  the  risk
       assessment contained in those documents is one carried out  following
       the  Appellant's  release  from  prison  and  therefore  reflects  an
       assessment  of  the  current  risk  following  consideration  of  his
       behaviour whilst at liberty.

   19. Turning then to the  Respondent's  ground  one,  dealing  first  with
       whether the Judge properly took account of  the  seriousness  of  the
       offence, the nature of it and the Appellant's failure to  accept  his
       culpability, we are satisfied that he  did.   We  do  not  accept  Ms
       Fijiwala's submission that [27] of the Decision does not form part of
       the Judge's consideration of the overall risk.  It  is  evident  when
       paragraphs [27] to [30] are read together that they are all  part  of
       the overall reasoning leading to the conclusion reached at [30].  The
       Judge therefore took account of the seriousness  and  nature  of  the
       offence as well as the Appellant's "failure to appreciate the gravity
       of his offence".

   20. Dealing then with the point  arising  from  the  judgment  in  Kamki,
       whilst we accept as Ms Chapman submitted that what is said at [18] is
       based on a concession, the Court expressed its  agreement  with  that
       concession as realistic.  The concession there made is  that  "it  is
       legitimate to look both at the likelihood of  re-offending  occurring
       and at the  seriousness  of  the  consequences  if  it  does".   That
       concession has to be read in context  because  it  appears  that  the
       previous position of the appellant in that case was that it  was  not
       legitimate to consider what would happen if  the  risk  arose;   this
       appears to have been the reason why permission to appeal was  granted
       applying the second appeals test.  Further, the  concession  was  not
       that a Judge is bound to have regard to that factor; due no doubt  to
       the way in which the issue arose in  Kamki  that  was  not  relevant.
       However, in this case we do not need to consider whether that follows
       from the concession made in Kamki because, in any event, our view  is
       that the Judge did take into account  the  seriousness  of  the  harm
       which would be caused in the event that the risk arose.  At  [29]  of
       the Decision the Judge referred to  the  definition  of  medium  risk
       which, as he rightly noted, was a risk of "serious  harm".   That  is
       reflected in the Judge's conclusions at [30] where he again refers to
       the risk being one of "serious harm".  It is also  notable  that  the
       Judge did not say in his conclusions  that  the  risk  posed  by  the
       Appellant if it arose  would  not  be  "sufficiently  serious".   His
       conclusion is that the risk was not genuine  and  present  given  the
       content of the risk assessments and the factors referred to therein.

   21. Finally in relation to ground one, as  we  note  at  [11]  above,  we
       accept the proposition that even low risk  does  not  mean  no  risk.
       However, in the EU law context, the issue is whether the  risk  is  a
       current and real one.  The Judge recognised that  medium  risk  still
       meant that there was a risk.  However, the categorisation meant  that
       the risk  was  unlikely  to  occur  unless  there  was  a  change  in
       circumstances  ([29]).   The  Judge   went   on   to   consider   the
       circumstances of the Appellant and whether those might change at [29]
       and [30] of the Decision and those form part of his  conclusion  that
       the risk was not one likely to occur and therefore not present.

   22. We turn then to  ground  two.   The  principle  to  be  derived  from
       Bouchereau is as set out at [84] and [85] of the judgment in Robinson
       as follows:


           "84....As I have said in my earlier analysis of Bouchereau, that
           case itself recognised that what one is looking for is a present
           threat  to  the  requirement  of  public  policy;  but  it  also
           recognised that, in  an  extreme  case,  that  threat  might  be
           evidenced  by  past  conduct  which  has  caused   deep   public
           revulsion.
           85.   However, with all of that said, I am also of the view that
           the sort of case that the ECJ had in mind in Bouchereau, when it
           referred to past conduct alone as potentially being  sufficient,
           was not the present  sort  of  case  but  one  whose  facts  are
           extreme.  It is neither necessary  nor  helpful  to  attempt  an
           exhaustive definition but the sort of case that  the  court  was
           thinking of was where, for example, a person has committed grave
           offences of sexual abuse or violence against young children."
           [our emphasis]

   23. We accept that this appeal concerns an offence against  a  child  and
       that the sentencing Judge noted the sexual motivation for the  crime.
       However, as Ms Chapman points out, the Appellant was not involved  in
       any sexual activity with the minor.  As such, the facts of  the  case
       fall short of the example given in Robinson.   Further,  and  in  any
       event, as the Court noted in Robinson, the circumstances in which the
       principle arises are ones with extreme facts.   Whilst  this  offence
       might be described as unusual, we are  far  from  convinced  that  it
       could be said to be extreme.  That brings us to the main  reason  why
       we do not find an error of law disclosed by this ground and  that  is
       because the  Respondent  did  not  suggest  that  the  principle  was
       relevant.  It may well have been open to her to argue that  this  was
       such an extreme case that the principle applied but it is not  raised
       in the decision letter and, even if that was because that letter pre-
       dated Robinson, there is nothing to show that any submission was made
       to the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the principle applied.   Whilst
       it is open to  a  Judge  to  take  into  account  a  legal  principle
       established in another case whether or not a submission is made  that
       it  applies,  the  Bouchereau  principle  is  highly  fact  and  case
       sensitive. The Judge was not therefore obliged to consider it  unless
       its relevance was raised.

   24. We have carefully considered whether it can be said  that  the  Judge
       should have taken the point for himself in  light  of  what  he  says
       about the nature and seriousness  of  the  offence  at  [27]  of  the
       Decision.  However, we have decided that he was not  required  to  do
       so.  What is there said is in an  entirely  different  context.   The
       Judge  was  there  considering  whether  the  threat  goes   to   the
       fundamental interests of society rather than whether  the  nature  of
       the criminal conduct  is  so  extreme  as  to  give  rise  to  public
       revulsion  which  of  itself  justifies  deportation  based  on  past
       conduct.  Whilst the Judge's findings there are that the offence  was
       a very serious one, we do not read that as finding that the case  was
       so  extreme  as  to  bring  the  Bouchereau  principle   into   play,
       particularly when neither party placed reliance on it.

   25. For those reasons, we are satisfied that the grounds do not  disclose
       any error of  law  in  the  Decision.   Accordingly,  we  uphold  the
       Decision with the consequence that  the  Appellant's  appeal  remains
       allowed.

   Conclusion

   26. For the above reasons, the Respondent's grounds do not establish  any
       material error of law.  We therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION
We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Decision  of  Judge  S  Taylor
promulgated on 9 August 2019 does not contain any material error of law.  We
therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the  appeal  of  the
Appellant (Mr Smith) remains allowed.
Signed           [pic] Dated: 18 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
