
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
DA/00542/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 October 2018                       |On 27 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                burhan hassan
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No Appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The  respondent,  whom  I
    shall  call  "the  claimant",  did  not  appear  by  himself   or   any
    representative.  Notice of the hearing had been served on him  in  good
    time and in the circumstances, I decided it was appropriate to  proceed
    in  his  absence,  which  I  therefore  did.    Mr  Lindsay  made  oral
    submissions and I reserved my judgment.  Mr Lindsay has since  sent  me
    submissions dated 24 October 2018, headed 'Secretary of State's Written
    Submissions for Continuance Hearing Held at Field House on  23  October
    2018'.   I have no idea what a "continuance hearing" is, but  there  is
    no doubt that these submissions post-dated the hearing  of  the  appeal
    before me, which was the hearing to which the claimant was invited.  It
    would be quite wrong for me to  take  any  notice  of  the  submissions
    subsequently sent by Mr Lindsay, and I have not done so.

 2. The claimant is a national of  the  Netherlands,  born  in  1998.   His
    history is not entirely clear, but it is claimed that he  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2001.  Certainly, there are  numerous  references  to
    his being here in the succeeding years, and it is clear  that  much  of
    his schooling took place in the United Kingdom.  It appears that he was
    away from the United Kingdom between about  October  2013  and  October
    2015: he went with his mother to Kenya to study.  The assertion appears
    to be that the claimant's father has been working in the United Kingdom
    continuously since at least 2008 as a taxi driver, but it is  not  easy
    to see that any continuous occupation of that sort is supported by  his
    HMRC records.

 3. In the summer of 2016, relatively shortly after  his  return  from  his
    absence in Kenya, the claimant appears to have begun a life  of  crime.
    There are so many  offences  and  Court  appearances  within  the  next
    eighteen months that it is not easy to provide a coherent statement  of
    them.  There are, altogether, eight drugs offences, including,  on  the
    most recent conviction, three offences of  possession  of  cannabis,  a
    class B drug, within intent to supply; there are two offences of having
    a bladed article in a public place; and  there  are  altogether  twenty
    offences, the subject of convictions on six separate occasions  between
    27 October 2016 and 6 November 2017 inclusive.  What is of note is that
    amongst those offences are offences of  breach  of  bail,  and  that  a
    number of the offences were committed while the claimant was either  on
    bail or subject to a community order.  He was  also  convicted  of  the
    offence of obstructing a search for drugs.  There were two  substantial
    prison sentences, of six months and eight months in a young  offenders'
    institution; there were also shorter prison sentences.

 4. Following a formal notice of intent, a  deportation  order  was  signed
    against the claimant on 9 June 2017.  He appealed against it.

 5. There was a case management hearing, at which  preparations  were  made
    for the full hearing,  including  indications  that  Counsel  would  be
    instructed, and the booking of an interpreter in the  Somali  language,
    which the claimant said he would need.  When  the  matter  came  before
    Judge Cockrill on 8 August 2018, however, there was no appearance by or
    on behalf of the claimant.  He proceeded in the claimant's absence.  By
    his decision, signed on 13  August  2018,  he  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal.  The Secretary of State now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal,  with
    permission, against that decision.

 6. As the claimant is a national of a Member  State,  his  deportation  or
    expulsion is governed by articles 27 - 28 of  the  Citizens  Directive,
    2004/38/EC, implemented in the United Kingdom, so far  as  is  relevant
    for the purposes of this appeal, by Regs 23(6)(b) and  27(1)(2)(3)  and
    (4) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.   The
    overriding rule is that the basis for the decision must be "grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health"; a decision  taken  on
    such grounds is a "relevant decision" for the purposes of Reg 27.

 7. Regulation 27(3) and (4) read as follows:

         "(3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may  not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA National who -


            (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
              of at least ten years    prior to the relevant decision; or
            (b) is under the age of 18...."

 8. Article 15 provides that an EEA National who has resided in the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with these regulations for a continuous period of
    five years acquires a permanent right of residence, but by  Reg  15(3),
    "the right of permanent residence under this regulation is lost through
    absence from the United Kingdom for a period exceeding two years."

 9. Having reminded himself of those provisions, Judge Cockerill  proceeded
    to determination of the appeal before him.  He  remarked,  twice,  that
    for that purpose it was crucial to determine whether the  claimant  had
    either of the levels of protection afforded by Reg 27.  His primary and
    principal conclusion was that the claimant had  the  highest  level  of
    protection, and could therefore be removed only on  imperative  grounds
    of public security, which, the judge concluded, clearly did  not  apply
    in the present case.  In the alternative, the judge concluded that  the
    claimant had the middle level of protection, deriving from a  permanent
    right of residence, but that even if he  were  entitled  only  to  that
    level of protection, there were no serious grounds of public policy  or
    public security which merited his deportation.  It would  appear  clear
    from his recognition that it was crucial to determine whether either of
    the levels of protection  did  apply,  that  if  neither  of  them  had
    applied, the judge would have dismissed the appeal.

10. As argued in the grounds of appeal and orally before me by Mr  Lindsay,
    it is clear that the judge made a number of errors of law  in  reaching
    the conclusions he did.

11. It is convenient to begin with the acquisition of the  permanent  right
    of residence.  As I have already indicated, and as  was  apparent  from
    the materials before the judge, which he mentions in his determination,
    the claimant had been absent from the United Kingdom from about October
    2013 to October 2015.  The exact dates were not specified,  and  it  is
    clear that that period, as so described, could have exceeded two years.
     It was for the  appellant  before  the  judge  to  show  that  he  had
    acquired, and had not lost, a permanent right of residence.  There was,
    in my judgment, no sound evidential basis upon which  the  judge  could
    properly conclude that any  permanent  right  of  residence  which  the
    claimant had acquired before October 2013 had  not  been  lost  by  his
    absence.  The judge therefore erred  in  law  by  concluding  that  the
    claimant had, at the date of the expulsion decision, a permanent  right
    of  residence.   Under  those  circumstances  he  could  not  have  the
    intermediate level of protection, which depends on a permanent right of
    residence.

12. In relation to the highest level of protection, the judge wrote this at
    [33]:

             "What I should emphasise, is that in  calculating  a  10  year
             period, it is not necessary to calculate back a 10 year period
             from the date when the deportation decision was taken.  Any 10
             year period would be sufficient."

13. That, in my judgment, is not correct either.  Although the  words  used
    in the  regulation,  which  I  have  set  out  above,  are  potentially
    ambiguous,  the  ambiguity  is  wholly  removed  by  reference  to  the
    directive which they implement.  Article 28.3(a) refers to a person who
    has "resided in the host Member State for the previous ten years".   In
    those circumstances, it does not appear to me that there  is  any  real
    scope for  suggesting  that  the  potential  ambiguity  in  the  United
    Kingdom's implementation of the directive is  to  be  resolved  in  the
    sense indicated by the judge.  The CJEU has held in its judgment  in  G
    (C - 400/12) at [35] that the period of ten years specified in  article
    28.3(A) is to be  calculated  back  from  the  date  of  the  expulsion
    decision.

14. Secondly, and crucially, the CJEU held in its judgments in B and Vomero
    (C - 316/16 and C - 424/16), that the highest level of protection could
    be enjoyed only by a person who had a permanent right of  residence  in
    the host Member State.  Thus,  in  this  case  as  in  any  other,  the
    claimant's failure to establish his entitlement to the middle level  of
    protection shows equally that he is not entitled to the  highest  level
    of protection.

15. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was  evidently  motivated  by  its
    erroneous application of the law to the facts and the evidence  in  the
    case before it.  I set Judge Cockrill's decision aside.  I  proceed  to
    remake the decision on the claimant's appeal.  The claimant has made no
    submissions to this Tribunal.  As I have already indicated, the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, to whom submissions were made in writing  but  not
    personally, evidently took the view that without either of  the  higher
    levels  of  protection  the  claimant  would  have   been   liable   to
    deportation.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  made  before  the
    claimant's most recent convictions, points out that:

             "Your convictions indicate an established pattern of  repeated
             offending within a relatively short period of time.  The  fact
             that you have continued to offend without  being  deterred  by
             previous convictions or sentences indicates that  you  have  a
             lack of regard for  the  law,  a  lack  of  remorse  for  your
             offending behaviour,  and  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the
             negative impact your offending behaviour has on others."

16. I agree.  It further seems to me that a lack of regard for the  law  is
    shown by the claimant's bail offences, commission  of  offences  whilst
    subject to community orders, and the offence in relation  to  searching
    for drugs.  I can see no basis for saying that the claimant is a person
    whose removal is not justified on grounds of public policy  and  public
    security.

17. Looking separately at the issue of proportionality,  I  note  that  the
    claimant's removal will be to the Netherlands, the country of which  he
    is a national.  Although he does not speak Dutch, he has grown  up  and
    been educated in the United Kingdom, and (despite  his  request  for  a
    Somali interpreter at  the  hearing)  I  must  assume  that  he  speaks
    English, the language spoken by the vast  majority  of  people  in  the
    Netherlands.  There is no reason to suppose that he would  not  readily
    establish himself there.  Although he has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for much of his childhood, he recently spent an extended period of time
    in Kenya, a country of which he is not a national,  and  evidently  was
    able to conduct his life there.  On  the  basis  of  all  the  material
    before me the Secretary of State's  decision  to  deport  the  claimant
    appears to me to be both justified and proportionate.

18. I therefore substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 19 November 2018.

