
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00461/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 May 2013                                |On 3 June 2013               |
|Prepared 20 May 2013                          |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                          leland edward Mcclincton

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, of Counsel instructed by Messrs J D
Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Hayes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant,  a  citizen  of  America  born  on  13  September  1976,
    appeals, with permission, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford and Mrs S I Hewitt)  promulgated
    on 11 December 2012 in which the  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a deportation order  dated  25  June  2012  following  a
    decision to deport under the provisions of  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant's mother is British and his father  American.   He  first
    entered Britain on 28 July  1987  with  his  younger  brother  and  his
    parents.  He was then aged 10 years and 10 months.  On 15 May  1989  he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain.

3.   The appellant has 37 convictions, six for offences against  the  person
    between 1992 and 2011, two against property between 1993 and  2002,  21
    offences of theft and kindred  offences  between  1992  and  2011,  six
    public order offences between 1997 and 2005, 23  offences  relating  to
    police/courts/prisons between  2001  and  2010,  three  drugs  offences
    between 2001  and  2011  and  two  firearms/shotguns/offensive  weapons
    offences between 1994 and 2010 as well as  six  miscellaneous  offences
    between 1998 and 2004.  The appellant it appears has therefore offended
    regularly between the age of 16 and his last offences, in 2011 when  he
    was aged 35.

4.   When considering the appeal the Tribunal noted in  particular  that  on
    13 June 2003 the appellant had committed a common assault  on  a  child
    which had led to him being imprisoned for four weeks, on 30  July  2003
    he had been imprisoned for 21 months  for  grievous  bodily  harm  with
    intent after he had hit his victim a number of times over the head with
    a metal brace so that the victim had  needed  seventeen  staples.   The
    appellant had said that the victim of his attack had stolen the child's
    bike bought with financial assistance from the appellant and that  this
    had outraged the appellant.

5.   They also  noted  that  on  10  August  2005  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of wounding and sentenced to four years' imprisonment  -  the
    appellant had stated that he had used a potato peeler in  self  defence
    and in defence of his pregnant partner and that the victim had been one
    of two drugs users who had broken into his home.  The  tribunal   noted
    also that on 5 November 2010 the appellant had committed an offence  of
    common assault against his then partner, LT, the mother of his son,  O,
    who had been born in  February 2010 and  that  the  offence  had  taken
    place in front of his son.

6.   They noted that the offence which had led to  the  decision  to  deport
    had been that whilst on bail for other offences  in  January  2011  the
    appellant had entered a newsagent's shop  with  another  man,  his  co-
    defendant, threatened the shop assistant and that  the  shop  assistant
    had sustained some  injuries  although  they  were  not  deemed  to  be
    serious.  The appellant had then been sentenced to imprisonment for  21
    months in April 2011 with a further three  months  for  an  offence  of
    theft.

7.   In  paragraph 17 of the determination the  Tribunal  stated  that  they
    had heard evidence from the appellant, his father and his mother  about
    his criminal history and they were satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    begun to get into trouble with the authorities from the age of 13  when
    he had started to smoke cannabis and to drink.  He had used heroin from
    the age of 18 and attributed most of his criminal behaviour to his drug
    habit.

8.   They noticed the sentencing remarks of the  His  Honour  Judge  Darroch
    when sentencing  the appellant for his last offence, although they  did
    not quote from these in full.  I have considered the sentencing remarks
    and I think it relevant to note that the judge stated:-

         "At a comparatively early hour in the morning in January two people
         bursting into a shop where there is one person  on  his  own  is  a
         frightening experience; that is the first point.  The second  point
         is small businesses just cannot afford to stay in business if  they
         lose their takings: up go their insurance policies, they lay  staff
         off and they close down, they are very vulnerable in fact so courts
         have to protect businesses of this nature.


         To your credit you have both pleaded guilty.  The amount of force I
         accept is less than in  many  cases,  I  think  it  is  correct  to
         describe it as a struggle rather than an all out  attack  upon  the
         person.  The amount of money taken is not the largest one sees  but
         is significant for business of the  type  I  have  mentioned.   You
         McLeland [sic] were on bail at the time, both of you have a  number
         of convictions.  You  accept,  quite  rightly,  that  an  immediate
         prison sentence is going to follow, I shall keep it as short  as  I
         can but it must be significant.


         Each of you for this robbery will be sentenced  to  a  term  of  21
         months' imprisonment.  Mr  McLeland  [sic]  in  addition,  for  the
         assault on your wife I impose a three  month  consecutive  sentence
         making two years in all.  I take no action on  the  breach  of  the
         conditional discharge, there is no separate penalty  on  the  other
         matters.  I have taken into account the offences to be  taken  into
         account."


9.   In paragraphs 19 onwards the Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    three children with three different partners.  His eldest son had  been
    born in January 2000 and the appellant had  had  no  contact  with  him
    since 2009 and there was very little evidence of  contact  before  that
    time.  They found that the appellant did not have a genuine  subsisting
    relationship with that son.

10.  His second child was born in July 2005  and  again  the  appellant  had
    said that he had no contact with that child since 2009 and there was no
    evidence before the court from the mothers of either of those children.
     The appellant had said that the mothers had said that they would  need
    to see a significant  change  in  his  behaviour  before  they  allowed
    contact again.

11.  The Tribunal noted that O  had been born in February 2010 and that  his
    mother had written in August 2012 stating that she  and  the  appellant
    had been living together for approximately two years.  The  appellant's
    son had not seen him for over a year and it was his  mother   whom  the
    appellant had assaulted in November 2010.  The Tribunal concluded  that
    the appellant had not seen O between November 2010 and August 2012,  he
    having been only 9 months old in November 2010.

12.  It was the appellant's evidence that he had seen O  on  eight  or  nine
    occasions in the three months prior to the hearing.

13.  LT had stated that O had asked for the appellant on a daily  basis  and
    remembered his voice and had  stated  it  is  important  that  "despite
    Leland's mistakes" he was still his son's father.  It appeared from the
    pre-sentence report that that LT continued  to  be  frightened  of  the
    appellant.  It was the appellant's evidence that LT was  in  a  settled
    relationship and was engaged and due to be married in 2013.

14.  The Tribunal  noted that there was no witness statement from LT.

15.  The Tribunal stated they were surprised  that  during  the  hearing  to
    find that neither the appellant's mother nor his father were aware that
    LT was engaged to be married to her current partner  in  2013  or  that
    there had a serious incident of domestic violence between the appellant
    and LT.

16.  In paragraph 30 they concluded that the appellant  was  engaging  in  a
    significant degree of manipulation of both LT and  their  child.   They
    stated they were concerned that the appellant would seek to disturb the
    stability which LT and the child now had for his own ends.

17.  In paragraph 32 the referred to the pre-sentence report which  although
    it noted that the appellant was motivated to address his  drug  use  it
    stated that:-

         "Until he is able to demonstrate his ability to sustain any  change
         within the community and lead a drug-free life  for  a  significant
         period of time, he is assessed as posing a  high  risk  of  serious
         harm to the public, including partners."


18.  They noted further that  the  appellant  had  engaged  with  the  CARAT
    service and that his methadone prescription had gradually been  reduced
    from 45 mls to 16 mls.  He had completed a building skills for recovery
    treatment,  a  three  day  relapse  prevention  course  and  had   also
    volunteered for frequent  testing  programme.   They  referred  to  the
    circumstances set out in the pre-sentence report in which the appellant
    had assaulted LT.

19.  In paragraphs 34 onwards they considered a report  on  the  psychiatric
    health of  the  appellant  by  Dr  Sarah  Isherwood.   They  noted,  in
    particular,  the circumstances in which the  appellant  had  refused  a
    random drug  test  in  October  2012  for  which  he  had  received  an
    adjudication.

20.  They noted that Dr Isherwood stated that in her opinion it  was  likely
    that removal of the appellant from Britain would have a negative impact
    on his health.  She stated that he had maintained  close  contact  with
    family  members  and  that  appeared  to  be  an  important  source  of
    psychosocial support and be important to his continued  recovery.   She
    indicated that his mood might, if he were removed,  deteriorate further
    and he might develop a depressive episode.

21.  The Tribunal commented that it did not appear  that  Dr  Isherwood  had
    had a complete picture as to the appellant's violent behaviour and  his
    current  circumstances.   Moreover,  they  did  not  consider  that  Dr
    Isherwood had attached  appropriate  significance  to  the  appellant's
    refusal to take a drug test.

22.  In paragraphs 45 onwards the Tribunal  set  out  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and of his parents.  It was his parents' evidence  that  they
    could not offer the appellant accommodation on his release from prison,
    and that their  income  was  limited  and  they  could  not  afford  to
    financially support the appellant either in Britain or in America.   It
    was the appellant's evidence that he  had  not  had  contact  with  his
    parents  for  a  twelve  month  period  during  his  recent  period  of
    imprisonment.

23.  The Tribunal  noted that the appellant's father had said  that  he  had
    seen a new maturity in the appellant when he had visited  him  after  a
    period of time in prison and noted that the appellant's mother saw  the
    appellant's two eldest children on a regular basis.  The appellant  had
    not kept his parents informed of his criminal behaviour after  the  age
    of 19/20.

24.  It appeared that the appellant's father had a brother, a  sister-in-law
    and sister living in America, his sister was retired and  she  and  her
    husband spent time travelling around America.  The appellant  had  some
    cousins in America but it was  not  known  if  the  appellant  had  any
    contact with them.  His parents stated that they did  not  really  know
    what the effect would be  on  the  appellant  if  he  were  removed  to
    America.

25.  The Tribunal noted the appellant's evidence that he had worked  in  the
    building trade as a roofer and a fitter but  that  he  had  spent  many
    years unemployed due to his drug habit  and  due  to  injuries  he  had
    suffered in various road traffic accidents.

26.  The appellant's evidence was that LT was not frightened of him.

27.  In paragraphs 64 onwards the Tribunal set out their  findings  of  fact
    and their conclusions.  They noted that the appellant had spent much of
    the past ten years in prison, that he had reduced his methadone  script
    but that he was not yet drug-free and that he  had  pleaded  guilty  to
    every offence with which he had been charged.  He had never engaged  in
    any  anger  management  course.   They  considered  the  appellant  was
    manipulative in his relationship with LT and they quoted from a  letter
    from her to the appellant in which she had stated:-

         "I hate how things are and  how  they've  turned  out  but  there's
         nothing we can do to change it.  You have got a lot to do and prove
         to me before I can let you into Olli's life.  I'm sorry Leland  but
         that little boy is my life and I can't bear to think what all  this
         has done to that little boy".


28.  Having further considered the relationship between the appellant and  O
    the Tribunal stated the appellant was currently not in  a  position  to
    offer his son a stable home.

29.  In paragraph 71 they stated the appellant  knew  little  about  America
    but stated they were satisfied that the way of life and culture in  the
    US was not alien to  him.   They  referred  to  crossover  between  the
    culture of the US and the culture of the UK and stated that English was
    the predominant language in America.  The appellant would  be  able  to
    access emotional support from his parents and his  brother  by  way  of
    telephone calls and internet communication and could  speak to them  on
    Skype.

30.  They stated it had not  accepted  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his first two children and that in  relation  to  his
    third they did not accept that eight or nine visits to  prison  in  the
    last three months had been a sufficient basis on which to conclude that
    the appellant had a genuine subsisting parental relationship with  him.
    There was no proposal that the appellant should be that child's primary
    carer.  They emphasised that a child needed stability in his  life  and
    stated that there would be a long time before the  appellant  would  be
    able to get his life in order and  could contemplate seeing any of  his
    children.

31.  In paragraph 77 they refer to the judgments of the  European  Court  of
    Justice  in Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 546 and �ner [2006] ECHR  873.



32.  They went on to state:-

         "77...We consider the Appellant  has  a  serious  criminal  history
             including serious violent offences against  not  only  persons
             against whom he  had  a  grudge,  but  also  his  partner  and
             innocent third parties (the robbery offence).   We  take  into
             account that the Appellant has lived in the UK for  25  years.
             We also take into account that he  has  spent  many  of  those
             years in prison for various offences.  We have looked  at  the
             time that has elapsed since the  last  offence  was  committed
             (March 2011) and we have looked  at  the  Appellant's  conduct
             since the offence.  He has been in prison since then.


         78.  We give him full credit for his guilty pleas, his  efforts  to
             reduce his methadone whilst in prison and his efforts to  stay
             drugs-free.  We are concerned about his  refusal  of  a  drugs
             test referred to above.  We were also concerned at his ongoing
             insistence that blame was to be attached to third parties  for
             his offending behaviour.


         79.  We give the Appellant credit for the courses that he has taken
             in prison and the efforts that he is making to turn  his  life
             around.  But he has not been able to satisfy us  that  he  has
             reached the stage where on his release from prison, it is more
             probable than not that he  will  be  able  to  live  a  stable
             existence, avoiding criminal behaviour.


         80.  We have taken into account the solidity  of  social,  cultural
             and family ties with the UK and with the  US.   The  Appellant
             made it clear in his evidence that he now wishes  to  distance
             himself  from  his  previous  acquaintances  both  inside  and
             outside prison because most of his acquaintances were involved
             with drugs.  That is commendable.  He did  not  speak  of  any
             close friendships with people who  he  would  wish  to  remain
             friends with.  His parents and his brother  live  here.   They
             can continue to provide him with emotional  support  and  they
             are in any event, unable to  provide  him  with  practical  or
             financial support whether he lives in the UK or in the US.


         81.  The Appellant gave no account of any cultural interests in the
             UK.  He has worked in the UK as a window fitter, a roofer  and
             a builder, all of which are skills that he could put  to  good
             use in the US.


         82.  Life will be a challenge for the Appellant when he  comes  out
             of prison whether he is in the UK or in the US.  In  the  case
             of Maslov the court expressed the  view  that  for  a  settled
             migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his or
             her childhood and youth in  the  host  country,  very  serious
             reasons are required to justify expulsion.  This  is  all  the
             more so where the  person  concerned  committed  the  offences
             underlying the expulsion measure as a juvenile.  That  is  not
             the case here.


         83.  The Appellant is in good health despite his drug use.  We  had
             no evidence to the contrary except the psychiatric report.  We
             had  concerns  about  this  report  as  expressed  above.   We
             considered Dr Isherwood's conclusion as to the increased  risk
             of self-harm to be weak and unsubstantiated.  Dr Isherwood  is
             very careful not to quantify the  risk  of  self-harm  if  the
             Appellant were to be returned and we are not satisfied that  a
             return to the US of this particular Appellant would lead to an
             enhanced risk of self-harm.  An increased level  of  risk  was
             observed by Dr  Isherwood  at  a  time  when  the  Appellant's
             parents had withdrawn their support for  the  Appellant  in  a
             desperate attempt to force him to deal with his addiction  and
             the Appellant's then partner ended their  relationship.   This
             all took place when he was in prison and trying to reduce  his
             drug dependency.  We do not accept that there is  evidence  of
             any serious attempt at self  harm.   The  Appellant  has  made
             great  progress  in  reducing  his   drug   dependency.    The
             Appellant's father sees a new maturity in the Appellant and we
             are of the view  that  the  deportation  will  not  measurably
             increase the risk of self harm for this  Appellant.   We  note
             that Dr Isherwood considers that it is possible  that  a  move
             will lead to a depressive illness but  we  are  not  satisfied
             that it is more likely than not that it will lead to  such  an
             illness  as  the  Appellant  has  little  or  no  history   of
             depressive episodes.  Psychological  and  psychiatric  support
             will be available to this Appellant in the  US,  albeit  at  a
             cost.


         84.  On the evidence before us we do  not  accept  that  there  are
             exceptional circumstances in this case such that the Secretary
             of  State  should  have  exercised  her  discretion   in   the
             Appellant's favour.


         85.  We do accept that the Appellant  has  an  established  private
             life in the UK.  But his private life is not strong because of
             his offending behaviour and his drug addiction.  He  does  not
             have strong ties in the community.  He does  not  have  strong
             friendships and he wishes to avoid many of his friends due  to
             their involvement with drugs.  He has a poor recent history of
             unemployment although it is clear that he  was  in  employment
             when he was younger.


         86.  The Appellant argues that he is dependent upon his family such
             that he has family life with his parents and  he  also  argues
             that he has  family  life  with  his  children.   We  are  not
             satisfied that he is dependent on his parents or  his  brother
             or other family members in the UK such that family life exists
             between them for the purposes of Article 8.  The Appellant can
             continue his contact with his family in the UK  by  telephone,
             Skype  and  e-mail  and  in  time  by  visits  once  he   gets
             established.


         87.  He has had no contact with his son Tyler or his daughter  Tian
             for three years now.  Family life does exist between them  and
             the Appellant because he is their father.  But the family life
             is extremely limited.  In  relation  to  Oliver,  contact  has
             recently resumed after a break of  over  a  year.   Oliver  is
             still a very young child.   We  are  not  satisfied  that  the
             family relationship between Oliver and his father is currently
             a strong one although we accept that he wishes it to be so.


         88.  The Appellant argues that it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             Oliver and indeed his other two children  that  he  should  be
             allowed to remain in the UK to take up  any  opportunities  to
             have contact with them.  We must consider their best interests
             as a primary consideration.  We do not accept that their  best
             interests are affected by the deportation  of  the  Appellant.
             The Appellant has already disturbed stable living arrangements
             for Olli.  His mother  describes  the  improvement  in  Olli's
             wellbeing within that environment in several  of  the  letters
             that were provided.  Now the Appellant seeks to  disturb  that
             and suggests that the relationship  between  him  and  LT  may
             resume leading to her abandoning her current relationship  and
             the stability it offers her and Oliver.  Whilst the  Appellant
             and LT may have feelings for each other, the Appellant  should
             certainly not be seeking to disturb those  arrangements  until
             such time as he has shown considerable and prolonged stability
             in his own life.


         89.  There is nothing to stop  the  Appellant  from  continuing  to
             contact Oliver  by  Skype,  e-mail,  photographs  and  written
             communications so that he can  slowly  and  steadily  build  a
             relationship with Oliver.  Oliver is only 2 years and 9 months
             of age.  He had no contact with the Appellant at all for  over
             a year.  He witnessed the Appellant's violent assault  on  his
             mother when he was under a year old.  Whilst it is to be hoped
             that the Appellant will be able to get his  life  together  so
             that he can provide a realistic opportunity of establishing  a
             good father-son relationship with Oliver, he  is  a  long  way
             from that point at the present time.   We  are  not  satisfied
             that it is necessary for the Appellant to  be  in  the  UK  in
             order to do the work that is necessary to get  some  stability
             in his life such that he  can  build  relationships  with  his
             children.  If he succeeds then there is no reason we  can  see
             why the children should not be able to visit him in the US.


         90.  Following the guidance in the case of  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
             UKHL 27, we are satisfied that Article 8 is engaged in respect
             of the Appellant's private life and the  limited  family  life
             that he has at present with his children.   We  are  satisfied
             that this decision is in accordance with the law  because  the
             Secretary of State is obliged  by  the  2007  Act  to  make  a
             deportation  order  given  the  length  of   the   Appellant's
             sentence.  Given that the Appellant cannot show that he  meets
             the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  the  Rules  state
             that the Appellant  must  show  exceptional  circumstances  to
             avoid deportation.  We  are  not  satisfied  that  exceptional
             circumstances exist in this case.  We have looked carefully at
             the  proportionality  exercise  looking  at  the   Appellant's
             personal history and in particular the fact that he has  spent
             the vast majority of his life in the UK.  We  have  looked  at
             the potential impact on the Appellant of a move to the US.


         91.  Looking at the balancing exercise to be carried  out  in  this
             case, we are satisfied on the evidence  before  us,  that  the
             deportation of the Appellant is necessary in order  to  ensure
             public safety and the prevention of crime.  It is to be  hoped
             that this is a turning point in the Appellant's life and  that
             he will not relapse into drug taking and  criminal  behaviour.
             But he is a long way from showing that he can maintain a  drug
             free lifestyle once his is in the community.


         92.  We are satisfied that this decision is justified on the  facts
             as a whole.   We  are  satisfied  that  the  impact  upon  the
             Appellant's protected rights and the protected rights  of  his
             children have been properly balanced out in this case.


         93.  We are satisfied on the evidence before us that this  decision
             is a proportionate one and there is no breach of Article 8  in
             this case in respect of the protected rights of the Appellant,
             his children, potential partner or his parents.  Anonymity was
             not requested in this case and we do not  consider  it  either
             necessary or appropriate."


33.  The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  The grounds of  appeal
    first stating that at paragraph 90 of the  determination  the  Tribunal
    had been wrong to state that  the  appellant  should  show  exceptional
    circumstances to  avoid  deportation.   The  grounds  referred  to  the
    decision of the House of Lords in Huang.

34.  They argued moreover that the Tribunal was  wrong  to  state  that  the
    guidance in Maslov did not apply -  what  was  relevant  was  that  the
    appellant had been lawfully settled and had spent a major part  of  his
    childhood in Britain and therefore it was stated that he met the Maslov
    condition precedent.  The grounds  argued that the  Tribunal  had  been
    wrong to state that the appellant's private life was not strong because
    of his offending behaviour and his drug  addiction,  stating  that  the
    appellant was a "de facto British man" and that the concept of  private
    life should be widely drawn.

35.  They stated that the Tribunal had  erred  in  their  approach  to  "A's
    'solidity of social, cultural and family  ties'"  and  that  they  were
    wrong to find that his family life rights  would  not  be  breached  on
    deportation asserting that there was family life between appellant  and
    his third son and  that  the  Tribunal  had  accepted  the  appellant's
    intention  to develop that relationship.  They further added there  was
    no evidence the appellant could access US drug prevention  agencies  or
    housing estates and there was evidence of the  required  close  support
    from drug prevention agencies in Britain on his release  and  supported
    accommodation.

36.  Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Digney.  He stated:-

         "The first point made in the grounds of appeal is  that  the  panel
         misdirected  itself  in  law  in  concluding  that  there  must  be
         exceptional circumstances to avoid deportation in a  case  such  as
         this.  I conclude that that is arguably an error of law and  it  is
         also arguable that the panel did not properly distinguish the  case
         as it fell to be dealt with under the new rules and under article 8
         of the ECHR.


         It is debateable that the other  points  raised  identify  arguable
         points of law as opposed to disagreements as to what weight  should
         be given to certain matters, but the remaining grounds may also  be
         argued."


37.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Gilbert first stated that  an
    error in that the Tribunal had not looked at the new  Rules.  He   did,
    however, not consider that that was material.  He then emphasised  that
    in paragraph 90 of the determination the Tribunal had referred  to  the
    issue of exceptionality when considering the rights  of  the  appellant
    under the Convention and said that that was clearly wrong.

38.  Thereafter, he turned to the determination of the Tribunal in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC)  where  at
    paragraphs 35  and  36  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal,   having
    referred to the judgment in Maslov had stated that:-

         "It was thus in June 2010 trite law that in cases  of  the  present
         kind, where there has been  long  residence  since  childhood,  the
         private life claim will succeed  unless  'there  are  very  serious
         reasons... to justify expulsion'."


         That remains the case: see for example MW (Democratic  Republic  of
         Congo) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1240, Sullivan LJ at paragraph 75 and
         the reported decision of the Upper Tribunal in Masih (deportation -
         public interest - basic  principles)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00046
         (IAC)."


    The Tribunal had  stated that the First-tier Tribunal in that case  had
    "singularly failed to direct itself in accordance with Maslov".


39.  Mr Gilbert went on to argue that the Tribunal had not  shown  that  the
    very serious reasons which must be shown had existed in this case.   He
    emphasised that the appellant had come to Britain as a  child  and  had
    lived practically all his life in Britain.  He stated that  he  had  in
    fact, apart from a short period as a baby and toddler, lived in America
    only between  the ages of eight and ten - between the ages of 3  and  8
    he had been in Germany as his father was in the US army.

40.  He claimed that the Tribunal had  placed  insufficient  weight  on  the
    strength of the appellant's private life and referred to  the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in JO (Uganda)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  10  where  at
    paragraph 20 it was stated:-

         "As to private life, it is emphasised at paragraph 59 of  the  �ner
         judgment that settled migrants will have ties with  the  community.
         They constitute part of the concept of  private  life,  which  must
         therefore be considered even if the applicant has no family life in
         the host country.  The importance of this  can  be  seen  from  the
         discussion, at paragraph 55 of the same judgment, of the assembly's
         recommendation and the legislation enacted in some state the effect
         that long-term immigrants cannot be expelled on the basis of  their
         criminal records.  The Strasbourg court  rejected  the  concept  of
         absolute protection, recognising that there  is  a  balance  to  be
         struck under article 8; but the court has emphasised that it  is  a
         balance to be struck with a  proper  appreciation  of  the  special
         situation of  those  who  have  been  in  the  host  country  since
         childhood."


41.  He stated that the test of the  strength  of  the  appellant's  private
    life had  been  wrongly  applied  by  the  Tribunal  because  they  had
    emphasised ties with America.  The most important issue as set  out  in
    Ogundimu was the length of time the appellant had lived in Britain.  He
    accepted that the appellant had been in prison for just under ten years
    out of the 25 years he had lived in Britain (120 months in  total)  but
    stated that by reason of long residence in Britain the appellant should
    be  entitled  to  remain  on  the  basis  that  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

42.  He emphasised the lack of ties which the  appellant  had  with  America
    stating that the "cultural crossover" factors on which the Tribunal had
    relied were of little moment given the length of time the appellant had
    lived in Britain.  He relied further on paragraph 123 of the Tribunal's
    determination in Ogundimu which stated that:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."


43.  He  emphasised  the  appellant's  lack  of  connections  with  America.
    Moreover he emphasised that the appellant's parents would be unable  to
    give him fundamental support there. Having referred to the  appellant's
    wish to develop his relationship with his son he argued that to  do  so
    by e-mail was insufficient.

44.  In reply Mr Hayes stated that the Tribunal had properly considered  all
    relevant factors and made no errors  of  law.   They  had  applied  the
    Maslov criteria and had dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  necessity  of
    preventing  crime.   It  was  open  to  them  to  conclude   that   the
    relationship between the appellant and his son could be maintained from
    America.  He emphasised that the decision in Maslov  did  not  say  the
    length of residence in a country outweighed any other factors.

45.  He emphasised that when the Tribunal  had  referred  to  the  issue  of
    exceptionality they were considering the issue of the new Rules  rather
    than  considering  exceptionality  a  relevant  test   when   assessing
    proportionality of removal.

46.  In reply Mr Gilbert again emphasised the criteria  set  out  in  Maslov
    and argued that the criteria set out therein were rather  more  than  a
    list of factors  to  be  considered  but  should  be  considered  as  a
    checklist to be gone through.  It was clear that very  serious  reasons
    were required to conclude that a longstanding migrant who  was  legally
    resident here should be removed.  He referred to the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MW (Democratic Republic of Congo)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1240 which emphasised that very serious reasons were required.

47.  He also stated  that  it  was  important  to  consider  what  ties  the
    appellant would have with America and  as  regards  to  his  ties  with
    Britain the length of time he had  remained  here  was  relevant.   The
    issues  raised  by  the  Tribunal  of  "cultural  crossover"  were  not
    sufficient to warrant the removal of the appellant.

Discussion

48.  I considered there was no material error of law  in  the  determination
    of the Tribunal.  The reality is that in this  lengthy  and  considered
    determination the Tribunal made clear  findings  of  fact  and  reached
    conclusions which were entirely open to them.   They  referred  to  the
    appellant's  vast  number  of  convictions  which  included  crimes  of
    violence.  They were correct to place weight on those  offences.   They
    considered the judge's sentencing remarks and when they considered  the
    appellant's family ties in Britain reached conclusions relating to  his
    relationships with his children which were again open  to  them.   They
    found that the appellant had had no relationships with his  two  eldest
    children since 2009 and that relationships  with  them  could  not   be
    contemplated for some very considerable time.

49.  They considered the appellant's relationship with his third  child  but
    were correct to  categorise  the  appellant's  relationship  with  that
    child's mother as manipulative and to place weight on the importance of
    that child having a stable relationship with his mother and indeed they
    refer to the fact that his mother now has a new partner and planned  to
    marry this year.  They were correct  to  state  that  the  basis  of  a
    relationship with that child of nine visits in the  last  three  months
    when for a  long period before that the  appellant  had  not  seen  his
    child was not a basis on which a further relationship could develop and
    that in any event the appellant would be able to contact that child  by
    e-mail and Skype at a later stage.

50.  They noted the appellant's relationships with his parents and the  fact
    that they would not be  able  to  offer  him  accommodation  let  alone
    financial support.

51.  They noted the pre-sentence report  which  assessed  the  appellant  as
    posing a high risk of serious harm to the public  "including  partners"
    but also  took  into  account   that  the  appellant  had  reduced  his
    methadone prescription from 45 mls to 16 mls.  They noted  the  courses
    which he had undertaken.  They also considered the report from Dr Sarah
    Isherwood regarding the appellant's own mental health.  I consider that
     their findings of fact were both  fair and balanced.

52.  As regards the appellant's connections with America they  were  correct
    to state that there was a cultural crossover.  Mr Gilbert's  point  was
    that in doing so they  had  placed  insufficient  weight  on  the  more
    meaningful factors such as what connections the  appellant  might  have
    with relationships there let alone the length of time that he had spent
    in America is valid only insofar  as  should  the  appellant  have  had
    relatives in America then that would be a factor which should have been
    taken into account in  the  proportionality  exercise  and  would  have
    weighed in the balance against the appellant.

53.  I have considered the principal criticism made by  Mr  Gilbert  in  his
    submissions which was that the Tribunal had  not  properly  taken  into
    account the length of period which the appellant had spent  in  Britain
    having come here as a child at the age of 10  and  that  they  had  not
    specifically stated that there were  serious  reasons  justifying   the
    appellant's deportation.  In effect he was stating  that  the  Tribunal
    had not properly considered the criteria set out in the European  Court
    of Human Rights judgment in Maslov.  I would first emphasise  that  the
    Tribunal did set out at some length details of the appellant's offences
    and the length of time during the last twenty five years which  he  had
    spent in prison as well as referring to the judge's sentencing remarks.
     I consider that it is obvious that  that the Tribunal clearly  had  in
    mind the very serious reasons why it would  be  appropriate  to  deport
    this appellant.  It simply cannot be said that when  an  appellant  has
    committed 37 convictions between 1993 and 2002, has committed  acts  of
    violence and received one sentence for four years and  other  sentences
    for lesser periods of time that there are not serious reasons  why  the
    appellant should not be deported.  The reality is that the Tribunal did
    address the issues raised in Maslov to which they refer  in  paragraphs
    77 onwards.  It is clear from what they write in those paragraphs  that
    they have taken into account the relevant factors which are set out  in
    paragraph 68 of the  judgment  in  Maslov  which  refers  back  to  the
    judgment in Boultif [1997] VI82264.  It is clear they took into account
    the nature and seriousness of the offence committed by  the  appellant,
    the length of time he had been in Britain and the  time  which  elapsed
    since the last offence had been committed, the appellant's nationality,
    his family situation, the position  of  the  appellant's  relationships
    with his children and their age.

54.  In paragraph 71 of the judgment in Maslov the European Court  of  Human
    Rights  referred to a situation where the  person to be expelled  is  a
    young adult.  The reality is, of course, that this appellant is  not  a
    young adult.  They  were  quite  correct  in  any  event  to  point  in
    paragraph 82 that:-

         "In the case of Maslov the court expressed  the  view  that  for  a
         settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his
         or her childhood and  youth  in  the  host  country,  very  serious
         reasons are required to justify expulsion.  This is all the more so
         where the person concerned committed the  offences  underlying  the
         expulsion measures as a juvenile.  That is not the case here."


55.  Mr Gilbert argued that there they were suggesting that it was  not  the
    case in this appeal that very serious reasons were required to  justify
    expulsion.  That is wrong.  What they were stating was that it was  not
    the case that the appellant was a juvenile.

56.   They did take into account the nature and seriousness of  the  offence
    committed by the applicant and the length of his stay  in  Britain  and
    the time elapsed since the offence had been committed and the  solidity
    of the appellant's social, cultural and family ties of this country and
    the country of destination.

57.  The only factor  on  which  the  appellant  could  rely  was  his  long
    residence but, applying, as indeed the Tribunal did the factors set out
    in the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in  Maslov  which
    were repeated in the determination of the  Tribunal  in  Ogundimu,  the
    Tribunal  were  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  deportation  of  the
    appellant was proportionate notwithstanding the length of time  he  had
    lived in Britain.

58.  While it is the case that they may not have used the,  in  terms,   the
    wording of  Maslov  which  refers  to  various  serious  reasons  being
    required to justify expulsion, that is clearly obvious from  the  facts
    of this case.

59.  Even if I were to find that they had made an error of law in not  using
    those terms I could not consider that that was a material  error  given
    the appellant's serious criminality over a long period of time.

60.  I consider that their findings of fact properly deal with all  relevant
    Maslov criteria.

61.  At the beginning of their  determination  the  Tribunal  refer  to  the
    recent changes to the Rules relating to  the  rights  of  an  appellant
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  They refer, in particular, to  paragraphs
    398(b), 399 and 399(a) of the Rules.   It  was  accepted  however  that
    these do not apply in this case given the  length  of  time  which  the
    appellant has spent in prison here.  However, what is relevant is  that
    those Rules refer to the issue of exceptionality.  Clearly,  where  the
    Tribunal writes in paragraph 90 that  the appellant cannot show that he
    meets the requirements of the  Rules  -  the  Rules  stating  that  the
    appellant must show exceptional circumstances to avoid deportation  and
    they are not satisfied exceptional circumstances exist  in  this  case,
    what they are saying is that the appellant cannot meet the requirements
    of the Rules because he  does  not  meet  the  test  of  exceptionality
    therein.

62.   While that comment is made after reference is made to the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in Razgar and it might well  have  been  preferable
    had the Tribunal referred to the provisions within the  Rules  relating
    to an application to remain on private life separately, in a  different
    paragraph, the reality  is  that  that  provision  must  refer  to  the
    decision under the Rules.  Of course, one of the questions that  should
    be answered when considering the structured approach  set  out  in  the
    judgment in Razgar is whether or not the decision to remove is  correct
    in law and that for it not to be correct  in  law  then  exceptionality
    would be required under the terms of the new  Rules.   The  reality  is
    that what the Tribunal is doing is applying the appropriate  structured
    approach to the issues to  the  consideration  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under the Convention.

63.  They have set out in detail their findings of fact which  have  clearly
    been reached in a balanced and thorough manner.   They  find  that  the
    appellant's private life and his limited family life would be infringed
    by his removal and the then go on to say that they  are  satisfied  the
    decision is in accordance with the law before considering the issue  of
    proportionality.  Given their clear findings of fact their  conclusions
    regarding the proportionality of removal were clearly open to them.

64.  I would add that in considering the issue of cultural ties that is,  of
    course, an issue which arises when the terms of paragraph 399(a) of the
    Immigration Rules are considered in terms.  It is,  however,  a  factor
    which is relevant under  any  assessment  of  proportionality  and  the
    Tribunal did consider those ties within that context.

65.  I would add that where in paragraph 91 the  Tribunal  referred  to  the
    deportation of the appellant being necessary in  order  to  ensure  the
    public safety in the prevention of crime, they were entitled to do  so.
    It may well be that they could have expanded on that  assertion,  given
    the importance of the removal of a criminal from Britain which has been
    emphasised in N (Kenya), Masih (deportation - public interest  -  basic
    principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT as well as DS  (India)  EWCA  Civ  544
    [2009] and A D Lee EWCA [2011] Civ 348.  However,  the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal did not refer to those judgments is not  material  given  that
    the  conclusion which they  reached was correct.

66 . I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Tribunal and their decision dismissing this appeal
    on human rights grounds shall stand.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
