

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA/00088/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on    16.11.2016                     |on 25.11.2016                        |

Before:
                         The Hon Lord BANNATYNE and
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN
Between:
                         Mohd. Warsame Samankar GEDI
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Stephen Vokes (counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & co,
Harrow)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ravinder Bagral), sitting at Bradford on 3 June, to   a
    deportation appeal by a citizen of Sweden, born in 1992, and brought to
    this country with the rest of his family when he was eight.  Permission
    was given in the most general terms in the Upper Tribunal, but  without
    dealing with the necessary extension of time, as had to  be  done  (see
    for example AK and others  (Tribunal  Appeal,  out  of  time)  Bulgaria
    [2004] UKIAT 00201*). However, Mr Vokes realistically accepted that  it
    was open to us to extend time now, and conceded that there was no  good
    reason not to do so, given the short period involved, and  the  reasons
    put forward in the application; so we do.

 2. Criminal record        In  February  2015  this  appellant  received  a
    sentence  of  three  months'  imprisonment,  suspended  for   12,   for
    possession of a bladed article; but the conviction  which  led  to  the
    deportation decision under appeal (served 15 February 2016) referred to
    events in April 2015. These had begun with an assault on 3 March by the
    appellant's brother Ahmed Samankar and some other young men on  another
    called Kumar Mohammed, in the street, using knives: luckily he  got  no
    more than cuts to his arms when he put them up to defend himself.  This
    appellant was present at the incident, but took no part in it: his part
    was described by the sentencing judge as "a  very  serious  attempt  to
    pervert the course of justice".

 3. What the appellant did, on 24 April, was to go and  see  Kumar  at  his
    flat and tell him to drop the case: while  he  was  there,  he  rang  a
    solicitor to make arrangements for Kumar to see  a  solicitor.  On  the
    30th, the appellant and three others arrived at Kumar's  flat:  one  of
    them, not this appellant, got a knife out of the kitchen and told Kumar
    to drop the case, or they would get someone to 'finish' him.  Then  the
    appellant rang the solicitor again, and Kumar was taken  round  to  his
    office, where they saw a clerk, who took down  a  statement  retracting
    his complaint against the appellant's brother, which he signed  out  of
    fear.

 4. The sentencing judge went on to explain the  reasons,  too  obvious  to
    need repeating here, why that was a very serious offence:  he  set  the
    tariff for this appellant at two years' imprisonment, reducing it by  a
    third for his plea of guilty, but adding two months for his  breach  of
    the suspended sentence, making 18 in all.

 5. Decision under appeal  The decision to deport this appellant, as an EEA
    citizen, had to be based. at least, on  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public  security,  and  (see  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 [the EEA Regulations] reg. 21 (5)

       ... be taken in accordance with the following principles-
        (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
        (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
           of the person concerned;
        (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
           genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one
           of the fundamental interests of society;
        (d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
           relate to considerations of general prevention  do  not  justify
           the decision.
        (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
           justify the decision.

 6. Judge Bagral found that this appellant had not acquired  any  permanent
    right  of  residence,  so  that  no  higher  test  applied.  She  fully
    acknowledged the seriousness of what he had done, and found,  in  terms
    of principle (c) that,  as  things  stood,  his  personal  conduct  did
    represent the necessary  'genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat'. As principle (a) makes clear, however, she had  to  go  on  to
    consider proportionality in general terms, without  taking  account  of
    the considerations excluded by (b), (d), or, so far as it went, (e).

 7. Authorities     At this point the question of rehabilitation, actual or
    potential, became relevant. There had at one time been differing  views
    as  to  how  far  it  was  relevant:  on  one  view  (see  Essa   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT (IAC) 316,  judicial  head-note
    paragraph 3, reasonable prospects of rehabilitation could in  any  case
    be a substantial relevant factor in the proportionality balance. On the
    opposing view,  they  could  only  be  relevant  where  someone  had  a
    permanent right of residence. The difference was conclusively  resolved
    in Dumliauskas & others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145:  the  Court  of  Appeal
    discussed previous decisions at paragraphs 41 - 47, and  reached  their
    own views (Sir Stanley Burnton for the court) as follows:


  52. I am bound to accept, on the authority of the judgment of  this  court
      in Daha Essa, that the Secretary of State, and therefore the Tribunal,
      must consider the relative prospects of rehabilitation, in  the  sense
      of ceasing to commit  crime,  when  considering  whether  an  offender
      should be deported. I have to say that but for that authority, I would
      have said that this was a factor to be considered  if  raised  by  the
      offender, but not otherwise, just as the effect of deportation on  the
      health of an offender need not be considered unless it is  made  known
      to the Secretary of State that it is a relevant factor.


  53. However, different considerations apply to questions of  evidence  and
      the weight to be given to  the  prospects  of  rehabilitation.  As  to
      evidence, as a matter of practicality, it is easier for the  Secretary
      of State to obtain evidence as to support  services  in  other  Member
      States. However, in my judgment, in the absence of evidence, it is not
      to be assumed that  medical  services  and  support  for,  by  way  of
      example, reforming drug addicts, are  materially  different  in  other
      Member States from those available here. This is not the  occasion  to
      conduct a comparative survey, but it is appropriate to mention, by way
      of example, that medical services in France are said to be  excellent,
      and that Portugal has been innovative in  relation  to  treating  drug
      addiction.


  54. Lastly, in agreement with what was  said  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      Vasconcelos, I do not consider that in the case of an offender with no
      permanent right of residence substantial weight  should  be  given  to
      rehabilitation. I appreciate that all Member States have  an  interest
      in reducing criminality,  and  that  deportation  merely  exports  the
      offender, leaving him free to offend  elsewhere.  However,  the  whole
      point of deportation is to remove  from  this  country  someone  whose
      offending renders him a risk to the public. The  Directive  recognises
      that the more serious the risk of reoffending, and the  offences  that
      he may commit, the greater the right to interfere with  the  right  of
      residence.  Article  28.3  requires  the  most  serious   risk,   i.e.
      "imperative grounds of  public  security",  if  a  Union  citizen  has
      resided in the host Member State  for  the  previous  10  years.  Such
      grounds will normally indicate a greater  risk  of  offending  in  the
      country of nationality or elsewhere in the Union. In other words,  the
      greater the risk of reoffending, the greater the right to deport.


  55. Furthermore, as I  mentioned  above,  a  deported  offender  will  not
      normally  have  committed  an  offence  within  the   State   of   his
      nationality. There is a real risk of his reoffending, since  otherwise
      the power to deport does not arise. Nonetheless, he will not  normally
      have access to a probation officer or the equivalent. That  must  have
      been obvious to the European Parliament and  to  the  Commission  when
      they adopted the Directive. For the lack of such support  to  preclude
      deportation is difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  express  power  to
      deport. In my judgment, it should not, in general, do so.

 8. These considerations were summarized for the benefit of judges in  this
    field by the Upper Tribunal, in the  light  of  Dumliauskas  and  other
    decisions of the Court of Appeal, in MC (Essa principles recast) [2015]
    UKUT 520 (IAC). While the principles set out  in  MC  (Essa  principles
    recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) would of course have to  be  disregarded,
    so far as they might diverge from Dumliauskas, principles 6 - 10 in the
    judicial head-note to MC  are set out with specific reference to  those
    paragraphs of Dumliauskas, and we have heard nothing  to  suggest  that
    they did not correctly reproduce their effect.

 9. Conclusions: law       In this case, Judge  Bagral  is  criticized  for
    what she said about the possibility of rehabilitation,  without  taking
    into account the restrictions on that set out in Dumliauskas.  However,
    she did refer herself to MC; but Mr Jarvis suggested that she  went  no
    further  than  to  note  what   appeared   about   the   relevance   of
    rehabilitation at  principle  6  of  the  judicial  head-note,  without
    considering the restrictions at all. We disagree. The main restriction,
    shorn of the references to Dumliauskas, is at principle 10:

         In the absence of integration and a right of  permanent  residence,
         the future prospects of integration cannot be a weighty factor  ...
         Even when such prospects have significant weight  they  are  not  a
         trump card, as what the Directive  and  the  2006  EEA  Regulations
         require is a wide-ranging holistic assessment. Both recognise  that
         the more serious the risk of reoffending, and the offences  that  a
         person may commit, the greater the  right  to  interfere  with  the
         right of residence

10. The judge clearly  took  account  of  the  'no  trump  card'  point  at
    paragraph 67, where she acknowledged that the reasonable  prospects  of
    rehabilitation she found to exist were not "...  determinative  of  the
    issue of proportionality". However it is suggested that she went  wrong
    in law by not directing herself that such  prospects  could  not  be  a
    'weighty factor'. That principle is restricted by the Tribunal to cases
    where there is an "... absence of integration and a right of  permanent
    residence", whereas in Dumliauskas at paragraph 54 it is applied to all
    cases where there is no such right.

11. However, the Tribunal in MC  were careful to refer everything they said
    to the principles set out in Dumliauskas, and the first part  of  their
    principle 10 is no exception to that. The reference they gave  was  not
    only to paragraph 54, but also to paragraph 44  in  Dumliauskas.  There
    the Court of Appeal agreed with what  had  been  said  in  yet  another
    decision of the Tribunal, Vasconcelos (risk - rehabilitation)  Portugal
    [2013] UKUT 378, at paragraph 80, about the appellant in that case:

       His future prospects of rehabilitation  are  uncertain  and  whatever
       they are cannot be a weighty factor in the balance given the  absence
       of integration and a right of permanent residence.

12. It seems to us that the proposition approved by  the  Court  of  Appeal
    there is that both integration and a permanent right of  residence  are
    required to make rehabilitation prospects a 'weighty factor'  in  cases
    such as this. This is what the Tribunal must have meant by setting  out
    principle 10 as they did in MC, and it should be read in that light. We
    do not consider it necessary for this decision to join the plethora  of
    'reported' decisions on this subject; but we give permission  to  refer
    to it in any case where the contrary may be  suggested.  Otherwise  the
    principles summarized in  MC  make  further  reference  to  Dumliauskas
    unnecessary.

13. Conclusions: individual case         Judge  Bagral  correctly  directed
    herself that possible rehabilitation   was  not  a  'trump  card',  but
    should have also reminded herself that it could not even be a  'weighty
    factor', without any permanent right of residence. That was an error of
    law, though not one for which she could in any way be  blamed:  neither
    side had helped her, as they should have done, by referring her to  MC,
    on which she did the best she could without  any  help;  let  alone  by
    citing Dumliauskas.

14. As Mr Vokes reminded us, the principles in  reg.  21  (5)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations required a full proportionality assessment,  whatever  view
    was taken on  rehabilitation.  After  noting  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's offence at paragraph 68, the judge went on at 69 -  71  and
    73 to take  a  view  (realistic  subject  to  the  limitation  we  have
    mentioned) of his prospects of rehabilitation in this country, where he
    has the help of his family; but at 72 she reached findings  which  were
    not, and could not have been challenged, about  his  integration  here,
    though she did not use the expression herself.  For  a  young  man  not
    quite 24 at the date of the decision under appeal, here  with  all  his
    family since he was eight, those were findings, made in the course of a
    clear well-thought out decision, on which the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the appellant's deportation disproportionate to the legitimate
    purpose  of  ,  whether  or  not  rehabilitation  in  itself  could  be
    considered a 'weighty factor'. It follows that the error of law we have
    found, such as it was, was not material to the result reached.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
