
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00096/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 February 2016                      |   On 30 March 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                    Eduardo Rui Monteiro Barbusa Semendo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (whom we shall refer to as the respondent) against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 October 2015 allowing  an  appeal
    of the appellant against a decision to deport him under the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 made on 13 March 2015.


2.   The appellant is a national of Portugal born on 31 December  1991.   He
    apparently arrived in the United Kingdom in 1994 with his mother who is
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The appellant has  a  number
    of siblings.  On 31 March 2011 the appellant was convicted at Southwark
    Crown Court of rape and was sentenced to nine years  imprisonment.   He
    was placed on the sex offenders register for life.  He  later  appealed
    against the conviction and sentence but those appeals were refused.

3.   In the reasons for the decision of  the  respondent,  it  was  accepted
    that deportation  could  only  be  made  in  the  appellant's  case  on
    imperative grounds of public security since he had acquired a permanent
    right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  (Regulation  21  the  2006
    Regulations).  It was also accepted that  that  Regulation  required  a
    decision to deport to comply with the principle of proportionality,  be
    based exclusively on the personal conduct of the person concerned which
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society  and  that  the
    previous criminal convictions themselves could not justify  a  decision
    to deport.

5.   The rape of which the appellant was convicted was  committed  when  the
    appellant was 17 years of age.  The victim was 16 years  of  age.   She
    had been taken to a small park by the appellant and five  other  youths
    where she was repeatedly raped by four of them including the appellant.
     The sentencing judge considered this to be a very serious case  marked
    by the imposition of a substantial sentence of detention.

6.   An OASys assessment was prepared on the appellant and had been  updated
    on a number of occasions after sentence was pronounced.  He  was  found
    to pose a  low  but  real  risk  of  reoffending.  The  probability  of
    reoffending within two years of release was assessed  at  30%  and  the
    risk of serious harm which he posed in the community to members of  the
    public was assessed at being high.

7.   A major contributing factor to  that  assessment  was  the  appellant's
    continuing denial of guilt.  Due to that attitude, he was not  able  to
    participate in any programmes while detained which  might  address  his
    offending behaviour and reduce the risk he posed.  Similarly,  problems
    in relation to his ability to  attend  courses  post-release  would  be
    caused due to his persisting attitude towards  the  offence.   On  that
    basis, the respondent considered that  the  criteria  contained  within
    Regulation  21  of  the  2006  Regulations  were  fulfilled   and   his
    deportation was justified.

8.   In his appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  represented
    himself.  He gave evidence.  He reiterated that he did not accept  that
    he had committed rape but accepted that it was "possible he was  making
    wrong decisions at that time in that environment".  He  still  believed
    that there was a form of consent given by the victim.  He  stated  that
    he had been in the United Kingdom since he was  2  years  old  and  had
    lived here his whole life.  His first language  was  English.   He  had
    three siblings and played an older  brother  role  in  respect  of  his
    younger siblings.  His mother suffered from depression.  He stated that
    he would be seeking independent counselling to  help  him  improve  any
    behavioural issues he might need on release from prison.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  61  that  it  was
    difficult to understand why the appellant believed consent was  implied
    and also pointed out that the appellant had been adamant that there was
    no physical penetration of the victim.  That,  of  course,  was  wholly
    contrary to the jury's finding of guilt.  Reference  is  also  made  in
    that paragraph to the continued denial of guilt causing difficulties in
    being able to undertake courses which might mitigate the risk he posed.
     At paragraph 62 the judge states that "he is still  being  denied  the
    opportunity to take the  courses  he  needs"  despite  making  numerous
    attempts to undertake them.  He was, however, able to attend a  Project
    507 course for six weeks between September  and  October  2011  in  the
    young offenders institution.   However,  that  course  did  not  impact
    directly on mitigation of risk.  At paragraph 64 the  judge  refers  to
    the case of LG (Italy) [2008] EWCA Civ 190, which in turn  referred  to
    Home Office guidance relating to the definition of  imperative  grounds
    of public security.

10.  We should note at  this  stage  that  the  respondent's  representative
    before the First-tier Tribunal sought to withdraw the  concession  made
    in the decision letter that the appellant enjoyed the enhanced level of
    protection acquired by continuous residence of at least  ten  years  on
    the basis that the relevant period  here  had  been  interrupted  by  a
    prison sentence.  Reference is made to MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of
    Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT  392  (IAC).   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that the appellant was entitled to  rely  on  this
    concession and proceeded on the basis that he could only be deported on
    imperative grounds of public security.  We do not consider that she can
    be said to have erred in that respect.  In any  event,  the  respondent
    made no criticism of that paragraph in the grounds of appeal to us.  It
    is argued instead that the judge erred in finding this criteria was not
    met in the circumstances of this case.

11.  The judge found as a matter of fact  that,  notwithstanding  the  index
    offence and the current  period  of  imprisonment,  the  appellant  was
    integrated within the United Kingdom.  She accepted  that  this  was  a
    very hard case.  Prior to this conviction the  appellant  had  been  of
    good character apart from one police remand three years  prior  to  the
    offence.  She acknowledged that the appellant held wholly  unacceptable
    and abhorrent views in relation to his behaviour  towards  the  victim.
    On the other hand, she noted  that  the  OASys  assessment  placed  the
    appellant as a low risk of reoffending despite the fact that he  needed
    to complete programmes that addressed  the  issues  and  factors  which
    originally led him to committing this crime.  However,  because,  as  a
    young man, he did not understand where his thinking was wrong and  thus
    refused to accept guilt, he was thereby prevented from taking  part  in
    courses that would provide an insight into that behaviour in  order  to
    address it.

12.  She noted that criminal convictions alone  do  not  constitute  grounds
    for deportation  and  that  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual
    concerned must represent "a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society."   She
    also referred to the refusal letter which, she stated,  suggested  "the
    proposition that completion of the  enhanced  thinking  skills,  victim
    awareness course and sex offenders treatment programme could reduce the
    risk of reoffending in the future".

13.  Before us Mr Wilding for the respondent maintained that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.  First there was a failure to recognise that
    the appellant will be on the sex offenders register for life  and  will
    remain on licence  for  a  considerable  period  upon  release.   Those
    factors indicated that he is a present threat and thus the criterion in
    Regulation 21(5)(c) was plainly  met.   Further,  that  threat  plainly
    affected a fundamental interest of society due to the serious nature of
    the crime committed and his continuing denial of  responsibility.   The
    appellant could not attend courses to address management of risk due to
    that denial and meant that he would not  make  positive  progress  with
    rehabilitation in the future.  At paragraph  68  of  the  decision  the
    reference to the appellant being a low risk of  reoffending  failed  to
    take  proper  account  of   the   appellant's   attitude   in   denying
    responsibility for the offence.  That inevitably went to the  issue  of
    the level of threat he poses and is in effect ignored by the Tribunal.

14.  Secondly it was submitted that the  Tribunal  had  failed  properly  to
    deal with the issue as to whether  there  were  imperative  grounds  of
    public security justifying deportation in this case.  At  paragraph  69
    reference is made to the requirements of Regulation 21(5) but there  is
    no analysis of imperative grounds of public  security.   In  this  case
    there was not only the commission of a very  serious  offence  but  the
    continuing denial of responsibility.  This demonstrated that imperative
    grounds had been made out.

15.  The appellant on his own behalf  submitted  a  number  of  letters  and
    testimonials from family and friends and a  letter  dated  15  February
    2016 from his probation officer which appears to  attest  to  the  fact
    that the appellant has abided by the requirements of his licence  since
    being released in December 2015.  However, that material was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal and we cannot have regard to it.  The appellant
    also stated that he maintained  his  innocence  and,  although  he  had
    applied for courses, he  was  unable  to  participate  because  of  his
    denial.  He had the support of his family in the United Kingdom.

Discussion and Decision

16. In relation to the First-tier Tribunal's treatment of the issue  as  to
    whether the appellant represented a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society,
    it is apparent that the Tribunal recognised that management of his risk
    both in prison and on release was rendered problematic because  of  his
    attitude to the offence which prevented him being accepted  on  courses
    which might assist in the  management  of  risk.   However,  the  judge
    concluded at paragraph 68 that, because he "would remain on licence for
    a considerable period and remain on the sex offenders register, he will
    then have the support to access relevant programmes".  That appears  to
    us to be simply an assertion.  While he might have  support  to  access
    programmes, there was no evidence before the Tribunal that he had  been
    able to participate in  any  courses  relating  to  risk  or  any  real
    possibility that he would do so on release.  His denial  continued  and
    with it the bar to acceptance into courses  to  address  risk.  Such  a
    circumstance is central to the question of rehabilitation and  goes  to
    the heart of the  question  of  the  level  of  threat  he  poses.   In
    circumstances  where  the  appellant  had  failed  to  participate   in
    treatment programmes, we consider that the Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    failing properly to address the criteria in Regulation 21(5)(c) of  the
    2006 Regulations.


17. In relation to the respondent's submission that the Tribunal failed  to
    address the submission that imperative grounds of public  security  had
    been made out in this case, different considerations apply.  This was a
    case in which it was accepted that the appellant had the benefit of the
    highest level of protection from deportation.  Expulsion  from  the  UK
    could not be carried  out  except  on  "imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".  That presupposes not only the  existence  of  a  threat  to
    public security but also that such a threat is of a  particularly  high
    degree of seriousness (see paragraph 20 of the  opinion  of  the  Grand
    Chamber in P.I. v Oberburgermeisterin der Stadt Remscheld 2012  2  CMLR
    13). At paragraph 33 the Grand Chamber emphasised that it is  a  matter
    for  the  national  court  to  decide  whether  "particularly   serious
    characteristics" are present justifying the conclusion that  imperative
    grounds exist and that must involve the individual examination  of  the
    specific case before it.  While the crime of which  the  appellant  was
    convicted in the current case did not involve the aggravations  present
    in P.I. (extreme sexual abuse of a child from  the  age  of  8  over  a
    period of year) or have any sort  of  organised  criminal  element,  it
    remained one of considerable seriousness. As Mr  Wilding  pointed  out,
    the judge did not give detailed reasons for the decision on  this  part
    of the case which demonstrates the sort  of  examination  required  was
    carried out (see paragraph 70).


18. Furthermore, while it is said there  that  all  relevant  factors  were
    taken into account, the fact that  the  judge  failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the issue of rehabilitation,  as  set  out  in  paragraph  16
    above, means that we cannot conclude that there has been a balanced and
    complete appraisal of the specific circumstances  of  this  appellant's
    crime and his circumstances.  We therefore  cannot  conclude  that  the
    Tribunal adequately addressed the question of imperative grounds.    We
    find that there is a material error in law by the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    and we set aside that decision.



   Re making the decision


19.   We now consider the issue of disposal of the appeal.  We  propose  to
    remake the decision flawed by error in the light of the facts found  by
    the First tier Tribunal that were not affected by the error and any  up
    dating evidence that the appellant had asked us to  take  into  account
    that was not available to the Tribunal below. We consider that  we  can
    remake the decision without the need for further hearing. In our  view,
    while the appellant's continued denial of guilt impacts adversely  upon
    the risk he poses in the community, we have regard to the fact that  he
    has remained out of trouble  since  his  release,  to  the  letters  of
    support lodged on his behalf and in  particular  to  the  letter  dated
    15.2.2016 from his Probation officer and  the  letter  dated  22.2.2016
    from his former teacher with whom he has  maintained  contact  and  who
    supported him at the First tier Tribunal, all of which are positive and
    show reasonable prospects  of  rehabilitation.  His  probation  officer
    confirmed that his conduct in  prison  was  good,  he  had  resided  in
    Probation managed premises and engaged with his police offender manager
    and presented as "motivated to move forward  with  his  life"  and  was
    trying hard to "get himself into the best possible position he  can  as
    regards to future education, training and employment." This is his only
    conviction and was imposed for an  offence  committed  when  he  was  a
    teenager.  He is integrated into society in the UK.  He has lived  here
    since he was 2 years old.  His first language is English.  He has  only
    visited Portugal three or four  times.   We  have  due  regard  to  the
    seriousness of the crime for which he was sentenced as discussed below.
    There was no issue taken by the respondent as to integration.

20. We consider the issue of rehabilitation (C-145/09 Land Baden-Wurtemberg
    v Tsakouridis CJEU  (Grand  Chamber)  2010  and  (MC  (Essa  principles
    recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC) in terms of  the  relationship
    between present threat and factors relevant to  rehabilitation.  Whilst
    it is correct  that  the  appellant  has  not  attended  rehabilitative
    courses we find that there is sufficient evidence before us to conclude
    that he has  made  progress  in  rehabilitation  including  during  his
    imprisonment and on licence. The appellant did not fail to engage  with
    rehabilitation courses. He applied for offence related courses but  was
    not accepted on them.   He  completed  one  course  Project  507  which
    involved some reflection on peer associations.  There was a letter from
    the project leader which was quoted in by  the  Tribunal  at  [62],  in
    particular .."I don't have any concerns about him being  released  ...I
    believe that he has learnt from past mistakes and has distanced himself
    from the negative people he once had around and is ready to  start  the
    rest of his life. I will also be around  to  offer  support."  We  have
    evidence that he has completed various educational courses. We  further
    find that this process will continue with the strong family  and  other
    support networks available to him, and which would not  be  present  in
    Portugal. The appellant has complied with  his  conditions  on  release
    including a curfew, a restriction on contacting his co  defendants  and
    maintained contact with his probation officer.  He has been  restricted
    from taking up employment  by  his  immigration  conditions.  The  OYAS
    report was prepared in 2014 and whilst there has been no  update  since
    then, we place weight on the evidence from  his  probation  officer  as
    relevant to risk of re offending. The appellant has  made  considerable
    efforts to rehabilitate and his removal to Portugal  where  he  has  no
    support, would be counterproductive.  We apply the principles  set  out
    in  regulation  21(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   Looking   at   the
    appellant's personal conduct and our view  that  the  conviction  alone
    cannot justify the decision to expel him, his conduct does not  in  our
    view represent a sufficiently serious threat  affecting  a  fundamental
    interest of society to justify his expulsion from the UK.


21.  Further, the crime of rape of which he was convicted does not, in  our
    view, meet the very high threshold required  by  regulation  21(4).  We
    have rejected Mr Wilding's submission that the crime is so serious that
    it merits the severity criteria on its own.  There  are  no  imperative
    grounds of public security involved in this case.  The  offence  itself
    was in respect of gang rape against a 16 year old girl by  a  group  of
    youths of which  the  appellant  was  a  member.  It  did  not  contain
    exacerbating circumstances beyond that.  It was not carried out as part
    of any wider network of abuse or exploitation.   It  cannot  be  placed
    into the same category of offences  as  drug  dealing  as  part  of  an
    organised group as used in the illustrations given at paragraph AG26 of
    the Advocate General's Opinion in P.I cited above and by the  court  at
    paragraph  15.    It   did   not   have   the   "particularly   serious
    characteristics" required to fall  within  the  concept  of  imperative
    grounds.  We are satisfied that there was no  evidence  of  exceptional
    seriousness of threat to the  public  that  necessitated  expulsion  to
    protect the public interest. That objective  can  be  attained  by  the
    appellant remaining in the UK where he is genuinely integrated and  can
    reasonably be rehabilitated.  The  severity  of  the  offence  and  the
    appellant's attitude do not  make  removal  "imperative"  in  terms  of
    public security.


22.  We shall therefore remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    allow the appellant's appeal against the deportation order of 13  March
    2015.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated  13
    March 2014 is allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date


The Hon. Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


