

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00182/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2013                               |On 9 September 2013          |
|And 21 August 2013                            |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               NEVILLE JACKSON
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant:      Mr J Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Watson
Ramsbottom
For the Respondent:    Ms S Marsh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
(11 June 2013)
      Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer (21 August 2013)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge A S  Law  and  Mrs  S  A
    Hussain JP sitting as a panel), promulgated on 5  April  2013  allowing
    the claimant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  made  on
    17th January 2013 to deport him from the United Kingdom  on  the  basis
    that he is a person to whom section 32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
    applies.

 2. The claimant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  1998.  He  was  later
    granted leave to enter  as  the  spouse  of  Amanda  Jackson  (formerly
    Thornber), a British citizen. The couple had a son born in 1999, and 19
    June 2000, the appellant was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.  In
    2003  the  claimant  was  divorced  from  Ms  Jackson.  He   formed   a
    relationship with Ms Reeder, and in 2005, they had a child. There is in
    place a contact order relating to the son.  The claimant's case is that
    he and Ms Reeder are in a relationship akin to marriage.

 3. On 2 December 2011, the claimant was convicted of unlawful wounding and
    sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. The  respondent  considered  that
    the appellant is a person to whom section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007 applies. She was not satisfied that paragraph 399(a) was met given
    that both of his children they were living with their mothers who  were
    able to care for them. The respondent was not satisfied that  paragraph
    399 (b) was met  either  as  the  claimant  was  not  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with a spouse of partner

 4. The respondent considered also that the claimant did  not  fall  within
    the terms of paragraph 399A as the  appellant  had  not  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of 20 years,  and  that  he  had
    ties to Jamaica.


 5.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances raised  which  would  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deporting the claimant, and while bearing in mine her  duties  pursuant
    to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and
    that  the  interests  of  the  claimant's  children   are   a   primary
    consideration, that there are other factors in this case which outweigh
    those, given that the children's mothers could  continue  to  care  for
    them.

 6.  The  claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  these
    decisions on the grounds that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the immigration rules [1], was not in accordance with the law  [2]  and
    was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  [3].  It  is
    further submitted that the claimant has a well-established private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom [5]; that he is not a danger  to  the
    community [6]; that it would be disruptive to all parties  if  he  were
    removed; that he is in a relationship with Michelle Reeder [8] and that
    deportation would not be in the children's best interests [9] and  that
    his removal would be in  breach  of  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention [10].

 7. On 5 April 2013 the appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  who  heard
    evidence from the claimant, Ms Jackson and  Ms  Reeder.   The  Tribunal
    found:

       i. That with regard to  paragraph  399(a)  while  there  was  another
          family member who could look after the children - their mothers  -
          there is a strong bond between the claimant and his children  [26]
          which would be breached and it would be disproportionate to remove
          him.

      ii. That with respect to paragraph 399A, while the  claimant  had  not
          lived here for a continuous period of 20 years, he had lived  here
          for a substantial time [26]; that he had  no  ties  with  Jamaica;
          and, has a strong family life with his two children and the mother
          of his younger child[26];

     iii. That the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  as
          set out in section 55 of the 2009 Act is effected by paragraph 399
          (a) [27];

      iv. That the criteria of paragraph 399 (a) is met by both children and
          it is in their interest that their father should  not  be  removed
          from the United Kingdom [27] "but to be allowed not only under the
          Immigration Rules but also under Article 8 to remain ";

       v. That although the claimant has been convicted of a  serious  crime
          and  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  are   engaged,   the
          "safeguards and criteria to prevent the [claimant's] removal  have
          been established not only under the  Immigration  Rules  but  also
          within Article 8.

      vi. That it is in the best interests of the children that each  should
          have its full set of parents; [28] and,  that  this  can  only  be
          accomplished if the rights of the children and  the  claimant  are
          "weighed against the  deportation  and  be  allowed  to  stand  as
          against it"[28].

     vii. That the interests of the children under section 55  can  only  be
          guaranteed by the appeal being  allowed[29];  that  the  arguments
          under  paragraph  399  have  been  considered  together  with  the
          supporting case law in concluding  that  the  removal  by  way  of
          deportation would not take into account the Immigration rules .

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to give reasons of adequate for  findings  in  that
    it:

       i. Failed to provide reasons for their  findings  on  the  claimant's
          risk of re-offending or causing him, particularly  given  that  it
          was noted he showed no remorse [1];

      ii. Failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the claimant  has
          no ties to Jamaica, given that he had lived there until he was  26
          [2];

     iii. Failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  it  would  be  in  the
          children's best interests for the claimant to remain in the United
          Kingdom [3];

      iv. Failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that the children's
          interests  outweigh  that  of  the  public,  particularly  as  the
          claimant had been found to be a risk to women [4];

    And that in consequence, the Tribunal's assessment  of  proportionality
    is flawed.






 9.  On  25  April  2013  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  granted
    permission to appeal on all grounds, having extended time  pursuant  to
    rule 24 (4) (a) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005.

10. In his response pursuant to rule 24, the claimant submits:

       i. That Judge Nightingale had erred by extending  time  [4],  and  in
          doing so had acted unfairly [5];

      ii. That the Tribunal had considered properly the risk  posed  by  the
          claimant and given proper reasons for this [7-8];

     iii. That the Tribunal had directed itself  properly  as  to  the  law,
          referring in detail to Ogundimu, and had reached conclusions as to
          the claimant's ties to Jamaica  which  were  open  to  it  [9-11],
          having made a favourable assessment even under the new rules [9];

      iv. That there was no merit in the observation that  British  children
          should be deprived of one of their parents [12];

       v. That there were no countervailing reasons of sufficient  force  to
          outweigh the children's best interests  [13],  not  least  as  the
          claimant represents a low risk, and the reasons for the Tribunal's
          conclusions are adequately reasoned [14];

      vi. That  there  is  no  merit  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
          determination should be allowed to stand.


11. When the matter first came before me, I heard submissions from Ms Marsh
    and Mr Nicholson, and  I  indicated  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the
    determination did involve the making of an error of law in  respect  of
    the decision to allow the appeal under article  8.  On  reflection,  it
    appeared that this may not have been material, given that the  Tribunal
    appeared to have allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules as well
    as under article 8 and the grounds  of  appeal  made  no  challenge  to
    findings under the Immigration Rules. I therefore had the matter listed
    for further argument on this issue and gave directions to both  parties
    to serve skeleton arguments

12. Mr Nicholson submitted that the Tribunal had indeed allowed the  appeal
    under the immigration rule, and that while their  decision  could  have
    been clearer, it was evident when reading paragraphs 26 and 28 together
    that they had allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  had
    been entitled, on the particular facts of this case, to have done so.

13. Mr McVeety, relying on his skeleton argument, submitted that it was not
    clear that the Tribunal had allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and, that they could not properly have done so.

14. The Tribunal's determination could have been more elegantly  expressed,
    but it is evident  from  both  paragraphs  26  and  28  that  they  had
    concluded that the appellant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I accept that, as Mr Nicholson submitted, that was a conclusion
    that would have been open to them, and the fact that they did not refer
    in detail to the provisions, is not a sufficient basis to conclude that
    they did not do so.   Had  the  respondent  challenged  the  Tribunal's
    decision to allow the appeal the Immigration Rules, it may well be that
    permission to appeal on that ground would have been granted, but  there
    was no such ground put forward either in  the  initial  application  or
    subsequent to the directions issued drawing attention to  this  matter.
    No application has been made to amend the grounds of appeal.

15. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the Tribunal allowed the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.  While it may be  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    failing to gave adequate reasons for allowing the appeal under  article
    8, that error cannot be material.

16. For these reasons, I uphold the Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

    Directions

    1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
       making of an error of law and I uphold its  decision  to  allow  the
       appeal under the Immigration Rules.





Signed                       Date: 27 August 2013


[pic]
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

