
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 8th September 2015               |On: 18th September 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Kenadid Abokar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slatter, Counsel instructed by Richmond Chambers
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of The Netherlands  date  of  birth  27th
       September 1987. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  A.  Cresswell)  to  dismiss  his  appeal
       against a decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.




       Background and Matters in Issue

    2. The Appellant claimed to have lived in the United Kingdom since 2000.
       In November 2009 he was convicted of a public order offence,  and  in
       the three years that followed was convicted a further  ten  times  of
       various offences, most relating to the possession of cannabis or  the
       failure to comply with the requirements of community  orders  already
       imposed.  One of these convictions, on the 5th March  2012,  resulted
       in the Appellant being sentenced to 14 weeks  imprisonment.   On  the
       28th July 2014 he was sentenced to 20  months'  imprisonment  upon  a
       guilty plea being entered to the following  charges:  obstructing  an
       officer searching for drugs, two counts  of  possession  of  cannabis
       with intent to supply and possession of the proceeds of the  sale  of
       drugs. It was following this latter conviction  that  the  Respondent
       took a decision to deport  him  with  reference  to  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, Regulation 19(3)(b).

    3. In the statement of reasons which accompanied the notice of  decision
       to deport the Respondent does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
       acquired a right to permanent residence. It is not accepted  that  he
       has been resident in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five  years.   Pursuant  to
       Regulation 21(5) the Appellant therefore fell to be deported  on  the
       grounds that his personal conduct represented a genuine, present  and
       sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of   the   fundamental
       interests of society. That threat was identified as  the  Appellant's
       prolonged involvement with  the  trade  in  illicit  drugs,  and  his
       propensity to re-offend: his OASYS assessment had placed him at a 74%
       risk of re-offending within a 2 year period.

    4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal found as fact  that  the  Appellant
       had entered the United Kingdom on the 20th July 2000 and that he  has
       lived here ever since.  At paragraph 14 (vii) it is recorded that the
       Appellant conceded  that  had  not  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
       residence since there was not sufficient  evidence  that  he  or  his
       mother, who had brought him here from Holland, had  exercised  treaty
       rights, or that any  member  of  the  family  had  had  comprehensive
       sickness insurance. The Appellant had  however  maintained  that  the
       Respondent had to  show  'imperative'  grounds  for  his  deportation
       because he had lived in the UK for a continuous period of  ten  years
       or more prior to the decision to deport him.  Although  he  had  been
       sent to prison in 2012 this had not interrupted his integration  into
       the UK. The Tribunal considered this argument at paragraph 14 (viii):

           "Mr Daouda maintained that the Appellant had resided in  the  UK
           for 10 years but this ignores the  fact  that  the  relevant  10
           years is required  to  be  a  continuous  period  preceding  the
           decision to deport (Regulation  21(4)).  Here  that  period  was
           broken by the Appellant's imprisonment on  5th  March  2012  and
           28th July 2014"

    5. Having made that finding the  Tribunal  went  on  to  find  that  the
       Appellant had not integrated into UK society: "he  has  never  worked
       beyond a single day and still appears to be avoiding work, preferring
       to earn his income  from  crime  and  the  misery  of  others".   The
       Tribunal determined the appeal on the basis that  the  Appellant  had
       only attracted the lowest level of protection  under  Regulation  21.
       The Respondent had to show that the Appellant's removal was necessary
       on the  grounds  of  public  policy  in  accordance  with  Regulation
       21(5)(c), and the Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  she  had  done  so,
       finding at paragraph 17 that the  Appellant's  conduct  represents  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
       fundamental interests of society.

    6. The determination goes on to address human rights. It is  found  that
       the Appellant no longer has a family life in the UK since  he  is  an
       adult. In respect of his private life any interference is found to be
       proportionate.  The  factors  set  out  in  sections  117A-D  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are not addressed.

    7.  The  Appellant  drafted  his  own  grounds  of  appeal.  These  were
       amplified, with permission, by Mr Slatter. The alleged errors are  as
       follows:

        i) The First-tier Tribunal has misunderstood or  miscalculated  the
           Appellant's period of residence in the  UK  prior  to  his  ever
           having been convicted, and so applied the wrong test  under  the
           Regulations. The fact that he had been sent to  prison  in  2012
           did not automatically prevent the Appellant from qualifying  for
           enhanced  protection:  MG  (prison-  Article  28(3)(a)  of   the
           Citizens' Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC).   Insofar
           as the determination purports to carry out a  proper  assessment
           of whether the Appellant is integrated, such  an  assessment  is
           flawed for a failure to take relevant factors into account.

       ii) The determination contains an error in respect of the claim that
           the Appellant had accrued five years permanent residence in  the
           UK prior to the relevant decision. His representative on the day
           had not withdrawn the claim: he had simply conceded  that  there
           was not sufficient documentary evidence to  establish  that  the
           Appellant's mother had been a worker during the relevant period.

      iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to Article 8.  The
           factors set out in Badewa (ss117A-D and EEA Regulations)  [2015]
           UKUT 00329 (IAC) should have been applied. It is  arguable  that
           the Appellant fell under Exception 1 in s117C(4), he having been
           lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life, being socially
           and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK  and  there  being  very
           significant obstacles to his reintegration in the Netherlands.

       iv) In respect of  the  factual  question  of  whether  or  not  the
           Appellant is  rehabilitated  the  determination  is  flawed  for
           failure to take relevant factors into account, such as the  fact
           that the Appellant had never been offered any therapy  or  other
           assistance to deal with his cannabis addiction.  Further  it  is
           submitted that in its assessment of whether there is  a  present
           threat the Tribunal erred in impermissibly placing weight on the
           fact that the Appellant had  convictions  prior  to  that  which
           prompted the decision to deport him.

    8. Mr Kandola opposed each of these  grounds.  His  submissions  can  be
       summarised as follows:

        i) The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that the  Appellant
           did not qualify for enhanced protection  on  the  basis  of  ten
           years continuous residence. The  period  had  to  be  calculated
           backwards from the relevant date in 2015 and whilst the  periods
           of  imprisonment  in  2014  and  2012  could  not   conclusively
           establish that there was a break  in  continuity  of  residence,
           they were strong indications of a lack of integration:  see  MG.
           The Tribunal had in any event gone on to  consider  the  factual
           background and had made a sustainable finding that the Appellant
           was not integrated into the UK.  Read as a  whole  it  is  clear
           that the Tribunal took all relevant factors into account.

       ii) In respect of the purported right of permanent residence arising
           from five years of residence in accordance with the Regulations,
           the Secretary of State places reliance on the  clear  concession
           made by the  Appellant's  representative  and  recorded  in  the
           determination.  Even if that concession had not been made, there
           was not the evidence to support such a claim. The Appellant  had
           accrued two periods of two years in education but  had  not  had
           comprehensive sickness insurance during that time. The  evidence
           that his mother, or he, had been jobseekers or  workers  at  any
           other time was scant and not sufficient  to  justify  a  finding
           that the five years had been accrued.

      iii) Mr Kandola accepted that the First-tier Tribunal did not address
           ss117A-D, or make express findings on Exception 1 as set out  at
           s117C(4), but he submitted that it was clear from  the  findings
           that the Tribunal had considered the test therein not to be met.

       iv) As to the Appellant's lack of rehabilitation and  propensity  to
           reoffend the Secretary of State  submits that  the  findings  of
           the Tribunal were open to it on the evidence available.  It  had
           been the Appellant's evidence that he had not  sought  any  help
           for his alleged addiction to cannabis.

       Ground 1: Ten Years Continuous Residence

    9. Mr Slatter accepted that the Appellant  had  to  show  ten  years  of
       continuous residence immediately  preceding  the  relevant  decision,
       that being the decision to deport taken on  the  9th  February  2015.
       Although the Regulations do not stipulate that the  ten  year  period
       must be calculated by counting backwards from the decision,  that  is
       the suggestion in the Directive[2] in  the  form  of  words  used  at
       Article 28(3): "an explusion decision may not be taken against  Union
       Citizens, except if the decision is based on  imperative  grounds  of
       public security, as defined by member states if  they...have  resided
       in the host member  state  for  the  previous  ten  years"  (emphasis
       added).   This interpretation finds support in the decisions  of  the
       Court of Justice in Onuekwere[3] and MG[4]:

           "It follows that, unlike the requisite period for acquiring  the
           right of permanent  residence,  which  begins  when  the  person
           concerned commences lawful residence in the host  member  state,
           the 10 year period of  residence  necessary  for  the  grant  of
           enhanced protection provided for  in  Article  28(3)(a)  of  the
           Directive 2004/38 must be calculated by counting back  from  the
           date of decision ordering that person's expulsion".

   10.  Mr  Slatter  further  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  periods   of
       imprisonment  in  both  2012  and  2015  were  relevant  factors   in
       determining whether there had been any break in the continuity of the
       Appellant's ten  years  of  residence.   In  accordance  with  MG  he
       accepted that such periods  of  imprisonment  must  have  a  negative
       impact insofar as establishing integration is concerned.  As such the
       First-tier Tribunal was entitled to place weight on these  sentences.
       What it was not entitled to  do  was  to  treat  those  sentences  of
       imprisonment as determinative of the question  of  integration.  That
       had to be determined with reference to all relevant  factors,  taking
       into account matters such as length of residence in the UK, his  age,
       state of health, family and economic situation, social  and  cultural
       integration into the host member state and the extent of his links to
       the Netherlands. The question is whether that is in fact the approach
       taken in this determination.

   11. At paragraph 14 of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  makes
       clear that the findings have been reached after consideration of  all
       of the evidence taken in the round: "I emphasise that I have come  to
       my findings after considering the evidence  as  whole  and  that  the
       order of findings in this determination does not indicate  the  order
       in which I came to my findings".  The determination then goes  on  to
       set out the Appellant's lengthy list of offences and convictions, his
       own evidence that he had only ever worked for one  day,  having  left
       school with no qualifications bar a Key stage 3  graduation  diploma,
       his problems with cannabis addiction, his length of residence in  the
       UK and away from the Netherlands.  As  to  the  latter  the  Tribunal
       acknowledges that there would be a  need  to  "readjust  to  life  in
       Holland after such a length of  time  away".   At  paragraph  18  the
       Tribunal concludes as follows:

           "I have concluded that this Appellant has not integrated into UK
           society. Whilst he has had  some  study,  he  has  never  worked
           beyond a single day and  still  appears  to  be  avoiding  work,
           preferring to earn his income  from  crime  and  the  misery  of
           others...."

   12. I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did here fail to take
       relevant factors into account. Mr Slatter suggested that there was  a
       failure to consider the Appellant's age and the length of time he has
       spent in the UK, but it is apparent from paragraph 14 (xvi) that this
       is not so: "I do bear in mind and place in the balance the time  that
       the Appellant has been in the UK and the fact that he has lived  here
       now for nearly 15 of  his  nearly  28  years".   The  same  paragraph
       recognises that after such an absence ties to Holland would  have  to
       be re-established; pertinent to that was the  fact  that  his  sister
       continues to regularly visit that country and that it  would  not  be
       difficult for other family members to do the same.  Whilst  paragraph
       14 (viii), read in isolation, might indicate an impermissibly  narrow
       assessment of whether the Appellant has attracted an  enhanced  level
       of protection, it is clear from the remaining  sub-sections  of  that
       paragraph that the Judge has turned his mind to all of  the  relevant
       factors, and in particular the question of whether the  Appellant  is
       "integrated". He need  not  make  express  findings  on  whether  the
       periods of imprisonment disrupted the Appellant's integration  if  he
       never accepted that he was integrated in the first place.

       Ground 2: Permanent Right of Residence

   13. There was a clear concession recorded in the determination  that  the
       Appellant would not be pursuing any claim to have accrued five  years
       continuous residence in accordance  with  the  Regulations:  this  is
       recorded at paragraph 14(vii). Mr Slatter informed  me  that  he  had
       spoken to the Appellant's previous representative and that issue  was
       taken with the way that  the  concession  was  recorded.  Mr  Slatter
       submitted that Mr Daouda had only  indicated  that  he  had  not  the
       documentary evidence to establish that  the  Appellant's  mother  had
       been working.

   14. If issue were to be taken with the way that the matter is recorded in
       the determination, then evidence to that effect from Mr Daouda should
       have been tendered. The determination is  unambiguous  and  there  is
       nothing  in  the  record  of  proceedings  to  support  Mr  Slatter's
       submission. It is apparent from the record that  Mr  Daouda  made  no
       submissions at all on the permanent residence point and that the HOPO
       on the day had noted that there had been a "withdrawal of all of  the
       5 year claim".

   15. The point was conceded and there  was  no  error  in  the  Tribunal's
       approach.

       Ground 3: ss117A-D NIAA 2002

   16. Mr Kandola concedes that the determination does not address  ss117A-D
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   He points  out
       however, that given the clear findings on  the  Appellant's  lack  of
       integration, this can hardly be material. I  agree.  Section  117C(4)
       provides that a foreign criminal can successfully resist  deportation
       where he has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his  life,
       he has socially and culturally integrated into the UK and there would
       be very significant obstacles to  his  reintegration  into,  in  this
       case, Dutch society.    Quite apart from the merits or  otherwise  of
       the Tribunal's assessment of the Appellant's level of integration  in
       the UK there was no evidence to suggest that the Appellant would face
       "very significant obstacles" to his reintegration in the Netherlands.
       The finding at paragraph 30 was one that was open to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal:

           "He would be  returning  to  a  country  whose  culture  he  was
           familiar with, having lived here for some 8 years to an  age  of
           weeks short of 13. I do not imagine it will be easy for  him  to
           re-establish himself as he will need to remember  the  language,
           but I know that English is widely spoken by  many  Dutch  people
           and the Appellant spent his  early  formative  years  in  Dutch-
           speaking schooling....he can take advantage  of  a  resettlement
           grant to ease his re-establishment".

   17. There being  no  challenge  to  these  factual  findings,  there  can
       realistically be no challenge to the overall conclusion: although  it
       will "not be easy" for the Appellant to return to Holland  there  are
       not "very significant obstacles to his reintegration".

       Ground 4: Rehabilitation and the Propensity to Reoffend

   18. As can be seen from the foregoing, the First-tier  Tribunal  rejected
       the Appellant's claim to have gained enhanced protection by virtue of
       his long residence in the UK, and the Appellant himself conceded that
       he had not acquired permanent residence. It  was  therefore  for  the
       Respondent to show that the conduct of the  Appellant  represented  a
       genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
       fundamental interests of society.

   19.  In  considering  this  question  the   Tribunal   identified   three
       interconnected factors as significant: the Appellant's  addiction  to
       drugs, his propensity to commit crime  and  the  seriousness  of  the
       offence for which prompted this deportation action.

   20. As to the first, the grounds complain that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
       give appropriate weight to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  not
       offered any professional  help  in  dealing  with  his  addiction  to
       cannabis.  That  is  in  fact  noted  at   paragraph   14(xii).   The
       determination recognises that the  Appellant  was  moved  around  too
       often I detention so was unable to avail himself of any courses,  but
       it is also found that he has done nothing  to  try  and  address  his
       addictions himself, nor did he take the opportunity to do  so  whilst
       under any of the various Community Orders he has been subject to.

   21. In respect of the Appellant's criminality, the grounds correctly note
       that the OASYS report was found not to be satisfactory and  for  that
       reason the Tribunal declined to place weight on it. However that  was
       not the only evidence before the Tribunal concerning future risk. The
       determination sets  out  in  detail  the  sentencing  remarks  of  Mr
       Recorder Malins who described the offence of possession  with  intent
       to supply as "very serious". It is noted that Judge Malins considered
       the offence all the more serious because of the Appellant's  apparent
       inability  to  learn  from  his  mistakes  and  co-operate  with  the
       Community Sentences imposed on him thus far. The First-tier  Tribunal
       agrees that this history was an aggravating feature of the offence in
       question: "he spurned the chances  given  by  financial  penalty  and
       suspended imprisonment, conditional discharge  and  community  order.
       Even sentences  of  imprisonment  did  not  cause  him  to  stop  his
       offending...the Appellant has wilfully wasted chance  after  chance".
       The Tribunal continues at 14 (xv):

           "I know that those involved in  the  supply  of  Class  B  drugs
           contribute to illness and financial loss for  many  citizens  in
           this  country.  Anybody  reading  serious   articles   regularly
           appearing in the media knows that to be the  case.  The  use  of
           Class B drugs, uncontrolled  by  medical  guidance,  presents  a
           substantial danger to the health  of  users  and  a  significant
           threat to the  economies  of  the  state  and  individuals,  and
           destroys many families. That the Appellant has been involved  in
           the supply of such drugs can only mean that he  was  willing  to
           contribute to incalculable harm not only through  health  issues
           and to the victims of the acquisitive crime that  goes  hand  in
           hand with a user's need to make money to buy their drugs. It  is
           common knowledge that addicts can cause untold  harm  to  family
           relationships, even where there is  not  serious  harm  for  the
           individual.   The   Appellant's   own   personal   and    family
           circumstances show the point  in  issue.  He  has  continued  to
           commit offences relating to the use and supply of  cannabis;  he
           became addicted to cannabis; he committed offences  relating  to
           supply partly to feed his own habit; he  contributed  to  others
           having a supply of the drug;  he  causes  distress  to  his  own
           family. Not surprisingly, the Respondent takes  a  very  serious
           view of those who cause these problems by ensuring that there is
           a ready supply of such drugs. I share her concern".

   22. These were all legitimate  findings  open  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
       evidence before it.  The Tribunal did not reach the  conclusion  that
       it did on the basis of the OASYS report, but with  reference  to  the
       "very serious" offence committed by the Appellant and the aggravating
       circumstances surrounding it. There is no identifiable error  of  law
       in the approach the First-tier Tribunal took.

       Decision

   23. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and it is upheld.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         17th September 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 9th July 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Simpson
[2] Directive 2004/38/EC
[3] C-378/12
[4] C-400/12

