
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00591/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th September 2018                  | On 21st September 2018             |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr JONATHAN MBUNGU-MUNDELE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Karnik, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Belgium.  In  a  decision  dated  23
         January 2018 the First-tier Tribunal  ('FTT')  allowed  his  appeal
         against  a  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department ('SSHD') dated 25 September 2016 to deport him  pursuant
         to regulations 23 and 27 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.
          The SSHD has appealed against that decision.

      2. The respondent entered the UK in 2010 when  he  was  a  13-year-old
         child with his parents.  He acquired a right of permanent residence
         in the UK.  On 23 September 2016 he was convicted of,  inter  alia,
         two offences of possession of class A drugs with intent  to  supply
         and sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment.





Procedural history

      3. The FTT heard the appeal on 8 January  2018,  when  it  heard  oral
         evidence from the respondent, his sister and his mother.   The  FTT
         accepted the respondent and his witnesses to be  entirely  credible
         and  concluded  that  notwithstanding  the   respondent's   serious
         criminal conviction there are no serious grounds of  public  policy
         or public security for removing the him from the UK.

      4. The SSHD's application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  initially
         refused by FTT Judge Foudy before being  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Davey in a decision  dated  28  March  2018.   Judge
         Davey observed that the FTT had arguably  not  adequately  reasoned
         its conclusion.

    Hearing

      5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Diwnycz made it  clear  that  he
         relied upon a single ground  of  appeal:  the  FTT's  decision  was
         inadequately reasoned, particularly in  relation  to  the  risk  of
         reoffending.  He then made very short  submissions  to  the  effect
         that the OASYS report was very brief and there was little  evidence
         to support the FTT's finding that the OASYS report indicates a  low
         risk of re-offending.  Mr Karnik took me through the  OASYS  report
         and invited me to find that this finding was open to the FTT.

      6. After hearing from both representatives, I announced that  I  would
         be dismissing the SSHD's appeal for reasons to follow.

    Discussion

      7. The FTT  has  given  adequate  reasoning  for  its  findings.   The
         decision may be concise, but this must be viewed in context.  There
         was no real dispute regarding the factual matrix or the legal  test
         to be applied.  It was only  necessary  for  the  FTT  to  consider
         whether there were serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
         security  for  removing  the  respondent  from  the  UK.   The  FTT
         expressly directed itself to the fact that the respondent committed
         very serious offences.  The FTT acknowledged and  agreed  with  the
         SSHD's submission that the respondent's  offending  had  a  drastic
         effect on society.

      8.  The  FTT  was  entitled  to  balance  this  with  factors  in  the
         respondent's favour: he entered the UK  as  a  child  and  acquired
         permanent residence; he has no significant links in Belgium; he had
         no previous convictions and was of  previous  good  character;  his
         offending was out of character; he was a model prisoner; the  OASYS
         report indicates there is a low risk  of  reoffending;  there  were
         positive features in support of the low risk of reoffending: family
         support and he had been offered a place at  University;  there  are
         good prospects of the respondent being completely rehabilitated  in
         the UK, where he will have the support of probation  together  with
         the emotional and financial support of his family in the UK - there
         was an express acknowledgment this could be provided long  distance
         to Belgium but would not be as strong  as  if  he  lives  with  his
         sister in Sheffield, with his mother in the same city.  It was also
         expressly acknowledged that the mother  and  sister  could  not  be
         reasonably expected to leave the UK to reside in Belgium  with  the
         respondent, given their strong links to the UK.

      9. I turn to the OASYS report because this was Mr Diwnycz's sole focus
         when making his oral submissions.  I entirely  accept  Mr  Karnik's
         submission that when the  OASYS  report  is  read  as  a  whole  it
         provides adequate evidence in support of the FTT's finding that  it
         indicates there is a low risk of reoffending and  there  is  family
         support.  In particular, the OGRS scores for reoffending are at the
         lower end of the spectrum (9% within a  year  and  17%  within  two
         years),  the  author  assessed  the  offending  as  excluding   any
         aggravating features and also  assessed  the  appellant  as  having
         recognised  the  impact  and  consequences  of  offending  on   the
         community.

     10. The FTT was well aware of and took into account the serious  nature
         of the respondent's offending but was entitled to conclude for  the
         reasons provided, as summarised above, that there  are  no  serious
         grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security  to  justify  the
         respondent's removal.  In so doing the FTT was mindful of the  need
         to comply with the principle of proportionality and  the  remaining
         factors set out at regulation 27(5).

Decision

The decision of the FtT does not contain a material error of law and is  not
    set aside.


Signed                              Date

Ms Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     20 September 2018
