
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00132/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2019                  |On 09 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN
                 (sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SEBASTIAN [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent  (hereinafter
    "the claimant") against a decision of the Secretary of State to  deport
    him.  This is a "public policy" decision under Regulation  23(6)(b)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The claimant has not exercised treaty rights for a continuous period of
    five years and so  the  Regulations  give  only  the  lowest  level  of
    protection against removal. Nevertheless he cannot be  deported  unless
    his personal conduct represents "a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society,
    taking into account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
    not need to be imminent". This is set out at Regulation 27(5)(c).

 3. This claimant has one conviction for an offence of dishonesty  in  2016
    for which he was fined, and, much more seriously, he was sent to prison
    for a total of nine months in March 2017 for  possessing  an  imitation
    firearm in a public place and possessing a knife in a public place  and
    possessing a Class B drug (amphetamine).  The offences  were  committed
    on 10 January 2017.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal has allowed the appeal and the main reason  for
    allowing the  appeal  is  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    requirements of 27(5)(c) were met.

 5. We must reflect on the judge's position and remember that  he  had  the
    advantage of hearing from the claimant and  the  claimant's  witnesses.
    They made a favourable impression and we must give that proper  weight.
    We note that it was their evidence, which the judge accepted, that  the
    process of being taken before the court and sent to prison  has  had  a
    shocking and salutary effect, which may well be the case.

 6. The problem we have in considering  whether  the  claimant  presents  a
    present risk is the seriousness of the  offence.  The  appellant  armed
    himself and went with a friend who considered himself under threat.  He
    may well have intended to use the weapons only in his defence but  they
    were taken to be used. This was a serious threat to the peace.  Further
    the offence was committed recently and the claimant has  a  history  of
    some kind of mental disturbance.  We mention this respectfully.  People
    cannot help being ill, but there has been an attempt at  suicide  which
    his wife had to deal with,  and  we  are  concerned  about  this  man's
    inherent stability.

 7. This is not  a  case  where  there  has  been  a  prolonged  period  of
    industrious good behaviour showing that the criminality can be seen  in
    isolation.  It is not a case where there is any objective  evidence  of
    the person taking advantage of the  opportunities  that  are  sometimes
    available  in  prison  to  reflect  on  his  life  and  reorganise  his
    behaviour. That evidence is just not there.

 8. The OASys Report found the risk of harm to the public  to  be  "medium"
    even though the risk of reconviction was  "low".  In  other  words  the
    probation officers preparing  the  OASys  Report  did  not  expect  the
    claimant to get into trouble, but if he did it was expected to be quite
    serious trouble.  The claimant  said  that  he  had  been  consuming  a
    mixture of alcohol and amphetamine when he committed the offence.  That
    was clearly going to affect  his  behaviour.   We  have  not  seen  any
    independent  evidence  that  indicates  that  any  intention  that  the
    claimant has formed to put such behaviour behind him  really  has  been
    put behind him.  The evidence is just not there.

 9. We do not accept that the judge was entitled to accept as accurate  the
    evidence of the family members in the terms that they gave  it  without
    something objective to give it weight and context.  This is not to  say
    that family members are necessarily dishonest but they are likely to be
    biased  and  their  evidence  needs  to  be  taken  with  a  degree  of
    circumspection unless it could be put in context and we found there  is
    nothing here that puts the evidence in a context which  would  make  it
    more likely to be right.  It is simply evidence of an aspiration.

10. The short point is that although we understand  where  the  judge  came
    from, we cannot accept he was entitled to reach the conclusion that  he
    did about the appellant's future behaviour when there is no independent
    evidence to give reasons to find the optimism to be well-founded.  This
    means that the reason advanced by the judge for allowing the appeal was
    wrong in law and we set aside the decision.

11. We then have to decide what to do now.  There is no-one here before  us
    to represent the claimant.  We have had the advantage  of  reading  the
    papers.  The stay in the United Kingdom is not particularly  prolonged;
    it is not long enough to  give  even  the  basic  level  of  particular
    protection to which EEA nationals can be entitled.  The appellant is  a
    family man. He has three minor children but they have only been in  the
    United Kingdom since 2013 and there is nothing to suggest it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the family to return to Poland or manage  without  him
    if that is what they chose to do. No doubt it is in the children's best
    interests that the family stays together but that is not determinative.
    We do not suggest that removing the claimant is a trivial matter.   His
    family members clearly want to live in the United Kingdom which is  why
    they have established themselves there, but they cannot  do  that  with
    the claimant because of the claimant's behaviour.   It  is  not  unduly
    harsh  or  unlawful  in  the  sense  of  it  being  a  disproportionate
    interference with their private and family lives  to  require  them  to
    manage without him or to require them to move.

12. There is one other point we feel  we  ought  to  make  because  we  are
    concerned that it is not misrepresented.  There was an  observation  in
    the OASys Report about the claimant being a risk to children.  This  is
    not for the disgusting reasons that sometimes occur.  It  is  simply  a
    reflection of the extreme caution that is shown to children these  days
    that caused the officer to suggest there was a need to be alert to  the
    possibility of problems if the claimant returned to  the  family  home.
    That is as far as it goes, but to the extent that it is relevant to our
    deliberations it is in favour of dismissing rather  than  allowing  the
    appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision.   It  is  a  further
    indication that there is not a proper reason yet to be  confident  that
    the professed declarations of new behaviour are well-founded.

13. In short we find that this is a case of  a  man  whose  criminality  is
    sufficient to warrant deportation and who has not  been  able  to  show
    that his or his family's circumstances come within the  exceptions  and
    he is not somebody who is entitled under EEA  law  with  its  different
    regime to be  allowed  to  remain  for  the  reasons  we  have  already
    outlined.

14. The only thing to say before concluding is that this decision was  made
    without the benefit of the claimant being here.  We put the  case  back
    in the list to 11.30 a.m. to give him time to arrive; at 12.30 p.m.  he
    has not appeared.  No explanation has been offered and the papers  show
    that proper service was  effected  on  his  address  for  service.   It
    follows therefore that as far as we can ascertain he had proper  notice
    of the hearing and failed to attend without explanation, which  is  why
    we continued in his absence.

    Notice of Decision

15. This is our decision.  The Secretary of State's  appeal  succeeds.   We
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  substitute  the
    decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deport him.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 April 2019                   |

