
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00049/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 May 2019                       | On 10 June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 DANIEL [J]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None


                                  DECISION

Introduction

      1. This is a 're-making' decision.  In an 'error of law' decision sent
         on 13 November 2018, I gave reasons  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FTT') made errors of law in allowing Mr [J]'s appeal,  such  that
         the decision must be remade.


      2. Mr [J] is a citizen of Germany, and therefore an EEA  citizen.   He
         was born in Germany in 1997, and is 22 years old.  He  entered  the
         United Kingdom ('UK') with his parents in 1998, when he was a baby.
          He has remained in the UK since this time.


      3. Mr [J] was convicted  of  offences  involving  Class  A  drugs  and
         sentenced to 40 months  imprisonment  on  26  June  2016.   In  his
         decision dated 11 January 2018 to make  a  deportation  order,  the
         SSHD did not accept that Mr [J] had acquired a permanent  right  of
         residence and did not consider that he had lawfully resided in  the
         UK for a continuous period of 10 years.  The SSHD's position at the
         time of his decision was therefore that Mr [J]'s  deportation  only
         needed to be justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
         security, and he did not need to make  out  serious  or  imperative
         grounds.  The SSHD's position has now changed and will be explained
         in more detail below.

Procedural history

      4. Mr [J] appealed against the SSHD's decision to deport him,  to  the
         FTT.  The FTT  accepted  that  Mr  [J]  was  entitled  to  enhanced
         protection on imperative grounds, and as such the  SSHD  needed  to
         demonstrate imperative grounds for his removal.  The FTT found that
         the SSHD was unable to do so and allowed the appeal.


      5. The SSHD appealed against FTT's decision, in which it  allowed  the
         appeal under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016
         Regulations).  I allowed that appeal for  reasons  set  out  in  my
         'error of law' decision.


      6. Mr [J] has not had the benefit of legal  representation  throughout
         the appeal proceedings before the Tribunal.  The relevant  evidence
         available to the Tribunal has been limited as  a  result  of  this.
         There have also been indicators that Mr  [J]'s  mental  health  has
         been an on-going concern.  He has attended his  GP  regarding  this
         and been referred to a psychiatrist.  It is with these  matters  in
         mind that I made directions to both parties at the 'error  of  law'
         hearing. Mr [J] was directed to provide: (i) a letter / report from
         the probation service outlining his behaviour in prison  and  since
         leaving prison and an update on his risk assessment in light of his
         behaviour and completion of  offence  related  coursework;  (ii)  a
         letter written by him explaining what he did from the beginning  of
         2009 to his conviction together with any evidence that his  parents
         were working or looking for work in the UK when he was a child.


      7.  The  SSHD  was  directed  to  submit  a  position  statement  that
         addressed: (i) whether it was accepted that Mr [J] was entitled  to
         permanent residence in light of all  the  evidence,  including  his
         length of residence as accepted by the FTT, and if  not,  why  not;
         (ii) whether the evidence from probation was accepted;  (iii)  what
         level of protection from deportation Mr [J] was entitled to, in all
         the circumstances.


      8. The matter was listed for a  're-making'  hearing  on  14  December
         2019, when [J]'s application for an adjournment  was  unopposed  by
         the SSHD.  At that hearing Mr [J] explained  that  since  the  last
         hearing in November 2018 he had moved, with the permission  of  the
         probation service, away from the Doncaster area  and  various  gang
         links, to Rotherham.  He therefore had a new probation officer  who
         has assisted him in attending his GP.  Mr [J] explained that he had
         been urgently referred to a psychiatrist because he  felt  mentally
         and emotionally very unwell.  The SSHD's representative agreed that
         in these circumstances it was very important to  have  up  to  date
         evidence regarding Mr [J]'s circumstances, and she was  content  to
         do what she could to assist as Mr [J] was not legally  represented.
         I gave further directions to the effect that it  would  be  helpful
         for Rotherham Probation  Service  to  provide  a  letter  /  report
         addressing: Mr [J]'s behaviour in prison and since leaving  prison;
         his compliance with licence conditions and  probation;  an  updated
         risk assessment in the light of  behaviour,  current  circumstances
         and  completion  of  offence  related  coursework;   prospects   of
         rehabilitation  in  the  UK  in  contrast  to  his   prospects   of
         rehabilitation if deported to Germany.  I also directed Mr  [J]  to
         provide any medical evidence and referrals.


      9. I once again directed the  SSHD  to  submit  a  position  statement
         addressing the updated evidence  and  providing  an  updated  legal
         position in light of it, including whether Mr [J] was  entitled  to
         enhanced protection.

Hearing

     10. Mr [J] attended the hearing.  He was surprised  to  hear  that  his
         probation officer had  not  sent  a  letter  to  the  SSHD  or  the
         Tribunal.  Enquiries were made and it was confirmed that  a  letter
         had been sent, but to the wrong address.   A  comprehensive  letter
         dated 6 March 2019  from  Ms  Baldwin,  a  probation  officer,  was
         emailed to the Tribunal.  Mr Diwnycz was  given  time  to  consider
         this together with a file of papers Mr [J]  had  brought  with  him
         concerning his family's residence in the UK,  his  medical  records
         and his interactions with the probation service.


     11.  I  then  invited  Mr  [J]  to  provide  an  oral  update  on   his
         circumstances.  He said that he had successfully completed a course
         on victim awareness and been asked to be a mentor  on  courses  for
         other young men.  He  continued  to  regularly  see  his  probation
         officer.  He has taken steps, with the assistance of the  probation
         service, to obtain paid employment and was hopeful of  a  job  with
         [~], which was employing ex-offenders in Rotherham.  He  has  lived
         in the same accommodation since his move to Rotherham and  had  the
         daily support of his friend's step-mother.  In addition, his family
         regularly drove to visit him on  a  weekly  basis.   He  felt  much
         better emotionally.  He was unable to attend  an  appointment  with
         the psychiatrist as it clashed with a reporting  condition  in  his
         licence but steps were being taken with the assistance of probation
         to rearrange this appointment.


     12. Mr Diwnycz  apologised  for  the  SSHD's  failure  to  comply  with
         directions on two occasions, and the failure to provide an  updated
         written position  statement  on  the  applicable  legal  test.   Mr
         Diwnycz acknowledged that Mr  [J]  had  provided  cogent  oral  and
         documentary evidence and in the circumstances he did  not  need  to
         cross-examine him.  He accepted that Mr [J]  "is  a  changed  young
         man" who "appreciates the gravity of his  offending".   Mr  Diwnycz
         confirmed that the SSHD now  had  a  fuller  picture  of  Mr  [J]'s
         circumstances in the UK, and he  was  able  to  update  the  SSHD's
         position.  The SSHD no longer disputed Mr [J]'s claim that: (i)  he
         acquired permanent residence in the UK, and (ii)  he  was  lawfully
         resident for a continuous period of 10 years  in  the  UK  counting
         back from the date of the deportation decision, notwithstanding his
         imprisonment between 2016 and 2018.


     13. Mr Diwnycz  finally  confirmed  that  the  only  issue  for  me  to
         determine is whether Mr [J]'s particular circumstances  (which  are
         not disputed by the SSHD)  are  such  that  the  SSHD  is  able  to
         displace the burden  of  establishing  that  there  are  imperative
         grounds for his removal.  Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that  this  is  a
         high test to meet but did not offer any substantive submissions  on
         how the test was met in this case.


     14. After hearing from Mr [J] and Mr Diwnycz, I indicated that I  would
         be allowing the appeal, for the reasons I now provide.   Given  the
         limited nature of the issues that remain in  dispute,  the  reasons
         provided are relatively brief.

Legal framework

     15. The relevant law, set out in the 2016 Regulations and decisions  of
         the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU), was not a matter
         of dispute between the parties.  The appellant is an  EEA  national
         and his deportation must, therefore, comply with EU law as set  out
         in regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.


     16. It  is  for  the  SSHD  to  establish  the  justification  for  the
         deportation of an EEA national under the 2016 Regulations. B v Land
         Baden-Wurttemberg; SSHD v  Vomero  (Cases  C-316/16  and  C-424/16)
         [2018] Imm AR 1145 make it  clear  that  in  the  case  of  an  EEA
         national who has been continuously resident in the UK for at  least
         ten years prior to  the  deportation  decision  (and  that  is  the
         relevant date from which to count back), deportation  can  only  be
         justified on the most serious ground namely 'imperative grounds  of
         public security'. In order to rely on this most serious ground  the
         individual must first establish that they have a permanent right of
         residence (see, B and Vomero at [49] and  [61]).   In  establishing
         these grounds, the individual conduct must  represent  a  "genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society". That, in general, requires  that
         it be established that the individual has a propensity to  reoffend
         in the future. However, in exceptionally serious cases, it  may  be
         that past conduct  (which  in  general  alone  cannot  establish  a
         "present" threat) may suffice (see SSHD v Robinson (Jamaica) [2018]
         EWCA Civ 85 at [80] - [86]  per  Singh  LJ).  It  was  not  however
         suggested by the SSHD in this appeal that the appellant's offending
         was an 'extreme case' where his  past  conduct  alone  might,  even
         under the 'serious grounds' basis for deportation, suffice.


     17.  In  reaching  any  assessment,  in  particularly  in  relation  to
         proportionality,  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the
         individual's age, state of health, family and  economic  situation,
         length of residence in the UK and social and  cultural  integration
         in the UK, rehabilitation prospects in both countries and any links
         with his or her own country, must be taken into account.
         Regard must be had to the considerations set out in Schedule  1  in
         the same way as in a non-EEA  removal  or  deportation  appeal  the
         considerations  in  s.117B   and   s.117C   respectively   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  must  be  taken  into
         account.


     18. The social rehabilitation of the Union  Citizen  in  the  State  in
         which he has  become  genuinely  integrated  is  not  only  in  his
         interests but also that of the European  Union  in  general  -  see
         Tsakouridis, C-145/09, EU: C: 2010.

Re-making the appeal

Matters not in dispute

     19. The relevant legal framework is complex.  However, Mr  Diwnycz  has
         clarified on behalf of the SSHD that it is no longer necessary  for
         there to be an examination of whether  Mr  [J]  acquired  permanent
         residence or  can  be  said  to  have  been  continuously  lawfully
         resident for a period of 10 years.  This is because  the  SSHD  has
         conceded these matters in Mr [J]'s favour.  I am satisfied that the
         SSHD was correct to make these concessions.  The evidence  that  is
         now available clearly supports  Mr  [J]  having  accrued  permanent
         residence.


     20. In addition, whilst Mr [J] was in prison for a  significant  period
         of some two years for  a  very  serious  offence,  that  period  of
         imprisonment during the relevant  10  years  does  not  necessarily
         prevent him from  qualifying  for  enhanced  protection  if  he  is
         sufficiently integrated, albeit a period of imprisonment must  have
         a  negative  impact  in  so  far  as  establishing  integration  is
         concerned.  Mr [J]'s integrative links to the UK (both  before  and
         after his imprisonment) are extensive, strong and deep-rooted.   Mr
         [J] has never left  the  UK  since  he  was  a  baby.   His  entire
         education has been in the UK.  All of his immediate family  members
         are in the UK.  English is his first language.


     21. However Mr [J]'s involvement in  gang  activities,  conviction  and
         imprisonment militate against his integration.  Nonetheless, Mr [J]
         has demonstrated a sustained period of good behaviour and  ambition
         to rehabilitate in the long term during his imprisonment  and  upon
         his release.  His has successfully participated in  every  form  of
         rehabilitative activity available  to  him.   He  has  successfully
         moved  away  from  past  criminal   associates   and   demonstrated
         resilience in setting up home  in  a  new  area,  albeit  with  the
         assistance of the probation service, his family and  friends,  upon
         whom he continues to place a great deal of  reliance.   He  has  an
         outstanding appointment with a psychiatrist  but  has  demonstrated
         recent improvements in his confidence and mental health.  The whole
         focus of his life is centred on the UK.  In all the  circumstances,
         Mr Diwnycz was correct to concede the period  of  imprisonment  has
         not had the effect of breaking the integrative links  with  the  UK
         (when counting back from January 2018).

Application of accepted facts to the enhanced protection test

     22. Mr [J] used 'spice' daily and sold drugs to finance this.  This led
         to his drugs conviction and sentence  of  40  months  imprisonment.
         This is a very serious offence and led to a significant  period  of
         imprisonment.  The nature and extent of Mr [J]'s  past  drug  habit
         and his involvement in the supply of class A drugs are matters  the
         UK and the EU are entitled to and do take  particularly  seriously,
         as do I.


     23. On the other hand, Mr [J] has been  consistently  remorseful  since
         his imprisonment.  He has worked  hard  in  prison  and  since  his
         release to improve himself, and has been broadly  successful.   The
         2017 OASYS report describes his risk of reoffending because of  his
         involvement in class A drugs as medium. In her letter dated 6 March
         2019, Ms Baldwin describes the risk of re-offending as  low.   This
         must be at the higher end of the spectrum of 'low' because the risk
         of reconviction within one year is assessed at 25% and  within  two
         years at 40%.  I note that the risk of harm is assessed  as  medium
         because of Mr [J]'s past involvement with a  gang  from  Mexborough
         which are known to use weapons.  However, Ms  Baldwin  states  that
         the risk will be reduced if he is able to sustain a period of  time
         with no association with the gang and complying positively with his
         licence conditions.  Since his release  from  custody  on  30  July
         2018, Mr [J] has been pro-active in relation to these  two  issues.
         He removed himself away from Mexborough  and  has  demonstrated  an
         ability to start a new life without the gang but with  the  support
         of probation, friends and  family  in  the  UK.   Since  moving  to
         Rotherham, Ms Baldwin states that Mr [J] has engaged "really  well"
         with probation, offending  behaviour  coursework,  the  police  and
         'Inspiring Intelligence'.  In all the circumstances, I  agree  with
         Ms Baldwin that the risk of re-offending is low.


     24.  I  entirely  accept  Ms  Baldwin's  assessment   that   Mr   [J]'s
         rehabilitation prospects are far greater in the UK than in Germany.
          Ms Baldwin was wrong to state that Mr [J] does not  speak  German.
         The FTT found that he does.  However, I accept his  entire  support
         structure (in terms  of  probation,  stable  accommodation,  family
         contacts, healthy friendships, potential employment  opportunities,
         community support) is in the UK.  I accept that the absence of this
         structure will adversely impact Mr [J]'s mental health and  ability
         to sustain his rehabilitation.  Further, Mr [J]  has  already  been
         referred  to  a  psychiatrist  in  the  UK   to   assist   in   his
         rehabilitation.  The entire process would have to  start  from  the
         beginning in Germany, when in the UK Mr [J] is well on the  way  to
         ensuring that the short-term rehabilitation  thus  far,  translates
         (with the assistance of his support structure) into something  that
         lasts into the medium and long-term.


     25. Mr [J] has resided in the UK from his arrival as  a  baby  in  1998
         continuously up until his imprisonment and then after  his  release
         in July 2018 i.e. for a period in excess of 19 years  and  for  the
         vast  majority  of  his  life.   He  has  a  comprehensive  support
         structure in place  in  the  UK  and  his  rehabilitation  will  be
         adversely impacted if he is deported to Germany.


     26. Consequently, while I acknowledge the significance  and  abhorrence
         of a risk (albeit low risk) of serious re-offending in relation  to
         Class A drugs and involvement in gang violence (capable of  causing
         medium harm), that risk  does  not  amount  to  either  serious  or
         imperative grounds of public policy.

Conclusion

     27. It has been accepted that Mr [J] has  both  a  permanent  right  of
         residence and was, at the date of the  SSHD's  decision  to  deport
         him, able to establish the ten  years'  continuous  residence  such
         that his deportation could only be justified on 'imperative grounds
         of  public  security'  under  regulation  27(4)(a)  of   the   2016
         Regulations.  For the reasons I have set out above  this  threshold
         has not been met in this case.


     28. It follows that it is not necessary for me to make further findings
         on the proportionality of  Mr  [J]'s  deportation  under  the  2016
         Regulations.  Suffice it to say that the  factors  weighing  in  Mr
         [J]'s favour, would, in my judgment, carry considerable  force  and
         his appeal succeeds on this alternative basis.

Decision

     29. I re-make the decision  by  allowing  Mr  [J]'s  appeal  under  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 June 2019

