
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 November 2014                           |On 20 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     AAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Collins of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1 February 1984.

2.   By a decision letter (undated) but served under cover of  a  letter  of
    15 January, the Respondent made a deportation order under Section 32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The decision was  a  detailed  one.   That
    claim was refused and was also certified under  Section  72(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.  It was not considered that  the  appellant  would  face  the
    requirement   of   humanitarian   protection.    In   that   connection
    consideration was given to the situation in Somalia and  in  particular
    the risk  from  Al-Shabaab.  So  far  as  humanitarian  protection  was
    concerned, that was excluded under paragraph 339D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   Consideration was also given in respect of Article 3 and Article  8  of
    the ECHR.    It  was  not  considered  that  a  removal  would  in  any
    circumstances act in breach of the obligations imposed thereunder.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Blackford and Mrs V Street  (non-
    legal member) on 28 June 2013 and 18 October 2013.  It was  a  detailed
    determination.  The appeals were dismissed.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted and the matter came before me in pursuance  of  that
    permission. There was a hearing before me on 16 May 2014.

6.   The Tribunal, having upheld the Section 72 certificate in  relation  to
    asylum and humanitarian protection, the live issue in the appeal before
    me was essentially whether the Tribunal had given proper  consideration
    to the issues raised under Sections 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  It  seems  to
    me that there were obvious factors as being relevant to  the  issue  of
    vulnerability of the appellant returning.  Such  being  his  long  term
    residence in the United Kingdom, his mental illness, and  his  lack  of
    community ties.  It was my finding that the issue of vulnerability  was
    not one that had been specifically considered by the Tribunal  and  was
    in those circumstances a significant omission.

7.   It was upon that narrow basis that the decision was  set  aside  to  be
    remade.

8.   It was made clear in my judgement on that matter dated  26  June  2014,
    and attached as an appendix to this decision, that I found no reason to
    set aside the other findings of the Tribunal nor indeed to  reopen  the
    issue of  Article  8.   The  matter  was  to  be  retained  within  the
    jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal.

9.   The rehearing on the limited aspect came before me on 16  August  2014.
     The hearing was however adjourned  in  the  light  of  a  new  country
    guidance case being imminent.   Given that adjournment was  opposed  by
    Mr Collins who represents the appellant, I set out the reasons for that
    adjournment in my decision of 21 August 2014.

10.  Eventually the matter did come for hearing. I have regard  to  a  large
    volume of material.  I note the background material and statements that
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  There are various other bundles which I have marked as bundle A and  B.
    In addition to the country guidance case of AMM and Others (Conflict  -
    humanitarian crisis: returnees; FGM) Somalia  [2011]  UKUT  4445  (IAC)
    there was the more recent decision of  MOJ  and  Others  (Returning  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).

12.  In addition my attention was drawn to the Operational Guidance Note  on
    Somalia of September 2013  and  to  medical  reports  relating  to  the
    appellant, particularly those prepared  by  the  Camden  Islington  NHS
    Trust dated 3 October 2014 and 29 October 2014.

13.  As I have indicated, the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    a detailed one. Much evidence was considered and findings of fact  were
    made.

14.  It  is  a  claim  of  the  appellant,  although  not  accepted  by  the
    respondent, that he came to the United Kingdom in October 1995 to avoid
    the war in Somalia which he had witnessed first hand as  a  minor.   He
    came with  his family.  He had first come to the attention of the  Home
    Office in March 2001 and he  had  applied  for  a  Home  Office  travel
    document.  On 14 July 2003 the appellant was granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain as a dependant of his sister.

15.  On 22 June 2009 the appellant was convicted at Blackfriars Crown  Court
    of two counts of rape and sentenced to five  years'  imprisonment.   He
    was ordered to sign on the Sex Offenders  Register  indefinitely.   The
    deportation order was signed on 25 January 2011 he  being  assessed  as
    constituting a high  risk  of  harm  to  children  and  adults  in  the
    community.  He was issued with a notice of liability for deportation on
    5 September 2011  and  refused  to  sign  an  acknowledgement  of  that
    receipt.  Following completion of his sentence he  was  detained  under
    immigration powers until granted bail by the  Tribunal  on  12  October
    2011.  On 7 February 2014 he had lodged an appeal against the  decision
    to deport him, which appeal  had  been  allowed  and  remitted  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  for  reconsideration.   He  was  interviewed   in
    connection with his claim for asylum on 5 July 2011.

16.  Thus it was that the decision of January 2013  which  is  the  operable
    decision for the purposes of this appeal.

17.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  and  upheld  the  Section  72(2)
    certificate.

18.  The family history of the appellant is that of the arrival of a  number
    of his siblings into the United Kingdom from 1973 onwards.  There  were
    some seven siblings including the appellant, the last being his  sister
    Faduma who arrived in 2003.  His mother arrived in  1999.   It  was  an
    important part of his claim, particularly that of  private  and  family
    life, that all his close family members are  now  said  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and most have British citizenship or are in the  process
    of applying for the same.  The father  had  also  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom but died in October 2006.  It  is  said  that  his  mother  has
    particular needs to be cared for and  that  he,  the  appellant,  among
    others provides that need for her.  The appellant did not live at  home
    in the latter stages of his residence in the United Kingdom but kept in
    close touch with his family.   A number of siblings have  now  children
    of their own and the family has  a  taxi  company  business  which  the
    appellant has from time to time assisted with.

19.  The appellant himself is single having no children.  The  appellant  in
    his evidence to the First-tier Tribunal stressed that he had  been  out
    of Somalia since he was 5 and knew little about the Somali culture  nor
    could he speak the language properly.  He had been living in the United
    Kingdom since he was 10 years old and started school  in  year  7.   He
    spoke broken Somalia and could  speak the basics with  his mother.

20.  The Tribunal had regard to a  number  of  statements  from  the  family
    members of the appellant particularly a statement from his  mother  and
    sisters as well as brothers.

21.  So far as his education was concerned he indicated that he had gone  to
    the South Camden Community School, obtaining a pass in business and IT.
    He worked part-time at a sports centre for two years and did courses at
    the Jobcentre in plumbing, painting and decorating.  He  described  the
    jobs that he did also in  prison  and  the  courses  taken  to  prepare
    himself for release.  On his release from prison in 2011  he  had  been
    in a probation hostel following which he went to live with  his  mother
    in February 2012 in  a  two  bedroom  flat.    She  had  problems  with
    arthritis and diabetes and had  difficulty  in  undertaking  her  daily
    household work.

22.  A feature of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  or
    not there was anyone in the immediate family who  could  care  for  his
    mother were he to be removed from the jurisdiction.  It was the finding
    that there would be some support  for  her.   Considerable  regard  was
    given to her condition and to that issue.  It was accepted in paragraph
    162 of the  determination  that  the  appellant's  mother  had  a  real
    dependency upon the appellant as he cares for her  in  many  ways.  The
    Tribunal found, however that she would not be left without  support  if
    he returned to Somalia for the reasons as set out in paragraph  165  of
    that determination.  The finding by the Tribunal that the appellant was
    capable was significant. Aat paragraph 168 of that determination it was
    noted that although there was  a  letter  referring  to  post-traumatic
    stress  disorder  from  Roxanne  Timmies,  a  forensic  mental   health
    practitioner, that aspect of the case was not pressed  at  the  hearing
    and thus it is understandable that the Tribunal gave little  weight  to
    the mental health aspect of the appellant.

23.  The starting point for a consideration of vulnerability lies indeed  in
    the head note to AMM which provides as follows:-

         "(i)     Despite the withdrawal in early August 2011 of  Al-Shabaab
             conventional forces from at least  most  of  Mogadishu,  there
             remains in general a real risk of Article 15(c) harm  for  the
             majority of those returning to that city after  a  significant
             period of time abroad.  Such a risk does not arise in the case
             of a person connected with powerful actors or belonging  to  a
             category of middle class or professional persons, who can live
             to a reasonable standard in circumstances  where  the  Article
             15(c) risk,  which  exists  for  the  great  majority  of  the
             population, does not apply.  The significance of this category
             should not, however, be overstated and, in particular, is  not
             automatically to be assumed to exist, merely because a  person
             has told lies.


         (ii)     The armed conflict in Mogadishu does not, however, pose  a
             real risk of Article 3 harm in respect of any person  in  that
             city, regardless of circumstances.   The  humanitarian  crisis
             in southern and central Somalia has led to  a  declaration  of
             famine in IDP camps in Mogadishu;  but  a  returnee  from  the
             United Kingdom who is fit for work or has  family  connections
             may be able to avoid  having  to  live  in  such  a  camp.   A
             returnee may, nevertheless, face a  real  risk  of  Article  3
             harm, by reason of his or her vulnerability."

24.  The head  note  perhaps  reflects  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in
    paragraphs 366 and 369 of AMM, in particular that someone  with  family
    connections in Mogadishu or who is AMM fit for work could avoid the IDP
    camps where the risk of Article 3 harm  currently  pertains.   In  that
    connection  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  repeated  its  findings  at
    paragraph 177 of the determination that the appellant was fit for work.



25.  To some extent AMM has been subsumed in a number of respects  into  the
    decision of MOJ and Others.  Once again it may be helpful  to  set  out
    the relevant passages in  the  head  note  to  that  decision.   It  is
    recognised that not all the issues addressed in MOJ  are  identical  to
    those in AMM.

         "(ii) Generally, a person who is 'an ordinary civilian'  (i.e.  not
             associated with the security forces; any aspect of  government
             or  official  administration  or  any  NGO  or   international
             organization) on returning to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
             absence will face no real risk of persecution or risk of  harm
             such as to require protection under Article 3 of the  ECHR  or
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  In  particular,
             he will not be at real risk simply on account of having  lived
             in a European location for a period of time  of  being  viewed
             with  suspicion  either  by  the  authorities  as  a  possible
             supporter of Al-Shabaab or by Al-Shabaab  as  an  apostate  or
             someone whose Islamic integrity has been compromised by living
             in a Western country.


         (iii)    There has been durable change in the sense  that  the  Al-
             Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is  no
             real prospect of a re-established presence  within  the  city.
             This was not the case at the  time  of  the  country  guidance
             given by the Tribunal in AMM.


         (vii)    A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
             will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living  in  the
             city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing a
             livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from
             his clan members who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is
             only likely to be forthcoming for majority  clan  members,  as
             minority clans may have little to offer.


         (viii)  The  significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
             changed.  Clans  now  provide,  potentially,  social   support
             mechanisms and assist with access to  livelihoods,  performing
             less of a protection function than previously.  There  are  no
             clan militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan
             based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for   minority   clan
             members.


         (ix)     If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a  return  to
             Mogadishu after a period of absence has no nuclear  family  or
             close relatives in the city to assist him  in  re-establishing
             himself on return, there will need to be a careful  assessment
             of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations   will
             include, but are not limited to;

                  Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                  Length of absence from Mogadishu;
                  Family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
                  Access to financial resources;
                  Prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                  employment or self-employment;
                  Availability of remittances from abroad;
                  Means of support during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
             Kingdom;
                  Why is the ability to fund the  journey  to  the  west  no
                  longer enabling an appellant to secure  financial  support
                  on return."

         (x)  Put another way, it will be for the person  facing  return  to
             explain why he would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
             opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic  boom,
             especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees
             are taking jobs at the expense of those who  have  never  been
             away.


         (xi)     It will therefore, only be those with no  clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circulates  falling  below  that  which   is   acceptable   in
             humanitarian protection terms."

26.  As is made clear, relocation to Mogadishu for a person  of  a  minority
    clan with no former links to the city, no access to funds and no  other
    form of clan, family or social support is unlikely to be a realistic  ,
    in the absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
    financial support. There will be a real risk of having  no  alternative
    but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp  where  there
    is still a real possibility  of  living  in  conditions  falling  below
    acceptable humanitarian standards.

27.  It is the burden of the submissions made by Mr Collins,  on  behalf  of
    the appellant, that he is such a person who falls within  the  category
    of someone having no family or clan support and no means of working  or
    having money sent to him and a person  who  by  his  mental  condition,
    simply would not be able to cope in a new environment and  particularly
    one that he has had very little experience of work indeed.

28.  Mr Collins invites me to find that, although the  appellant  may  speak
    some Somali language it is extremely basic, particularly as he has been
    away from the country for so long.  He will certainly stand  out  as  a
    stranger to Mogadishu by the way that he speaks.   In  that  connection
    my attention was drawn to paragraph 199 of the decision in MOJ.

29.  My attention was also drawn to paragraphs 214  and  215  of  MOJ  where
    consideration is given to the view of the  UNHCR,  who  considers  that
    return to Mogadishu is only reasonable where an individual  can  expect
    to benefit from a meaningful nuclear and/or extended family support  or
    from  clan  protection  mechanisms.   It  is  to  be  noted  that   the
    traditional extended family and community structures of Somali  society
    no longer constitute a stronger  protection  and  coping  mechanism  in
    Mogadishu as they did in the past.

30.  He invites me to find that in reality there is no such support for  the
    appellant in Mogadishu.  All his close  family  and  meaningful  family
    connections are in the United Kingdom and there is no  suggestion  that
    he has any family members or extended family members in Mogadishu  such
    as to give help and assistance to him.  Although it was not found by  a
    previous Tribunal that the appellant was a minority clan member, it  is
    submitted that even where he to be a majority clan member the advantage
    of clan membership is less significant than perhaps once it was.

31.  On returning to the issue of the 2014 UNHCR report the Tribunal in  MOJ
    at paragraph 244 highlighted the particular  risk  categories  in  that
    particular  report.   The  most  relevant  for  the  purposes  of  this
    immediate appeal is that  of  "persons  with  a  mental  disability  or
    suffering from mental illness".

32.  It is to be noted that MOJ is  a  detailed  judgment  and  much  of  it
    records the arguments made by one side and then the other.  It is clear
    that Miss Gill, who represented one or more of the appellants  in  that
    appeal relied very heavily upon the UNHCR reports for her submissions.

33.  For example, in paragraph 252 it is noted that  she  seeks  to  draw  a
    sharp  distinction  between  business  people  and  investors   seeking
    economic and business opportunities and those who have  neither  family
    nor clan connections nor access to  economic  resources.    It  is  the
    latter category that is the most vulnerable to  marginalisation  in  an
    IDP camp.   Her position is that there is  also  inadequate  facilities
    for treating those with mental health difficulties,  there  only  being
    some five health centres in the country.  Thus it is her submission  as
    recorded particularly in paragraph 254 of  MOJ  that  a  returnee  with
    mental health problems would be unable to access appropriate treatment.

34.  Essentially it is therefore at paragraph 404 onwards that  there  is  a
    detailed consideration by the Tribunal of the issues facing  those  who
    return with the importance of considering the individual  circumstances
    of those who return.  Such is  mirrored  in  the  head  note  to  which
    reference has already been made.  The Tribunal noted that there was  no
    reliable figures available  as  to  the  number  of  people  living  in
    conditions of destitution in IDP camps in Mogadishu.

35.   Clearly  in  assessing  the  issue  of  destitution  the  prospect  of
    financial  support  is  something  also  to  be  borne  in  mind  as  a
    significant factor.

36.  It  was  noted  by  the  Tribunal,  particularly  in  relation  to  the
    appellant MOJ himself, that he had employment in the United Kingdom and
    had undertaken courses whilst serving his sentence. It is not  accepted
    therefore that he had no prospects of obtaining suitable employment  on
    return. The case of MAA was considered by the Tribunal that he would be
    able to call upon the support network  of  the  majority  clan  in  re-
    establishing contact with relatives with whom he was living before  his
    departure.  As to SSM, the Tribunal did not accept that  he  would  not
    find employment, particularly as he is in good health and  it  was  not
    immediately obvious what would disqualify him from seeking a low  level
    job in one  of  the  many  new  enterprises  spawned  by  the  economic
    explosion of entrepreneurship that Mogadishu has seen.  SSM was also  a
    member of a majority clan.

37.  In the course of his submissions to me Mr Collins  places  considerable
    reliance upon the medical reports now submitted.  The first in time was
    that from the Camden Islington NHS of 3 October  2014  prepared  by  Dr
    Mohammed Abdelghani who is a consultant psychiatrist.  He sets out  his
    experience with complex depression, anxiety and trauma.

38.  The history of the appellant was  noted  in  the  report,  particularly
    that at the time of the offences in 2008 he was  taking  illicit  drugs
    and drinking excessively.  It was noted that whilst in prison and  from
    that time his mental state started to  deteriorate  and  the  appellant
    began to feel depressed, showing symptoms of PTSD related to  traumatic
    events witnessed during the  war  in  Somalia.   Whilst  in  prison  he
    received counselling and was placed on anti-depressant medication.   In
    2012 upon his release he was placed on a waiting list to receive trauma
    focused psychological work and referred to the teams CDAT at the end of
    2013 since when he has been in regular contact  with  that  team.   The
    author of the report was part of that team and had direct contact  with
    the appellant noting that, following certain medication his  depressive
    symptoms had responded  although  there  was  still  active  depression
    symptoms.  The appellant reported feeling stressed about his court case
    and although there was still active depression symptoms.  The appellant
    reported feeling stressed about his court case and the  possibility  of
    his  being  deported.   The  appellant  spoke  of   mood   swings   and
    particularly insomnia and nightmares which he attributed to the war. He
    had a  poor  appetite  and  was  losing  weight,  complaining  of  poor
    concentration and low energy levels.

39.  His medical history was essentially a whiplash injury  in  2004  and  a
    head injury sustained during a fight in 2006.  He  said  that  in  1992
    when he was 8 years old he was separated from his parents and  most  of
    his siblings in the war.  His aunt took  him and  his  younger  brother
    and fled to Ethiopia, arriving in the United Kingdom in 1995.   He said
    that he went to school in the United Kingdom and set out  a  number  of
    schools that he had attended. He said that he had  done  one  part-time
    job for a year and a half in 2003 and 2004 and he worked  in  a  sports
    centre for three hours a week.  He applied for many jobs but was  never
    successful because he was under-qualified. He  spoke  of  the  fear  of
    being injured and killed were he to return to Somalia.

40.  There are a number of other reports that were  presented  as  a  bundle
    for my consideration.  One that was dated September from Dr Kayal, also
    from  the  Camden  Islington  NHS.   He  was  a   specialist   clinical
    psychologist.  The date is not entirely clear but seemingly 17 December
    2013 was when the assessment was conducted.

41.  The appellant complained that his worst memories were those at  a  time
    when he was in Somalia.  He attributes much of his mental  disorder  to
    those years.  He has had a history of drink  and  alcohol  abuse  since
    early adolescence.

42.  Significantly, the appellant denied any  suicidal  ideas  or  intention
    and indicated to Dr Kayal that he had never had such thoughts.

43.  A psychological report  was  prepared  by  Dr  Laura  Kennis  dated  29
    October 2014.  It was prepared at the request of the solicitors  acting
    on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   She  sets  out  her   qualifications,
    particularly in clinical psychology.

44.  The appellant indicated that he was  separated  from  his  parents  and
    siblings at the time the war started in 1992.  His aunt helped him  and
    two brothers leave Somalia and live in Ethiopia.  He came to the United
    Kingdom in 1995. He has contact with their aunt.  The  appellant  found
    it difficult to adjust to life in the United Kingdom,  particularly  he
    struggled to make friends at school and to learn the language.  It is a
    matter of sadness to the appellant that two of his close  friends  made
    in the United Kingdom have died, one was murdered and one from  natural
    causes.  He expressed feeling anxious, lonely  and  afraid  during  his
    school years.  He became clinically obese and suffered  bullying  about
    his weight as a result.  He failed all his GSCEs but went on to study a
    course of business and management at a college and he was able to  pass
    that and subsequently completed maths  an  English  courses  whilst  in
    prison.

45.  He was introduced to cannabis when he was 14 years  of  age.   He  felt
    angry and upset that he had lost his father and his close friends.   He
    feels remorse for his crimes.

46.  His symptoms of PTSD  became  more  evident  as  he  was  detoxed  from
    alcohol and drugs and was observed to be  experiencing  nightmares  and
    flashbacks attributable to his time in Somalia.   Following  completion
    of his prison sentence he was followed up by the probation  office  and
    referred to the Traumatic Stress Council in July 2013, being  diagnosed
    with severe major depressive disorder (MDD).

47.  He has been receiving treatment and  counselling  particularly  at  the
    stress clinic.

48.  Reference is also made to an assessment by scoring to show a  diagnosis
    of PTSD. A score above  20  is  indicative  of  severe  depression  and
    fulfilling the criteria for major depressive  disorder.   It  was  said
    that he  scored  a  total  of  24/27.   A  concern  was  his  reporting
    experience and thoughts he would be better  off  dead  or  thoughts  of
    hurting him.  He denied having active plans to harm himself due to  his
    family but did not know how he would cope were he  to  be  deported  to
    Somalia and would be likely to commit suicide without  the  support  of
    his family.

49.  It was by  the  appellant  said  that  his  emotional  health  problems
    impacted significantly on his ability  to  complete  day-to-day  tasks,
    stressing an ability  to  work  due  to  high  levels  of  anxiety  and
    experience when leaving the house and feeling socially isolated.

50.  A model for recommended treatment is set out in  the  report.    It  is
    said that he requires ongoing treatment for his PTSD and for MDD.   The
    importance of a family network is also stressed in the report.  A  safe
    environment is necessary  to  overcome  the  feelings  of  anxiety  and
    stress.

51.  The appellant is currently being treated with sertraline 200  which  is
    anti-depressant medication. The view  of  the  doctor  quoting  various
    reports from the World Health  Organisation  is  that  there  would  be
    insufficient facilities to treat the appellant in Mogadishu.

52.  Mr Tufan, who represents the respondent, invited me to find that  there
    was little if any evidence to support the contention that the appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 1995.  He invited my attention to  the
    fact that at one stage he had described coming in 1992 when aged 8  yet
    when he claimed for a travel document in March 2001 he had  claimed  to
    have been resident for seven years and three months, which indicated an
    arrival in 1993.  Although the appellant seeks to indicate that he  has
    been  studying, there was little if any evidence of his presence in the
    United Kingdom prior to 2001.  It is not accepted  that  the  appellant
    was  without  family  in  Somalia  particularly  his  aunt  and   other
    relatives.  There is no reason simply to accept what the appellant said
    at face value.

53.  He invited me to be wary of the nature of the mental illness  which  he
    claims.  This is particularly so given that, although he claims to have
    been in the United Kingdom since 1995, there  has  been  no  indication
    prior to 2009 or later that he has had any mental health  difficulties.
    He invites me to find that had there been such depressive incidents  as
    is described by the various experts, such would have manifested  itself
    well before the event.  He invites me to find that the reality  of  the
    matter is that it  is  his  anxiety  to  resist  removal  that  is  the
    underlying factor of his mental health difficulties and  which  is  now
    being relied upon by him to resist removal.   He  submits  that  it  is
    significant  that,  although  the  nature  of  his  mental  illness  is
    described as severe, it was not a matter relied upon  at  the  previous
    Tribunal hearing which undermines, he submits, the credibility of  what
    is now proposed.

54.  He submits that the appellant lives within an extended  family  in  the
    United Kingdom with many brothers and sisters with no reason at all why
    remittances could not be made to him in Somalia.  He has worked in  the
    past and has acquired qualifications in prison. There is no  reason  at
    all why he cannot work and support himself in Mogadishu.

55.  He invites me therefore to find that the threshold  of  Article  3  has
    not been made out.  He also submits that there was  a finding  that  he
    was a majority clan member on a previous occasion and that there is  no
    reason at all why he cannot obtain some clan support.  In terms of  MOJ
    and the decision thereof he invites me to look at  the  three  personal
    profiles of the appellants set out therein and the  approach  taken  by
    the Tribunal to them, particularly at paragraphs 435,  440,  452,  463,
    467, 477 and 481.

56.  Given the issue of clan membership I raised the  issue  as  to  whether
    that could be clarified at the hearing.  Mr Collins  took  instructions
    and upon those instructions indicated that the appellant's mother is  a
    member of a majority clan, namely the Hawiye whereas his father  was  a
    member of a minority clan, the Midgan.  It was accepted, however,  that
    in the claim for asylum no case had been put  forward  as  to  minority
    clan membership.

57.  In considering whether or not a return to Mogadishu  would  expose  the
    appellant to a section 3 breach of his rights, the starting point is to
    look at the factors as highlighted by the Tribunal in MOJ, particularly
    at head note (ix).

58.  It was the case for the appellant that he had  for  a  few  years  been
    living in Mogadishu thereafter living  with  his  aunt  in  a  camp  in
    Ethiopia.  There seems to be little to indicate that  that  account  is
    not generally one that can be accepted, applying as I do  the  test  of
    reasonable likelihood or a serious  possibility.   That  the  appellant
    came to the United Kingdom  in  1995  would  accord  with  the  general
    context in which other members of his family  came  to  arrive  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Although the Secretary of State  has  challenged  that
    arrival to some extent, I find little  basis  upon  which  to  conclude
    otherwise.  Thus the appellant has been away from Somalia and Mogadishu
    for approaching nineteen years, having left as a child and  having  not
    experienced living in Somalia as an adult.

59.  Given the history of his family migration to the United Kingdom  it  is
    generally to be understood that there are no close  family  members  in
    Somalia.  His last association with his aunt was in the context of  her
    fleeing into Ethiopia.   There has  been  little  in  the  evidence  to
    indicate the presence of family members in  Mogadishu  and  indeed  the
    generality of  the  witness  statements  from  the  appellant's  family
    members, as set out in bundle B, would indicate that there are none.

60.  The aspect of his clan membership was  not  actively  pursued  nor  has
    that aspect been considered in any depth.  Certainly his mother  is  of
    the Hawiye and it may be that  some  clan  assistance  in  helping  the
    appellant adjust to life in Mogadishu might be  forthcoming.   That  of
    course should be read within the context of  a  very  large  number  of
    people; of returning diaspora members and the many people uprooted from
    their previous existence in the conflict.  He would be  competing  with
    many others for assistance and help.  It would be surprising indeed  if
    the  appellant  were  unable  to  access  any  substantial   assistance
    particularly  either  from  clan   members   of   from   a   developing
    infrastructure of support.

61.  Generally speaking the appellant is physically healthy. He  has  worked
    in the past and has acquired qualifications in prison. There would seem
    to be little reason at all why he could not gain some  employment.   It
    is not suggested that he speaks fluently  the  language  but  has  some
    basic understanding  of  it.    Indeed,  the  aspect  of  business  and
    financial support was one which occupied considerable   time  with  the
    Tribunal.  Paragraph 195 a Norwegian Land Info and Immigration  Service
    Report of 2013 was looked at in terms of its contention that it will be
    extremely difficult to return to Mogadishu if there is no one  to  rely
    on in that city.  As the Tribunal  commented,  however,  that  did  not
    accurately convey the essence of what is being said in the  section  of
    the report from which those words were taken.  Looking at the report in
    its proper context of the diaspora returning from abroad,  it  is  said
    that many are in fact  returning  to  Mogadishu  because  of  the  good
    business opportunities. The report speaks of the increasing freedom  of
    movement  and  that  many  resourceful  people   have   seen   business
    opportunities in the return.  Not all who return however were  able  to
    find a job in Mogadishu.  The report noted that the evidence as a whole
    pointed towards a very significant   economic  activity  in  Mogadishu.
    There was an effective mobile phone network enabling contact  not  only
    within Mogadishu but between those who live  in  Mogadishu  and  family
    members elsewhere.  Thus the link between the appellant and his  family
    in the United Kingdom could be established both  for  contact  and  for
    guidance.

62.  As was noted in paragraph 209 of MOJ there would seem  to  be  quite  a
    visible "economic boom" in Mogadishu said to be led  by  the  diaspora.
    An article in the New York Times published in April 2012 indicated that
    amore than 300,000 residents had returned into the  city  that  in  the
    previous six months of  that  article.   There  was  an  economic  boom
    fuelled by an infusion of tens of millions of dollars, most of it  from
    Somalis flocking from overseas spawning  thousands  of  jobs  that  are
    beginning to absorb the young militia men  eager  to  get  out  of  the
    killing business.  There is therefore a huge opportunity presented.

63.  In paragraph 211 of MOJ the Tribunal noted  the  contrast  in  evidence
    presented on this matter.  Dr Hoehne indicated that only about 1% to 2%
    of the population of Mogadishu had benefited from  the  economic  boom.
    The Secretary of State on the other hand had indicated that there  were
    tens of millions of dollars poured into Mogadishu and referred  to  the
    evidence from the Department for International Development in Somalia -
    Autumn Update 2013 in which it asserted that some 56,900 jobs had  been
    created since May 2011 and a further 45,000 new private sector jobs had
    also been created.  It gave examples  of  people  who  had  been  found
    employment upon return were set out in paragraph 225 of MOJ.

64.  On the face of the matter therefore there is little reason  to  suppose
    that were the appellant to return to Mogadishu that he could  not  find
    work there.

65.  He is a member of a large family of brothers  and  sisters  with  their
    families in turn and is part of the Somali community in his home  area.
    Although it was not specifically  canvassed,  there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that some financial support from his extended family could   be
    made available  to   him  to  assist  him  in  setting  himself  up  in
    Mogadishu.

66.  The real issue in this case, it seems to  me,  is  the  factor  of  the
    appellant's mental health.

67.  The appellant clearly is someone who has  spent  his  life  within  his
    extended family and the evidence  is  that  he  relies  upon  them  for
    support and he in turn seeks to give support to his mother.  Thus it is
    said that he would feel matters very keenly if he were without  support
    of any kind  in  Mogadishu.   Clearly  he  requires  support  from  the
    professionals in terms of counselling and assisting him  to  deal  with
    his depression and PTSD.  If he  were  put  in  a  strange  environment
    without such support would potentially make his condition worse  rather
    than better.  The relevance of  his mental  health  being  his  general
    ability to adjust  to  change  and  to  a  new  environment   and  more
    particularly his ability to manage his own affairs  and  accommodation,
    hold down a job and generally cope.   Suffering from severe  depression
    as is the evidence would be an important factor in  that  consideration
    as to whether or not the  appellant  could   function  as  an  economic
    entity if returned.

68.  Mr Collins relied upon the  fact  that  his  foreign  accent  might  be
    noticeable in Mogadishu. That was an aspect considered by the  Tribunal
    in MOJ and it was not a significant factor in the overall  analysis  as
    can be seen from the judgment.

69.  The evidence would seem to be that  the  appellant  does  require  some
    medication although for the most part it  is  counselling  and  therapy
    which are most effective for him.  It is submitted to the  Tribunal  on
    MOJ by Mr Gill, as can be seen in paragraph 253, that as many as one in
    three Somalis are affected by some  form  of  illness  largely  due  to
    prolonged exposure to conflict and instability.  There are  few  health
    centres in the country. An issue arises as to whether a  returnee  with
    mental health problems would be able to access  appropriate  treatment.
    Thus the appellant would not be unusual  in  having  symptoms  of  PTSD
    arising from flashbacks to his life in the conflict.

70.  The Tribunal considered evidence as  to  the  population  of  Mogadishu
    varying, it seems, from 1,500,000 to 2,500,000 with some 339,000 people
    IDPs.   There has been analysis of course as to how many of those  with
    mental difficulties succeed in keeping out of the camps. Certainly  the
    estimate by Dr Hoehne as to the limited number of those benefiting from
    the economic development was not accepted by the Tribunal.

71.  Essentially the real issue that is said to distinguish the case of  the
    appellant is whether or no,t by reason of his mental  difficulties,  he
    falls within the  vulnerable  category  of  individual  that  would  in
    reality have little prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
    return. He would find it difficult to make his way in  the  society  in
    the absence of family or social support.

72.  In connection with the mental difficulties which have  been  described,
    namely of severe depression and PTSD it is said by Mr Tufan, on  behalf
    of the respondent that the cause is  uncertain.   In  relation  to  the
    claimed experiences and flashbacks in Somalia it is perhaps  surprising
    that such symptoms did not manifest themselves earlier than is claimed.
    It would seem to be at the time when the appellant  was  detained  that
    the symptoms began to manifest themselves.

73.  A further report to which I  had  regard  is  that  of  Ies  Davies,  a
    chartered forensic psychologist, dated 10 May 2011.  Essentially it  is
    an  independent  risk  assessment  report  for   use   in   immigration
    proceedings but it is a detailed account of matters in or  around  that
    time.   It was prepared upon the appellant shortly before  his  release
    on licence on 25 June 2011.   It was a report based upon the  interview
    with the appellant together with consideration of  presentence  reports
    and  probation  reports  together  with  a  number  of  OASys   Reports
    particularly those dated 21 February 2011 and  12  January  2010.   The
    appellant spoke of bad memories  in  Somalia  and  bullying  at  school
    although he said  that  he  had  extra  help  with  classes  and  spoke
    positively about his schooling and his relationship with his  teachers.
    The index offence involved drink and cannabis. He  exercised  emotional
    coping strategies in response to problems in his life. It was noted  by
    the author of the report that at the time of the report  the  appellant
    was on antidepressant medication  and  had  a  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and
    depressive disorder.

74.  I regard that as a significant feature because  it  is  also  suggested
    understandably by Mr Tufan that the difficulties  which  the  appellant
    now experiences are in reality his concern at deportation  rather  than
    any deeper manifestation of cognitive difficulties.  No doubt there was
    very much stress at the detention of the appellant. However it seems to
    be at a stage prior to the formulisation of his deportation that  there
    is still this diagnosis of difficulty.  Significantly at page 29 of the
    report is a timetable highlighting major mental illness indicating that
    it was not a risk factor at the present or a year ago.  It was  not  to
    be relevant to the development of future  risk  management  strategies.
    It was not entirely clear what that means.  It  was,  as  I  indicated,
    however, as report more  focused  upon  the  risk  of  reoffending  and
    identifying the causes of offending rather than  the  analysis  of  the
    appellant's mental difficulties themselves.

75.  That his illness is not of recent origin is borne out by the  statement
    of Dr Kennis, who seems to attribute the manifestation of the  PTSD  in
    early life as comfort eating and other coping strategies including  the
    use of alcohol or cannabis.    His diagnosis of PTSD and  severe  major
    depressive  disorder  (MDD)  seem  to  be  one  made  by  a  number  of
    professionals based upon their experience of the  appellant  and  their
    involvement with him.  Such an assessment must in the circumstances  of
    this case be given very serious consideration indeed.   It was noted in
    the report at 6.3.1 his mental health problems impact upon his  ability
    to complete day-to-day tasks.  He rarely  leaves  the  home  and  feels
    isolated, avoiding social activities.  That  has  an  impact  upon  his
    ability to work or indeed his wiliness to do so.  At present he has the
    support of his family members but were he to be  removed  to  Mogadishu
    that degree of support would not be available to him.

76.  From reading the reports of as a whole there is little indication  that
    his symptoms have been exaggerated to  the  medical  practitioners  who
    have dealt with him.

77.  Dr Kennis, in her  report,  perhaps  ventures  somewhat  inexpertly  to
    areas of credibility and country conditions and is of the opinion  that
    because of his mental health difficulties the appellant  would  not  be
    unable to cope with the stress  of  living  in  a  tense  and  unstable
    environment filled with constant reminders of his past traumas.

78.  Reference is made to suicidal ideation.  Significantly that  is  denied
    by the appellant that he has any intention of killing himself except on
    occasions  when  he  is  very  depressed  he  expresses  a  feeling  of
    hopelessness.  The threat of suicide however is made by  the  appellant
    particularly if returned. Dr Kennis recommends  that  he  continues  to
    receive specialist mental health treatment in the UK.

79.  I remind myself that my focus is  and  should  remain  upon  Article  3
    rather than Article 8 and that there is  for  every  appellant  a  high
    threshold to meet in that connection. Nevertheless I  do  find,  having
    considered the medical evidence as a whole, that his severe  depression
    and mental difficulties will as  a  matter  of  commonsense  materially
    affect his ability to  function  as  an  individual,  particularly  one
    within a social context.

80.  I find that that factor should be taken together with a lack of  family
    or social  support;  with  a  lack  of  familiarity  with  customs  and
    traditions in Somalia and  the  absence  of  any  practical  family  or
    sibling support. I find those matters in combination with  one  another
    are  such  as  to  render  the  appellant  to  be  properly  considered
    vulnerable within the terms of MOJ such  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that he would end up in an IDP camp not being able  to  look
    after himself or to survive economically in those circumstances.

81.  In the light of such matters therefore the appeal  is  allowed  on  the
    basis that if returned there is a real risk that  the  appellant  would
    suffer harm such as  to  engage  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.   In  those
    circumstances his appeal on that issue alone is allowed.



Signed        Date 16 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

