
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00310/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 24 January 2017           |On Friday 03 February 2017           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              RADOSLAW OZGOWICZ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Smith, Counsel, instructed by IMD solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS





    Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against  a  decision
       of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 19 October 2016
       ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
       Secretary of State's decision dated 6 July 2015  to  deport  him  to
       Poland applying the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
       2006 (as amended) ("the EEA Regulations").

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Mc  Geachy
       on 20 December 2016 on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       had arguably failed to provide sufficient reasons  for  the  finding
       that the Appellant is at low risk of reoffending  and  that  he  had
       also arguably failed to give sufficient weight  to  the  Appellant's
       conviction of two years. The matter comes  before  me  to  determine
       whether the Decision contains a material error of law and  if  I  so
       find, either to re-make the decision or remit  the  appeal  for  re-
       determination by the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. The Appellant is a national of Poland.  The facts of  his  case  are
       not in dispute.  He asserts that he arrived in the UK in 2004 and it
       is accepted that he is (again) in a  stable  relationship  with  his
       partner, Anna-Maria Ozgowicz.   They  have  two  children.   She  is
       pregnant with their third child.  The couple separated in 2011 as  a
       result of the Appellant's behaviour but  they  are  now  reconciled.
       This is a point to which I will need to return.  It is also noted in
       the Decision that she and the children would not  return  to  Poland
       with the  Appellant  if  he  were  deported.  The  majority  of  the
       Appellant's family and his partner's family are also in the UK.

    4. The Appellant was convicted  of  offences  involving  the  theft  of
       property from his then employer.  I clarified at the  start  of  the
       hearing that these offences occurred over a period of two  years  in
       2011 and 2012 but were not discovered until after the Appellant left
       that employment.   He was charged and  pleaded  guilty  in  November
       2013.  He was not though convicted until February 2015  as  his  co-
       defendants pleaded not guilty.  In the period when he  was  on  bail
       between the charge and the conviction, Mr Smith confirmed  that  the
       Appellant had worked and there was no further offending (although of
       course the fact of being on bail would be a strong incentive not  to
       re-offend).   The Appellant was released  from  prison  in  February
       2016 and the period of his licence will shortly expire.

    5.  The  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  was
       initially  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mitchell.   In  a
       decision promulgated on 9 November 2015, Judge Mitchell  found  that
       the  Appellant  had  accrued  a  period  of  ten  years'  continuous
       residence and was therefore entitled to require  the  Respondent  to
       satisfy the "imperative grounds" test under the EEA Regulations.  He
       allowed the appeal, finding that there were no  imperative  grounds.
       That decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on  the
       basis that Judge Mitchell's decision contained an error  of  law  by
       the requirement of imperative grounds.  It could not  be  said  that
       the Appellant had resided lawfully for a continuous  period  of  ten
       years in the UK.  The appropriate test is accepted by the Respondent
       to be that of "serious grounds" on the basis that the Appellant  has
       acquired permanent residence by  the  exercise  of  European  Treaty
       rights for a continuous lawful period of five years,  prior  to  the
       conviction.

    6. Applying regulation 21(3) of the  EEA  Regulations,  the  issue  for
       Judge Buckwell was therefore whether there were serious  grounds  of
       public  policy  and  public  security  requiring   the   Appellant's
       deportation.  Regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations requires  that
       the relevant  decision  must  also  comply  with  the  principle  of
       proportionality, be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the
       individual and that the personal conduct must represent a  "genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious threat" to public policy or  public
       security.  The individual's previous criminal convictions do not  in
       themselves justify the decision.

    7. Although the Respondent's appeal is mainly targeted at  the  Judge's
       findings in relation to the considerations under regulation 21(5), I
       note for  completeness  that  regulation  21(6)  also  requires  the
       decision-maker to take account of  considerations  relating  to  the
       personal situation of the individual such as age, state  of  health,
       family and economic situation, length of residence,  integration  in
       the host country and ties with country of origin.

    Grounds and submissions

    8. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied in her submissions on  the  Respondent's
       grounds as amplified in the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
       from the First-tier Tribunal.

    9. The first of the Respondent's grounds concerns the  Judge's  finding
       in relation to the risk which the Appellant poses.  It is said  that
       the Judge failed to make findings or give adequate reasons  for  his
       findings in relation to material considerations.

   10. The Respondent first argues that the Judge failed to recognise  that
       the Appellant's family support was not  sufficient  to  prevent  his
       offending in the past and that the  fact  of  the  Appellant's  work
       history also  had  not  prevented  offending;  indeed  his  previous
       employment was at the heart of the offending.  It is said  that  the
       Judge was unduly impressed by those matters when  finding  that  the
       Appellant is at a low risk of offending.

   11. Conversely, it is argued that the Judge failed to have regard to the
       matters to which the Respondent  drew  attention.   Those  were  the
       causes of the Appellant's offending namely his  gambling  and  drugs
       habits which had led to the financial problems which were  the  root
       cause of the offending.  The Respondent  also  relied  on  an  OASyS
       report which suggested an increasing likelihood of offending (14% in
       the first year and 26% in the second year).  It was  submitted  that
       26% did not represent a "minimal low risk  of  re-offending  but  an
       increase in likelihood".  The Respondent also argued that the  Judge
       had failed to take into account that the Appellant had an  incentive
       not to offend following his  conviction  and  prior  to  the  appeal
       hearing (which took place only about seven months after his release)
       because of the threat of deportation.

   12. The Respondent also submitted that the  Judge  had  failed  to  give
       sufficient weight to the severity of the offence.   She  pointed  to
       the sentence of two years which had been imposed  in  spite  of  the
       Appellant's guilty plea.  In this regard, she pointed to  a  failure
       by the Judge to have regard to the sentencing remarks made  at  that
       time.  She noted the extent of the theft which involved products  to
       a market value of �100,000.  She also noted that the thefts were  to
       feed the Appellant's drug habit and recorded  the  adverse  societal
       effects of drug use.

   13. Finally, in relation to this ground, the Respondent took issue  with
       the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to  the  factors  raised   in
       regulation 21(6) and the question whether it would be "unduly harsh"
       in Article 8 terms for the Appellant's wife and children  to  return
       to Poland with him given that all are nationals of Poland.

   14. The Respondent's second ground focusses  on  [57]  of  the  Decision
       where the Judge appears to  compare  the  risk  of  the  Appellant's
       reoffending with that  posed  by  other  offenders  with  a  similar
       history.  It is said that it is not clear to whom the Judge  intends
       there to refer nor why this is relevant.  It is also said  that  the
       Judge had regard to an irrelevant factor at [60] in noting that  the
       offence was not once of violence, seemingly as a mitigating factor.

   15.  In  her  oral  submissions,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  summarised  the
       Respondent's case as being  that  the  Judge  had  given  inadequate
       reasons and had failed to have regard to the statistical data in the
       OASyS report and to the sentencing remarks.  In relation to [57]  of
       the Decision, she submitted that the Judge failed to have regard  to
       the increase in risk reflected in the OASyS  report.   She  accepted
       that the risk recorded in the OASyS report is categorised as a  "low
       risk" but she pointed to the fact that this was at the higher end of
       the scale and submitted that this was not a "minimal" risk.  In  his
       submissions, Mr Smith rightly took issue with that submission on the
       basis that the test is whether the  threat  posed  by  the  risk  of
       reoffending is sufficiently serious and not whether it is a  minimal
       one.

   16. The second of the main arguments concerned what Ms Brocklesby-Weller
       describes as the Judge "minimising the Appellant's offending".   She
       submitted that the Judge failed to take into account  the  prolonged
       nature of the offending, the breach of  trust  involved  (since  the
       offence was committed against  the  Appellant's  employer)  and  the
       reasons for the offending which included  the  Appellant's  gambling
       habit and drug addiction.

   17. In relation to the second  ground,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted
       that the Judge was not entitled to take into account a comparison of
       risk with other similar offenders.  The focus  should  be  the  risk
       posed by this individual.

   18. In relation to the proportionality consideration, she submitted only
       that the findings in relation to risk feed into the  proportionality
       assessment and if those former findings  are  found  to  contain  an
       error of law then the Judge's assessment whether it would be  unduly
       harsh for the Appellant's partner and children to accompany  him  to
       Poland (or remain in the UK without him) is infected.

   19. Mr Smith for the Appellant provided me with a very helpful  skeleton
       argument upon which he relied.  He reminded me  that  the  issue  is
       whether the Decision discloses an error of law.  He categorised  the
       Respondents' grounds as nothing more than a  disagreement  with  the
       findings.  The Judge had clearly applied the correct test.  I raised
       a query with him concerning [57] of the Decision (set out below) and
       whether the Judge had imported into his  consideration  the  earlier
       finding that imperative grounds were not met.   Mr  Smith  submitted
       that this is not the case - the Judge  is  there  merely  drawing  a
       distinction between the two tests.

   20. Mr Smith then turned his attention to the two documents on which the
       Respondent's grounds focus and which the Respondent  says  have  not
       been taken into account.  In relation to the OASyS report,  he  drew
       my attention to [57] of the Decision which clearly records that  the
       Judge has taken the OASyS report into account.  He then directed  me
       to [19] of his skeleton argument which sets out the factors which he
       says have been taken into account  arising  from  the  OASyS  report
       which support the  conclusion  reached  in  the  Decision  that  the
       Appellant is at low risk of reoffending.  Mr Smith points to [45] of
       the Decision which has regard to the submission that the risk in the
       second year is higher than the first.  However,  he  noted  that  in
       fact the Respondent's analysis is not strictly correct as  the  risk
       is cumulative.  Taken separately, the risk in the first year is  14%
       whereas the risk  in  the  second  is  12%  but  giving  rise  to  a
       cumulative risk of 26%.  The Judge also took into account the causes
       of the Appellant's offending which he found no longer  exist  ([21],
       [45], [49] and [56]) and noted also the Respondent's  acceptance  in
       submissions that the OASyS report  categorises  the  risk  as  "low"
       ([45]).

   21. In relation to the impact of family support on the Appellant's  risk
       of reoffending, Mr Smith asked me to note (as the  Judge  had  done)
       that this is not simply a case of  the  Appellant  having  the  same
       family support as when he had offended  previously.   The  Appellant
       had nearly lost his family as a result of, in particular,  the  root
       causes of his offending. The importance of that from  the  viewpoint
       of motivation not to reoffend is recorded at [22] and  [38]  of  the
       Decision. He also drew my attention to what is said at [12]  of  the
       Appellant's sister's statement and [14] of the Appellant's partner's
       statement.

   22. Mr Smith also drew my attention to a further  aspect  of  this  case
       which is  unusual  namely  the  period  between  the  offending  and
       conviction.  Ordinarily, when considering the risk of reoffending, a
       Judge can have regard only to the period  following  conviction  and
       imprisonment. Here, the Judge could and did have regard not only  to
       that period but also the period between  the  offending/guilty  plea
       and conviction which was a period of  some  eighteen  months  during
       which there had been no offending.  Of course, it is  relevant  that
       the Appellant was at the time on bail as it  is  similarly  relevant
       that the threat of deportation following release is an incentive for
       the Appellant not to re-offend  during  that  period.   However,  Mr
       Smith submitted that this  is  a  factor  to  which  the  Judge  was
       entitled to have regard ([56]).

   23. The key issue, Mr Smith submitted, is what is different now from the
       position which pertained at the time of offending.   The  Judge  was
       keen to satisfy himself that the Appellant was no  longer  gambling.
       That is mentioned on three occasions ([45],  [49]  and  [56]).   The
       Judge was similarly concerned with whether the Appellant  was  still
       using drugs.  The Judge had evidence before him  that  he  was  not.
       That similarly finds mention in a number of places.

   24. In relation to the relevance of the offence not being a violent one,
       Mr Smith submitted that the distinction was relevant  because  there
       are two fundamental interests at play in a deportation case - public
       security and public policy.  The fact  that  the  offence  was  non-
       violent was not therefore irrelevant.

   25. In relation to the risk of reoffending, Mr Smith asked  me  to  note
       that the Appellant's probation officer who prepared the OASyS report
       had reduced the regularity of his meetings with  the  Appellant,  no
       doubt due to his satisfaction that the Appellant did not  present  a
       risk.

   26. In relation to the weight given to the  conviction,  the  Judge  was
       clearly aware that a previous conviction could not of itself lead to
       the conclusion that the Appellant is a  present  threat.    That  is
       referred to four times in the Decision, three times in  the  section
       where the Judge makes his findings.   Mr  Smith  accepted  that  the
       Judge had not set out the nature and  extent  of  the  offending  in
       detail at [6] of the Decision. He fairly  accepted  that  the  Judge
       should perhaps have said more.   However,  he  submitted  that  this
       could not make a difference.  The Judge was clearly aware that  this
       was an offence against the employer ([6]), that it led to a sentence
       of two years' imprisonment on a guilty  plea  ([6]),  and  that  the
       Appellant had benefitted from his crime by the receipt  of  a  large
       sum of money ([45]).  The Judge referred to the  sentencing  remarks
       as being one of the documents before  him  ([11]).   There  is  also
       express reference to that document elsewhere in the Decision  albeit
       in the context  of  the  sentencing  Judge  not  having  recommended
       deportation.  Mr Smith also drew my attention to the points made  at
       [20] of his skeleton argument.

   27. Mr Smith finally directed me to the reasons given at [21]  and  [22]
       of his skeleton arguments for supporting the Decision.  He  accepted
       that if the Judge had given  insufficient  weight  to  the  evidence
       and/or failed to give adequate reasons, the Respondent might succeed
       in an argument that the  Decision  disclosed  an  error  and/or  was
       perverse.  However, for the reasons set  out  in  his  skeleton,  he
       submitted that the Decision accords with the evidence and should  be
       upheld.

   28. In conclusion, he submitted that the Appellant's conviction and  the
       reasons for offending are in this case the only indicators favouring
       deportation.  The Judge rightly acknowledged that the former was not
       of itself sufficient to justify deportation and found,  in  relation
       to  the  latter,  that  the  causes  no  longer  exist.   All  three
       supporting witnesses (whose evidence  the  Judge  found  impressive)
       testified to the change in the Appellant.  There were prison reports
       which confirmed that the  Appellant  had  complied  with  the  drugs
       programme.  The OASyS report shows that the  probation  officer  was
       not concerned that the Appellant continued to present a  risk.   The
       Appellant had one previous offence  for  which  he  had  received  a
       caution and had not offended since the offences  for  which  he  was
       convicted.

   29. In relation to proportionality - although  this  was  not  the  main
       plank of the Respondent's case -  Mr  Smith  reminded  me  that  the
       Appellant has a partner and two (soon to be three) children  in  the
       UK and that the Appellant's partner has indicated that she  and  the
       children would not go with the Appellant if he were deported.

   30.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing,  I  reserved  my  decision.    Both
       representatives indicated that if I were to find an  error  of  law,
       the appeal could remain in  this  Tribunal  but  that  it  might  be
       necessary for a further  oral  hearing  to  be  convened  to  update
       evidence.

    Discussion and conclusions

   31. Since the Judge's findings  and  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
       Appellant succeeds in relation to the level of risk  are  relatively
       short, I set them out in full:-

           "[55] I confirm that I take into account all  relevant  evidence
           presented.  That includes my consideration of the evidence given
           in person by the witnesses, whose credibility was not challenged
           by Mr Das Gupta for the Respondent.  In  addition  I  take  into
           account the importance of the principle of  proportionality  and
           the best interests of the two (soon to be three) minor children.
             I  believe  that  in  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal  in
           particular factors should be considered in the round.  Whilst of
           course I take into account the seriousness of the offence I also
           note that the sentencing judge did not recommend deportation.

           [56]  The Appellant has been present in this country  exercising
           European Treaty rights from September 2004.  Although the period
           of his presence in this country did not assist him in contending
           that there was a higher  threshold  in  relation  to  protection
           under the EEA Regulations (as it transpires that Judge  Mitchell
           incorrectly found) I am satisfied and find  that  the  Appellant
           has been present in this country since  September  2004,  albeit
           with some returns for brief periods to  Poland.   It  transpires
           that the Appellant began to gamble and became involved in drugs.
            Having considered what was said at the Crown Court hearing  and
           otherwise as presented in evidence before me, it is  clear  that
           the Appellant became an addict in respect of both activities.  I
           am satisfied that it is highly  likely  that  they  led  to  his
           financial difficulties.   Indeed  the  Appellant  still  has  to
           discharge a balance of sums owing in  respect  of  his  gambling
           debts although the matter  appears  to  be  appropriately  under
           control.  The Appellant has a good work record and I  find  that
           having cleared himself of the drug and gambling habits,  he  has
           demonstrated a good attitude both to work, to his family and  to
           society generally.  There are two children who are  educated  in
           this country and although the Appellant and his wife ended their
           previous marriage, they are living again as a  family  unit  and
           plan to remarry in the near future.  The evidence I  heard  both
           from the Appellant's partner and from her sister  impressed  me.
           As Mr Das Gupta stated, both had given evidence  in  a  credible
           manner, as had the supporting witness, Mr Inkpen.

           [57]  It is important to have specific  regard  to  the  offence
           which the Appellant committed.   In  that  respect,  taking  all
           evidence into account, I am satisfied that there is a  low  risk
           of re-offending, when compared to other  offenders  who  have  a
           similar history to the Appellant.  The OASyS  report  I  believe
           supports such a view.  Previously it was conceded on  behalf  of
           the Respondent, before Judge Mitchell that imperative grounds of
           security could not be established.  In the circumstances, it  is
           my view that on the evidence before me the Respondent  does  not
           discharge a  burden  in  establishing  that  there  are  serious
           (rather than imperative) grounds of public security with respect
           to the Appellant which apply in the circumstances before me.

           [58]  Taking into account the terms of Regulations 21(5) and (6)
           I consider whether there are serious grounds  of  public  policy
           which might here be said to  apply  and  which  would  therefore
           justify the decision to deport the Appellant as  an  EEA  member
           state national.  I subsume into my consideration  the  principle
           of proportionality.  In that regard I take account also  of  the
           provisions within section 5A of the 2002 Act and the  provisions
           relating to deportation within the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as
           amended), in both respects  as  providing  guidance  in  matters
           relating to the public interest as clearly approved and accepted
           by parliament.  Taking all such matters  into  account  and  the
           competing interests of both the Appellant and the Respondent  as
           to proportionality I find that on the  particular  circumstances
           of this appeal a requirement that  the  Appellant  should  leave
           this  country  as  a  deportee,  which  must  be  a   reasonably
           foreseeable consequence of the making of the deportation  order,
           would in all the circumstances be disproportionate.

           [59]  For the reasons stated above, it is not found that serious
           grounds of public policy or public security  subsist  so  as  to
           permit under the EEA Regulations the making of the  decision  to
           deport the Appellant.  Deportation in all the circumstances  was
           also found to not be proportionate and the taking  into  account
           of the factors set out in EEA Regulation 21(5) and (6)  supports
           this conclusion.  The reasons are set out above.

       Of course, those reasons cannot be read in isolation from  the  rest
       of the Decision, particularly the Judge's recitation of the evidence
       both documentary and oral, the record of submissions and the factors
       to which he has had regard when considering that evidence and  those
       submissions.   I  have  noted  below  (and  in  my  record  of   the
       submissions) where a particular reference is relevant but I have had
       regard to the entirety of the Decision when reaching my decision.

   32. I start by noting what it seems to me is a quite unusual  factor  in
       this case which appears to have  persuaded  the  Judge  to  find  in
       favour of the  Appellant.   That  concerns  the  chronology  of  the
       offending.  As I note at [4] above, the offending took  place  about
       four to five years ago.  It came to light when  the  Appellant  left
       that employment but the Appellant, when charged, pleaded guilty some
       three years ago.  He was then  at  liberty  albeit  on  bail  for  a
       further eighteen months before his  sentence  and  imprisonment.   I
       readily accept that the fact of being on bail would provide a strong
       incentive for the Appellant not to re-offend (as would the threat of
       deportation in the period after  release).   However,  that  coupled
       with the fact that the Appellant has not apparently offended in  the
       period prior to the main offending (other than an unconnected  minor
       offence for which he was cautioned) is something to which the  Judge
       was entitled to have regard.  That finds  mention  as  part  of  the
       Judge's reasoning in [56] of the Decision.

   33. That paragraph is also the crux of the Judge's findings  as  to  the
       causation of the offending which the Judge finds no longer to  exist
       and the Appellant's motivation not to reoffend.  I have already made
       reference at [23] and [21] above to the findings  elsewhere  in  the
       Decision which support that reasoning.

   34. I turn then to consider the two documents which the Respondent  says
       the Judge has not given  any  or  sufficient  weight  or  has  given
       insufficient reasons for discounting from his analysis.

   35. The first is the OASyS report.  That appears to have been  completed
       in March 2016 shortly after the Appellant's release.  I have already
       noted at [11] and [20] above, the reference to the increased risk of
       reoffending (although I also accept Mr Smith's submission as to  how
       that needs to be analysed).  The fact remains that both  percentages
       are categorised as low.  The assessment notes that the Appellant has
       accepted responsibility for his offending, the  Appellant  only  has
       one earlier offence (unrelated) for which he received a caution  and
       that the main  offending  represents  an  escalation  but  does  not
       constitute  serious  harm.  The  assessment  also  notes  that   the
       Appellant instigated the criminal activity.  The Appellant's  guilty
       plea is noted although there is reference to him seeking to minimise
       his offending.  The antiquity of the offending is noted.

   36. On the positive side, the Appellant's good work  ethic  is  recorded
       although it is noted that the  offending  represented  a  breach  of
       trust and to that extent is relevant to employment. It is noted that
       there are some financial problems and that those are linked  to  the
       offending.  The  assessment  notes  the   connection   between   the
       Appellant's gambling and drugs habit and the offending and that  the
       Appellant says that he does not use drugs or gamble  now  (and  that
       there are no indicators to suggest that  he  does  although  further
       monitoring is required).   The importance  of  the  positive  family
       support is underlined.  The value which the Appellant now places  on
       his family, having dealt  with  the  consequences  of  the  marriage
       breakdown is noted.  The Appellant is noted as being quite motivated
       to address his offending behaviour.  The Appellant's probability  of
       reoffending is given as low.

   37. Although I accept that the Judge has not set out the content of  the
       OASyS report to the extent that I have in the preceding  paragraphs,
       it is nonetheless the case  that  the  Judge  has  recorded  in  his
       reasons or elsewhere the main thrust of the report (see for  example
       [45] of the Decision).  The assessment is to  the  effect  that  the
       Appellant has been convicted of  a  serious  offence  involving  his
       employer, that the  cause  of  the  offending  was  the  Appellant's
       gambling and drug habit which no longer apply and that the Appellant
       now has the increased motivation of support from his family (who  he
       nearly lost due to marital breakdown) as  reason  not  to  reoffend.
       The risk of reoffending is said to be low.

   38. Although I note that the OASyS report does not in terms compare  the
       Appellant's risk of reoffending with the risk for similar offenders,
       the main scoring mechanism in section one of the report  deals  with
       the details of the offence and sentence.  That may well be what  the
       Judge had in mind at [57] of the Decision (see  weighted  scores  at
       page 27 of the assessment).  To that extent the Judge  is  right  to
       point to the fact that other factors have not added significantly to
       the scores with the result that it may well be  the  case  that  the
       Appellant is of a lower risk than similar offenders.  Whether or not
       that is right, I am satisfied that this point is not material if the
       remainder of the reasoning withstands scrutiny.

   39. I turn then to consider the Trial Judge's sentencing remarks.  Those
       begin by noting that the Appellant is previously of  good  character
       and has pleaded guilty. The period of  the  offending  is  noted  as
       being  nearly  two  years.   The  extent  to  which  the   Appellant
       benefitted financially is noted as is the loss to his employer.  The
       fact that the offence involved a  breach  of  trust  is  taken  into
       account in sentencing as is  the  length  of  time  over  which  the
       offending took place.  In mitigation,  the  Judge  referred  to  the
       Appellant's cooperation, lack of  previous  convictions,  good  work
       record, remorse and attempt to sort himself out.  The Appellant  was
       given full credit for his guilty plea.

   40. Again, I accept that the Decision does not cite from the  sentencing
       remarks or refer to the content in any detail.  However, the matters
       dealt with in the sentencing remarks do find mention in the  Judge's
       consideration.  He  is  clearly  aware  (as  shown  at  [6]  of  the
       Decision) that the offence was serious, the length of the conviction
       and that this was on a guilty plea.  The Judge was also  aware  that
       the offence was against the Appellant's employer. The fact that this
       amounted to a breach of trust is recorded at [45] of  the  Decision.
       It is also there noted that the Appellant received a  large  sum  as
       proceeds of his offending. Therefore,  although  the  Judge  in  his
       reasons at [55] does not repeat those findings,  it  is  clear  that
       when he there refers to the  "seriousness  of  the  offence",  those
       factors are taken into account.

   41. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Judge has not  failed  to
       take into account the two documents on which the Respondent  relied.
       Nor do I accept that he has failed to give reasons for  his  finding
       that the Appellant is not a sufficiently  serious  threat  based  on
       those documents.  True it is that those reasons do not all appear in
       the "Findings and Reasons" section.  However, on a  reading  of  the
       Decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the reasoning  for  finding
       as he did taking into account what is said  in  those  documents  is
       apparent.

   42. I turn then to deal with the other grounds raised by the Respondent.
        I have already mentioned one of the unusual factors in this case at
       [32] above.  The second concerns the Appellant's family support.   I
       accept Mr Smith's submission that this is not simply a  question  of
       the Appellant having available to him the same family support as  he
       had at the time of the main offending but rather that, as  a  result
       of his gambling and drug  habit,  he  almost  lost  his  family  and
       therefore his motivation for not offending  based  on  that  support
       increases.  That submission finds favour with the Judge as is  clear
       in particular at [60] of the Decision (referring  back  to  what  is
       said at [22] and [38] of the Decision).  That disposes of the  point
       made at [10] above.

   43. I do not accept Ms Brocklesby-Weller's  submission  that  the  Judge
       should have taken into account the causes of the offending and  that
       both gambling and drug  addictions  have  adverse  societal  impact.
       This was a cause of the offending and not  an  effect  of  it.   The
       adverse impact related to the Appellant alone.  It was not one which
       he was imposing on society other than by the  associated  offending.
       In any event, the Judge accepted (as he was entitled to  do  on  the
       evidence) that the Appellant no longer gambles or uses drugs.

   44. In the course of submissions, I  expressed  some  concern  that  the
       Judge may have taken into account in his  finding  as  to  risk  the
       Respondent's previous concession that she would be  unable  to  show
       "imperative grounds"  ([57]).   I  was  however  satisfied  with  Mr
       Smith's analysis of that paragraph.   Whilst  there  is  a  slightly
       unfortunate juxtaposition of the Respondent's concession against the
       Judge's finding  that  serious  grounds  are  not  made  out,  I  am
       satisfied in particular by the further reference in parenthesis that
       what the Judge there intended was to draw a distinction between  the
       two levels of protection.

   45. Having found that the Judge was  entitled  to  find  as  he  did  in
       relation to  whether  the  Appellant  is  a  "genuine,  present  and
       sufficiently serious threat",  I  do  not  need  to  deal  with  the
       Respondent's final ground relating  to  proportionality  issues.   I
       accept that the factors there cited  are  probably  insufficient  to
       render the Respondent's decision to deport disproportionate  if  the
       Judge's decision in relation to  risk  was  held  to  be  in  error.
       However, that does not arise if, as the Judge found,  the  Appellant
       does not pose the requisite threat.  His findings have to be read in
       that context.

   46. For the above reasons, the Decision does not disclose  an  error  of
       law and I uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.   I  also  note
       that, based on the evidence in this case  and,  in  particular,  the
       unusual factors to which I have drawn attention  at  [32]  and  [42]
       above, even if I had found an error in the Decision, I would have re-
       made it in the Appellant's favour.  The evidence suggests  that  the
       Appellant is at a low risk of reoffending.  That does not of  course
       amount to saying that he is of no risk.  However, having  regard  to
       the causative factors which led to the offending  (which  no  longer
       exist), the date of the offence, the  fact  that  (aside  one  minor
       offence) this is the Appellant's only offence,  and  the  motivating
       factors which exist in this case to prevent further offending, I  am
       satisfied that the Judge's conclusion that  he  is  not  a  genuine,
       present and sufficiently serious threat is not only  one  which  was
       open to the Judge but one which I would myself have found.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
promulgated on 19 October 2016 with the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
(Mr Ozgowicz's) appeal remains allowed.


Signed           [pic] Dated:    2 February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
