
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: DA/00678/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 30th November 2015                         | On 18th January 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                HAROON ZAHEER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Graham, Counsel, instructed by Worldwide
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and  to  avoid  confusion  I  shall  refer  to  her  as  "the
    claimant".  The respondent, Mr Haroon Zaheer, is a national of Pakistan
    born on 17 September 1982.  It is said that he has  lived  lawfully  in
    the United Kingdom since the age of 10 in the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Shepherd  but,  for  reasons  which  will  become
    apparent, that does not appear to be correct.

2.   On 4th April, 2014 the claimant decided to deport the  respondent  from
    the United  Kingdom  under  the  automatic  deportation  provisions  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, because he had been convicted
    of an offence for which  he  received  a  sentence  of  twelve  months'
    imprisonment.  The claimant was  satisfied  that  the  decision,  which
    would cause an interference with the respondent's Article 8 private and
    family life, would be proportionate and justified in order  to  protect
    the public interest  in  the  permissible  aim  of  the  prevention  of
    disorder and crime and the protection of the  rights  and  freedoms  of
    others.

3.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his  appeal  was
    first heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant  at  Kingston  Crown
    Court on 9th September, 2014.  In her determination promulgated on 26th
    September, 2014, Judge Grant dismissed the respondent's  appeal.  Leave
    was subsequently granted to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pinkerton allowed the respondent's appeal to the  extent
    that the matter was remitted to be heard afresh by a judge  other  than
    Judge E B Grant.

4.   The appeal was  heard  afresh  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  H  L
    Shepherd at Taylor House on 22nd January, 2015.  Her determination  was
    promulgated on 16th February, 2015. In her determination the judge made
    several findings.  At paragraph 8 she considered whether the respondent
    could  bring  himself  within  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399A  of
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395  as  amended  and  she
    concluded that the issue to be determined in the appeal was whether  or
    not the respondent had in fact no ties,  whether  social,  cultural  or
    family with Pakistan.  She found that he had no family ties there.   As
    to cultural ties, she noted that the claimant had sought to argue  that
    by virtue of his retention of some spoken Urdu that was  sufficient  to
    show that he retains a cultural connection.

5.   At paragraph 88 she said this:

         "88. Although at first blush the matter appears finely balanced, on
             consideration I have concluded that such 'ties' as remain with
             Pakistan, culturally are nominal only.  If it had  been  shown
             that this gentleman had visited Pakistan frequently during the
             time he has been here, I would have been prepared to  conclude
             that despite denials he must  have  been  visiting  family  or
             friends with whom he  would  still  retain  sufficient  links.
             However his visits to Pakistan have been few, and two of these
             were largely in connection  with  the  death  of  his  father.
             Indeed the death of his father does seem to have  extinguished
             his relationship with Pakistan.  Once again if the  [claimant]
             had been able to produce concrete documentary evidence to show
             that the [respondent[ retained a sustained relationship worthy
             of a character reference with a  family  member  in  Pakistan,
             then this may well  have  tipped  the  balance.   However  the
             [claimant] has not produced this evidence and I  do  not  take
             mention of it into  account.   I  conclude  that  if  he  were
             deported he would return almost as a stranger to Pakistan.   I
             conclude that the [respondent] has been able to bring  himself
             within the provisions of paragraph 399A(a)."

6.   The judge went on at paragraphs 89 and 90 to say this:

         "89.     However that is not an end  to  the  matter.   The  public
             interest promotions are now contained in  primary  legislation
             and as noted in Section 117A(2( of the 2002 Act requires me to
             have regard to the considerations vested in Sections 117C.  As
             I am here dealing with a question involving a foreign criminal
             I must have regard  to  the  following  statutory  provisions.
             Section 117C provides that the deportation  order  of  foreign
             criminals  is  in  the  public  interest  unless  one  of  the
             Exceptions applies.  In this case the potential is Exception -
             private life. This applies where

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  integration
                  into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         90.  Clearly in this case the requirements  in  subSections  (4)(a)
             and (b) are met and the issue is as to whether there would  be
             'very  significant  obstacles'   to   his   integration   into
             Pakistan."

7.   The judge went on to find that  there  would  and  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8.  The claimant, dissatisfied with that decision, sought
    and obtained leave to challenge it. The first ground suggests that  the
    judge applied the wrong version of paragraph 399A  in  that  the  Rules
    changed on 28th June, 2014 and the version that  she  was  required  to
    apply required her to establish whether there would be very significant
    obstacles to his integration.  However, it was pointed out to me by  Mr
    Wilding who appeared on behalf of the claimant that in fact  the  judge
    noted submissions to her at paragraph 59 and 61  of  the  determination
    that there had been a change in the Rule and that the relevant test was
    very significant obstacles.

8.   In addressing me on the second challenge, Mr Wilding told me  that  the
    judge had applied the wrong test under the Rules.  It is suggested that
    this is not material, but he submitted,  it  is  because,  the  judge's
    finding that the respondent has no family ties infects what  the  judge
    goes on to discuss at paragraphs 91 and 92 of her determination.

9.   The fact that the judge has applied  the  wrong  test  means  that  the
    findings she has made are wrong and for that reason  the  determination
    cannot be corrected without, he submits, a fresh de novo hearing.

10.  The findings of the judge at paragraph 91 are best demonstrated  by  my
    setting out that and paragraph 92:

         "91.  This question is related to whether or not he  retains  'ties
             in Pakistan'.  I have found that he retains no ties and yet  I
             am still asked to  conclude  that  he  would  not  face  'very
             significant obstacles' to integration.  There  is  as  yet  no
             judicial guidance on the interpretation of this  phrase.   The
             respondent has said that it would be difficult for him to find
             work, not having Urdu as his first language and that he  would
             have nowhere to live.  Neither side has provided any  evidence
             of the current  economic  or  socio-political  environment  in
             Pakistan and I am not assisted I do bear in mind  that  he  is
             clearly an able individual  and  with  the  benefit  of  a  UK
             degree, some cultural familiarity and some ability in  one  of
             the indigenous languages.  The [claimant] seems  to  take  the
             view that he could  travel there and get some sort of job  and
             live there and that that means he  cannot  meet  the  test  in
             Exception 1.   I  suppose  that  on  landing  he  could   find
             temporary accommodation, presumably an hotel, although  it  is
             not shown that he has savings of any order to fund this, so he
             would take the first  job  he  could   find  and  I  can  only
             speculate on what.  As I say, I  received  no  information  on
             current levels of employment in Pakistan  from  the  claimant.
             The [respondent] may spend some considerable  time  alone  and
             jobless.


         92.      If I take into account the second element of the  test  in
             Exception 1 - it is that the obstacles are to  integration  in
             Pakistan.  This I conclude is of a higher  order  than  merely
             'living' or 'supporting oneself' and on reflection therefore I
             further conclude that  in  this  [respondent's]  circumstances
             having no remaining ties and not having lived there at all  as
             an adult nor having been educated  there,  with  no  financial
             resources to 'cushion' him, that he falls within Exception 1."

11.  Mr Wilding  suggests  that  at  paragraph  91  the  judge  should  have
    considered that the respondent had been living in  the  United  Kingdom
    for most of his life and was fully integrated.  The question of whether
    there were very significant obstacles was the only question  which  she
    needed to answer.  He pointed out that in fact the respondent  has  not
    been living in the United Kingdom for half his life. He was not granted
    leave to remain until he was 19.  Before that he was a dependant of his
    parents' asylum claim and thereafter when that appeal was dismissed was
    an overstayer.

12.  Mr Graham also suggested that there had been no real assessment of  the
    public interest.  I am not inclined to agree with him.  I believe  that
    there was an assessment of the public interest at paragraphs 93 and  94
    of the determination.  What is difficult  to  understand  is  what  the
    judge meant in the first sentence of paragraph 92 where she says: "If I
    take into account the second element of the  test in Exception 1  -  it
    is that the obstacles are to integration in Pakistan."

13.  I believe that the determination is  confused  and  whilst   Mr  Graham
    suggested that the determination was not  materially  affected  by  the
    error, I believe that it was and that I  have  no  alternative  but  to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh  by  a
    judge other than Judge E B Grant or J H L Shepherd.  As for  timing,  3
    hours should be sufficient.  An interpreter is not required but an Urdu
    interpreter would be required for one of the witnesses.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
