
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  DA/00260/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Field House, London                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 16 October  2014                           |on 13 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

               The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey &
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr metin polat
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:        Mr  Ali  (of  Counsel),  instructed  by  Kilic  and  Kilic
              Solicitors.
Respondent:       Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.     This decision has its origins in a deportation order made  by  the
      Secretary of State dated 28 January 2014.  By the terms of this  order
      the Respondent to this appeal, Metin Polat, was to be deported by  the
      Secretary of State from the United Kingdom.   The  background  to  the
      decision and the supporting reasons were, as is customary,  elaborated
      in some detail.

   2.     Mr Polat appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter  the
      "FtT").  The grounds of  his  appeal  were  twofold.   First,  it  was
      contended that the Secretary of State's decision was  unlawful  as  it
      represented a disproportionate  breach  of  Mr  Polat's  rights  under
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  Second, it  was  contended,
      without any particularisation, that the decision was not in accordance
      with the Immigration Rules.  The decision of the FtT adverted  to  the
      new statutory regime introduced by section 19 of the  Immigration  Act
      2014   This was followed a reference to the  new  provisions,  in  the
      following passages:

           "[4]       Particularly relevant are sub paragraphs (4) and (5).
                   The decision was made in January  2014,  prior  to  these
                  provisions being in place.  Section 19 came in  effect  on
                  28 July 2014.  Therefore, even  though  the  decision  was
                  lawful at the date of decision, this is no longer the case
                  as these provisions apply in this matter and there  is  no
                  mention of them  in  relation  to  consideration  of  Rule
                  399(b) of HC 395 which has been amended since the decision
                  was taking and reflects broadly the provisions in  section
                  117C.


           [5]        I find that it is therefore appropriate to remit  the
                  matter back to the respondent to consider the factors as I
                  should not become the primary decision maker, certainly in
                  the case of the new section 19  provisions  which  clearly
                  have a significant bearing in the matter when  considering
                  the fact of this particular case.   In  other  words,  the
                  decision to remit is fact sensitive.


           [6]        Mr Ali agreed for the matter to  remitted  back.   Ms
                  Ayodele stated    she was in my hands in relation  to  the
                  decision to remit.

           [7]    Finally, I would suggest that it  would  be  prudent  for
                  those representing the appellant to ensure that they  send
                  to the respondent any relevant new documentary evidence in
                  relation to the appellant's claim  to  coincide  with  the
                  timing of the promulgation of this determination  so  that
                  this can be properly considered by the respondent when she
                  remakes her decision.


           DECISION


           [8]    The appeal is allowed to the limited extent  that  it  is
                  remitted  back  to  the  respondent  to   reconsider   the
                  appellant's case in line with what is stated at paragraphs
                  four and five of this determination."

     Permission to appeal  was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
      grounds of appeal focused exclusively on the impact of s.117A  of  the
      2002 Act as introduced by s.19 of the new Immigration Act 2014.

   3.   As we indicated at the outset of the hearing, it appeared to us that
      there was an obvious and fundamental anterior question,  namely:  what
      order did the FtT actually make?  In paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 8  of  the
      determination the judge repeatedly uses the terminology "remit" and  a
      number of derivatives from the verb 'to  remit'.   If  the  Judge  had
      intended to allow the appeal one would expect something as  elementary
      as that to be expressed in unambiguous language.   There  is  no  such
      expression anywhere to be found in his determination.   If  the  Judge
      had intended to exercise the statutory power conferred on the  FtT  to
      allow the appeal and give a direction for the purpose of giving effect
      to the decision to allow the appeal one would also expect that  to  be
      expressed in unequivocal terms.   There is no  such  statement  to  be
      found in the determination.  We conclude, without any hesitation, that
      the Judge made a pure remittal order.  We consider this to be the only
      realistic construction which can be placed on the relevant passages in
      the determination of the FtT.

   4.     The powers available to the FtT are those set out in Part 5 of the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Within those  provisions
      there is no power to make a pure remittal  order.   This  has  already
      been  decided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  case  of  Greenwood.
      Accordingly, the first error of law which vitiates  the  determination
      of the FtT is the making of an order which was ultra vires, that is to
      say beyond the Tribunal's powers.

   5.     We turn to consider a quite separate issue. In making this  order,
      the Judge purposefully declined  to  decide  any  of  the  grounds  of
      appeal.  Thus there was no examination of the ground of  appeal  which
      complained that the impugned decision was a disproportionate breach of
      the rights of those concerned, that is the  Appellant  and  the  other
      family members, under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
      Furthermore, the Judge gave no consideration to the written  evidence,
      he received no oral evidence and he made no findings of  any  kind  in
      relation to the Article 8 ground of appeal.  Those  failings,  in  our
      judgment, constitute a free standing error of law.  It  was  incumbent
      upon the Judge to conduct this necessary exercise and he failed to  do
      so.  See the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in YM  (Uganda)  v
      the Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, [36]-[39] especially.  We
      conclude that the judge's abdication of decision making responsibility
      is incompatible with s.117A(1) of the 2014 Act.  In short,  the  judge
      misconstrued the new statutory provisions.

   6.     The materiality of both errors of law is beyond plausible dispute.
        Accordingly this appeal succeeds.  We make the following order:

        i)    we set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal;


       ii)    it follows inexorably from our analysis above that  we  allow
           the Secretary of State's appeal,  and


      iii)    given that there was no proper hearing at first  instance  we
           remit the case to the same constitution of the FtT for rehearing
           and fresh decision.



                                    [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:   24 October 2014
