

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      DA/00498/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 2 September 2013                       |On 6 September 2013      |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                        Mr Richard James Anselm Henry
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr C Jacobs, Counsel
For the Respondent:            Mr S Allen,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         This appeal comes before me following the grant  of permission
      to the Secretary of  State,  whom  I  continue  to  refer  to  as  the
      respondent in this determination. No anonymity order  was  granted  to
      the appellant by the First-tier Tribunal and none was requested of the
      Upper Tribunal.
   2.       The appellant is a citizen of St Lucia born on  21  April  1967.
      Although there are claims by his family and by the  appellant  himself
      that he is entitled to British nationality on account of his  father's
      patriality or his mother's nationality, the former is unproven and  he
      does not qualify  under  the  latter  due  to  the  terms  of  British
      nationality law prior to 1 January  1983  and  his  criminality  which
      invalidates any claim under  current  law.  The  case  must  therefore
      proceed on the basis that he is a foreign national.  He claims to have
      entered the UK with his father in 1974;  no  documentary  evidence  to
      support  this  contention  has  been  provided  but  it  appears   the
      respondent accepted this part of the claim at the hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 46). The  appellant  maintains  he  was
      granted indefinite leave to remain in 1985 but  the  determination  of
      the First-tier Tribunal suggests this has not  been  established.  The
      Secretary of State seeks to deport him as a foreign criminal.

   3.       The appellant has a long history of offending  (which  I  detail
      below) but the offences which triggered the  notice  of  liability  to
      deportation on 20 August 2012 were production of a Class B  controlled
      drug and extracting electricity for which,  on  11  October  2010,  he
      received  an  18  month  prison  sentence.  On  28  February  2013   a
      deportation order was made under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

   4.       The appellant's offending commenced in 1982 at the  age  of  15.
      Between then and  2  February  2012  he  has  25  convictions  for  65
      offences. Of these, there were 8  offences  against  the  person,  one
      against property, 14 theft and  kindred  offences,  two  public  order
      offences, five offences relating to police/courts/prisons,  five  drug
      offences, 24 miscellaneous offences (such as drink  driving,  reckless
      driving, driving without insurance and  driving  whilst  disqualified)
      and six  non  recordable  offences.  The  lengthiest  prison  sentence
      received was for seven years with a concurrent six year  sentence  (in
      July 1999) followed by a further three year sentence  for  an  offence
      committed  whilst  on  licence  after  his  release  from  prison  (an
      additional year was received for breach of his licence).

   5.       The appellant has four children with three women; Yasmin born in
      December 1989 and Tanya born in May 1993 to Muvecel Fevzi (referred to
      as Brenda by the appellant), James born  on  an  unspecified  date  to
      Janet Thomas and Lexi-Rose born in February 2012 to Amanda Walker. His
      most recent estranged partner was said at one stage to be pregnant but
      no further details are  given.  There  are  also  adult  stepchildren;
      Brenda has  a  son  from  another  relationship  and  Amanda  has  two
      daughters.

   6.       The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson and  a
      non legal member at Hatton Cross on 5 July 2013.  The  Tribunal  heard
      oral evidence and found that the appellant had established private and
      family life in the UK which took priority over the public interest and
      accordingly, the Tribunal allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

   7.       The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was  granted
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker on 24 July 2013.

Error of law Hearing

   8.         The appellant was present at the hearing on 2 September when I
      heard submissions from Mr Allen and Mr Jacobs.

   9.       Mr Allen submitted that the determination was flawed in  that  a
      reasoned and full assessment of all  relevant  factors  had  not  been
      undertaken. He submitted that many of  the  Tribunal's  findings  were
      contradictory and that the public interest element had been minimised.
      The findings on private and family life were not properly reasoned  in
      that the panel did not explain why it found the appellant had  private
      life given that he had spent most of the last 20 years in  prison,  or
      why it found there was family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his
      children given that three were adults and there was  no  contact  with
      the fourth. The finding on whether it "may" be in the youngest child's
      best interests to have contact with her father was unclear.

  10.       Mr Allen submitted that the Tribunal had wrongly  placed  weight
      on the claim of the appellant and his parents  that  they  had  always
      considered him to be a British national.  He  submitted  that  such  a
      finding neglected to take account of the evidence before the Tribunal;
      for example, that as far back as 2002, the appellant had been informed
      by the Secretary of State that he was not a British national. He  also
      submitted that the Tribunal's reliance upon Ogundimu was inappropriate
      as that case could easily be distinguished in that  Ogundimu  had  met
      the Immigration Rules and was not subject to automatic deportation. He
      submitted that only lip service had been paid to the  public  interest
      factors and that, given the long history of offending, it was  in  the
      public interest to deport the appellant. Criticism  was  made  of  the
      psychologist's report, the inconsistencies  in  his  opinion  and  the
      standard of proof applied. It was further argued  that  there  was  an
      inadequate assessment of the facts and  that  findings,  for  example,
      those at paragraphs 75 and 76 (on the appellant's ties with St Lucia),
      did not flow from the evidence recorded earlier at paragraph  58.  The
      balancing exercise had not been properly  undertaken  and  the  entire
      determination needed to be set aside.

  11.       In response, Mr Jacobs submitted there had been no error of law.
      The respondent's challenge amounted to a disagreement of  the  outcome
      of the appeal. The panel had  taken  account  of  a  large  bundle  of
      documentary evidence and substantial oral  evidence.  The  facts  upon
      which the decision was based were set out  at  paragraphs  32-51.  The
      Tribunal found that the appellant had established a private and family
      life and set out reasons for that finding at paragraphs 63 and 70. The
      issue of citizenship was a relevant factor as the appellant had  grown
      up thinking he was British and the Tribunal was entitled to take  this
      into account. He had not applied for Indefinite Leave  to  Remain;  it
      had been granted to him at the  airport  in  1985.  The  Tribunal  had
      considered whether the appellant could return to St Lucia. The  appeal
      was allowed on the basis of private and family life. This was  a  long
      residence case and the Maslov principles applied. The  best  interests
      of the youngest child had been considered. It was  accepted  that  the
      rules had not been  met  in  this  case.  There  was  nothing  in  the
      determination which conflicted with the principles in Ogundimu.

  12.       It was accepted that the appellant would need to have  a  strong
      Article 8  case  to  succeed  in  the  appeal  given  his  history  of
      convictions; the Tribunal found that he did. It was not correct to say
      that the public interest factors had not been considered. The Tribunal
      commenced its analysis with the appellant's history of  offending  and
      noted that there was a medium risk of re-offending. The case  law  had
      been properly applied and the decision was not confused. The panel had
      considered the close and strong ties between  the  appellant  and  his
      daughters; they had given evidence as to  how  their  lives  would  be
      affected by his removal. There would be dependency between him and his
      mother if he remained. If he lived with her,  she  would  be  able  to
      influence his behaviour and he would be able to assist with her needs.
      Various case law was referred to. In conclusion, Mr  Jacobs  submitted
      that the balancing exercise  had  been  properly  undertaken  and  the
      determination should be upheld.

  13.       Mr Allen replied. He submitted that there were  material  errors
      in the determination which might have led to a different  outcome  had
      they not been made.  As  per  Kugathas,  the  court  was  required  to
      scrutinise  the  relevant  factors  particularly  where  relationships
      between adult rather than adults and children were involved. This  was
      not to say there should be a blanket finding that there could never be
      family life between adults but  there  had  to  be  a  case  sensitive
      balancing exercise; that had not been done in this case. There was  no
      detailed analysis of  the  family  circumstances.  The  findings  were
      scant. The appellant had spent the best part of the last 20  years  in
      prison and in those circumstances the panel had to explain what it was
      about his private and/or family life that was deserving of protection.
      The conclusions were inadequately reasoned and the  determination  was
      unsafe.

  14.       At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Findings and conclusions

  15.       I have taken full account of the submissions made, the case  law
      referred  to,  the  facts  of  this  case,  the   evidence   and   the
      determination in reaching my conclusions.

  16.       The following cases were relied upon by the parties:

      Gul v Switzerland [1996] ECHR 5 (for the principle that a  child  born
      of a marital union is ipso jure part of the family and has a bond with
      his parents which subsequent events cannot break save  in  exceptional
      circumstances; paragraph 32).
      Maslov v Austria [2008] ECHR 1638/03 (for guidance on  long  residence
      cases).
      EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41  (for  confirmation  that  courts  must
      undertake a careful and informed evaluation of the particular facts of
      a case; at paragraph 12).
      ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 (for the principle that where  a  decision
      affects a child, a primacy of importance must be accorded  to  his  or
      her best interests; paragraph 46).
      Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (for the principle that neither blood ties
      nor the concern and affection that ordinarily  go  with  them  are  by
      themselves enough to constitute family life and the  requirement  that
      relevant factors must be scrutinised by the court; paragraphs 14,  16,
      19, 24 and 25).
      SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 (for  the  principle  that  the  more
      pressing the public interest in deportation or removal,  the  stronger
      the Article 8 claim must be for it to prevail; at  paragraphs  46  and
      54).
      Rai and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 (for endorsement of the  approach  of
      the Upper Tribunal in Ghising; paragraph 46).
      Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)
      (for its analysis of Kugathas and other case law on  family  life  and
      the guidance that Article 8(1)  if  highly  fact  sensitive  and  that
      rather than applying a blanket rule with  regard  to  adult  children,
      each case should be analysed on its own facts to decide whether or not
      family life exists; at paragraphs 52-62).
      Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) (on  the
      best interests of the child having to be a primary  consideration;  at
      paragraph 96).
      Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 146 (IAC) (on the
      standard of proof; at paragraph 24).
      Bah (EO (Turkey) - liability to deport) [2012] UKUT  00196  (IAC)  (on
      the approach to deportation).

17.   The panel found that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules because under paragraph  399a(ii)(b)  the  minor
      child was cared for by  another  family  member  and  under  paragraph
      399(b) he had no  subsisting  relationship  with  a  partner  and  had
      sufficient knowledge of and connections to his country of origin to be
      able to form an adequate private life there (paragraphs 54, 55, 57, 58
      and 59). For the appellant, Mr Jacobs accepted that  the  rules  could
      not be met. Only Article 8 was pursued and it is the panel's  findings
      in that respect that are challenged by the Secretary of State.

18.   The first two points  raised  in  the  grounds  take  issue  with  the
      positive findings in respect of the  appellant's  private  and  family
      life.  These were amplified  by  Mr  Allen  at  the  hearing  and  his
      submissions are summarised above.  Essentially, it is argued that  the
      panel  made  conflicting  findings,  disregarded  certain  facts   and
      inadequately reasoned its conclusions some of which did not flow  from
      the evidence set out.

19.   At paragraph 58, when considering human rights under  the  rules,  the
      panel noted that the appellant had made frequent visits  to  St  Lucia
      and, indeed, had often taken his two older daughters there.  It  found
      that notwithstanding the  present  absence  of  relatives  there,  the
      appellant continued to have social and cultural ties to his country of
      origin and that the country and its culture are very familiar to  him.
      It concluded that the  appellant  had  sufficient  knowledge  of,  and
      connections to, his country of origin to be able  to  form  a  private
      life there. These findings, however, do not appear to factor at all in
      the panel's second stage assessment of Article 8 where it is concluded
      that the appellant has ties and connections to the UK  which  make  it
      necessary to protect his private life in the UK.

20.   At paragraph 63 the panel found  that  the  appellant  enjoyed  family
      life with all his four children as well as with  his  mother  and  his
      sister. The facts (as set  out  at  paragraphs  32-51)  on  which  the
      conclusions are based do not engage at all  with  the  nature  of  the
      relationship the appellant enjoys with  his  mother  and  sister.  The
      determination is silent on why a family life is said to exist  between
      them and the appellant. Whilst there is a brief reference to an  offer
      of  accommodation  from  his  mother,  the  issue   of   whether   any
      interdependency exists or has existed between them  is  not  explored.
      The evidence from the appellant's mother was that he  had  lived  with
      her "on and off" in the past. Her testimony was that she had  mobility
      problems and hoped the appellant would help; his evidence did not make
      any reference to any willingness  or  ability  to  assist.  Mr  Jacobs
      submitted that Mrs Henry would be able to exert  some  influence  over
      the appellant's behaviour if he lived with her; it is difficult to see
      how such a suggestion can be realistic. The mother is elderly and  was
      unable to exert any influence over her son in the past when she  would
      have been younger and fitter. It is difficult to see how she would  be
      able to do so now and indeed she did not suggest she could.

21.   Even less is known about the appellant's sister. Her evidence did  not
      even touch upon any relationship between  herself  and  the  appellant
      (paragraph  18).  The  same  difficulty  exists  with  regard  to  the
      children. It is difficult to see how family life can be said to  exist
      between the appellant and James (his  adult  son)  when  in  the  same
      paragraph 63 the panel noted that  it  had  little  information  about
      their relationship, that they had lost contact for some time  but  had
      resumed some contact. Such vague findings do not  come  anywhere  near
      the detailed scrutiny or fact finding that the cited cases  demand  in
      adult relationships.

22.   Family life was also found to exist between the appellant and his  two
      adult daughters. They attended the hearing and gave evidence  but  the
      testimony recorded at paragraphs 15-17 is brief and gave no indication
      as  to  the  frequency  of  their  face  to  face  contact  given  the
      appellant's frequent sojourns in prison. There was nothing to indicate
      where or with whom they live, whether they had formed relationships of
      their own, whether they led independent lives or  were  employed.  Nor
      was there any explanation for why, if regular visits to St Lucia  were
      possible previously,  they  would  not  be  possible  now.  Mr  Jacobs
      stressed that the  panel  was  impressed  with  the  evidence  of  the
      witnesses and I accept that is so, however little is  said  about  the
      content of the evidence given or why it led to the  findings  made  in
      paragraph 63.  The  witness  statements  of  the  daughters  give  the
      impression that the appellant was always  around;  we  know  from  his
      prison record and the OASys report that this was not the  case.  There
      is no information whatsoever  about  contact  during  the  appellant's
      various periods of imprisonment other than a visit  having  been  made
      during the current sentence. The panel does not appear to have had any
      appreciation of the fact that these children, along  with  James,  the
      appellant's mother and  sister  are  all  adults  and  that  in  those
      circumstances more is needed than mere blood ties.
23.   There are also difficulties over the finding of  family  life  between
      the appellant and his youngest daughter. They do not  appear  to  have
      lived together at all and the appellant's relationship with her mother
      broke down some time ago. A non molestation order was taken out by her
      which, it is now said in her brief letter, she is seeking  to  remove.
      At the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there was no
      update to her letter (written several months earlier),  no  indication
      that steps had been taken and the evidence of the appellant  was  that
      this had not been done. Despite the  panel's  conclusion  that  family
      life was enjoyed between the appellant and this child, the  basis  for
      such a conclusion where there was no contact either during or prior to
      the appellant's imprisonment with her or her mother, is unclear. It is
      even more puzzling when one takes account of paragraph  69  where  the
      panel finds it cannot assess the relationship  between  the  appellant
      and the child because there is no information about her. I have  taken
      note of Gul upon which Mr Jacobs relied but note that case deals  with
      a child born of a marriage and the bond that must in that  context  be
      assumed to exist between parent and child. As far as I can  tell,  the
      appellant and Ms Walker were never married and there is scant, if any,
      information as to the nature and duration of their relationship. There
      is no analysis of what role it is proposed the appellant would play in
      the child's life or how often or in what circumstances  he  might  see
      her. Ms Walker's apparent willingness to let the appellant  back  into
      her life so that he can see  the  child  has  to  be  approached  with
      caution given the past history of domestic violence. Although this was
      acknowledged by the panel at paragraph  69,  it  appears  then  to  be
      completely put to one side.  Plainly the child's welfare is a  primary
      consideration but the panel's finding that some face to  face  contact
      between the appellant and the  child  "may"  be  in  both  their  best
      interests is rather unclear.

24.   Also at paragraph 63, the panel found  that  the  appellant  would  be
      separated from his close friends and that  would  interfere  with  his
      right to a private life however there was no evidence before the panel
      from any friends and I cannot  see  that  any  was  provided  in  oral
      testimony by the appellant.

25.   No findings are made on any family life between the appellant and  his
      'stepchildren'.

26.   The Secretary of State also criticises the panel's failure to  explain
      why the extent of the appellant's offending, which  Mr  Jacobs  fairly
      accepted was extensive, did not justify  deportation.  There  is  some
      reference by the panel to attempts being taken  by  the  appellant  to
      address offending. The panel does not, however, engage with  the  fact
      that the appellant had been in prison numerous times  before  when  he
      would also have had opportunities to address his  offending  behaviour
      but plainly did not do so or, if he did, did not benefit  in  any  way
      from such opportunities. Nor does the panel engage with the fact  that
      despite a warning in 2002 that continued offending may well result  in
      deportation, the appellant continued with  his  criminal  conduct  and
      without any regard for the impact of that upon his children who  would
      have been minors at that time. the very persistence of the appellant's
      offending and his blatant disregard for the laws of  the  UK  and  the
      affect of his criminality upon his victims, many of whom were  elderly
      and vulnerable, was not adequately  balanced  in  the  proportionality
      exercise.

27.   It is established in the case law to which  I  was  directed  by  both
      parties that where there is a strong public interest  in  removal,  as
      there  plainly  is  in  this  case  given  the  appellant's  extensive
      criminality since the age of 15, the Article  8  claim  must  be  very
      strong if it is to prevail.  Mr  Jacobs  submitted  that  it  was.  He
      emphasised the substantial bundle and length of the hearing before the
      First-tier Tribunal. Whilst he may be right in that, the determination
      does not reflect that submission. It presents  an  average  Article  8
      case where the long residence of the appellant is rather undermined by
      lengthy spells in prison over the last 20 years and where elements  of
      any private and family life that may be enjoyed in  that  context  has
      been inadequately explored and assessed.  Indeed at paragraph 71,  the
      panel appears to adopt  the  sentencing  judge's  description  of  the
      appellant's private life as consisting of a criminal lifestyle.

28.   The Secretary of State has also taken issue with the panel's  reliance
      upon Ogundimu pointing out that  the  appellant's  offences  continued
      into adulthood, that he did not meet the requirements of the rules, as
      Ogindimu did and that he was subject to the  provisions  of  automatic
      deportation whereas Ogindimu was not.  Those  differences  are  valid.
      They have not been appreciated by the panel.

29.   Finally, there is criticism of the panel's approach to the claim  that
      the appellant and his family all believed he was a British citizen. At
      paragraphs 47 and 68 the panel regarded this as a "significant" factor
      to be weighed in the balance when proportionality was  considered.  It
      has to be said that the panel's approach and findings in  this  regard
      are somewhat  confused.  It  is  not  explained  why  the  appellant's
      father's registration in 1987,  twenty  years  after  the  appellant's
      birth, should have led the appellant and his family to believe he (the
      appellant) had any entitlement to citizenship himself. No  explanation
      appears  to  have  been  provided  as  to  why  no   application   for
      registration was made by the appellant at any time. Most  puzzling  of
      all is the failure to take account  of  the  fact  that  in  2002  the
      appellant was told in no uncertain terms by  the  Secretary  of  State
      that he was not a British  national.  Quite  why  he  and  his  family
      continue to maintain that he has such an  entitlement,  even  when  it
      must be clear that any such entitlement would not succeed  on  account
      of his inability to meet  the  good  character  requirements,  is  not
      explained and the panel's consideration of this as  a  factor  in  his
      favour is not sufficiently reasoned.

30.   For all these reasons, therefore, and after careful  consideration  of
      all the submissions made and  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  I
      conclude that the First-tier Tribunal made errors of law  such  as  to
      make the determination unsafe. The determination is set  aside  except
      as a record of the evidence before the Tribunal and of the proceedings
      which took place. No findings are preserved. The  matter  is  remitted
      for re-hearing afresh to another panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  at
      Hatton Cross.

31.   I was informed by Mr Allen that the Secretary of State seeks  to  make
      an application under  Rule  15  to  adduce  a  substantial  amount  of
      additional documentary evidence. It was agreed with the  parties  that
      this should be compiled and served upon the Tribunal and the appellant
      with a written application prior to the next hearing.  I  direct  that
      all such evidence should be served no  later  than  ten  working  days
      prior to the hearing. It shall then be for the panel with  conduct  of
      the appeal to consider the application and decide whether or  not  the
      evidence should be admitted. Should the application be successful,  it
      is anticipated that the hearing would proceed without any  adjournment
      as the appellant would have had sight of the evidence well in  advance
      of the hearing.

Decision

32.   The Tribunal made errors of law and the determination  is  set  aside.
      The appeal is remitted to a panel of the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-
      hearing afresh.

            Signed:



      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            4 September 2013
