
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00307/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 26 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               REDHA HAMIDECHE
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Mr C H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born  on  18  December  1970.   No
   anonymity order has been requested or made.

3) The respondent decided to deport the appellant for reasons  explained  in
   her notice of decision served on 6 February 2013.

4) A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Quigley and  Ms  V  S
   Street JP allowed the appellant's appeal by determination promulgated  on
   27 September 2013.




5) The following are the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:



    1. ... the Tribunal has erred in law ... the  Tribunal  has  failed  to
       provide adequate reasons why the appellant meets the  exceptions  to
       the Immigration Rules ... There is  no  evidence  the  appellant  is
       still in a relationship with his wife.  Whilst they may  still  have
       some form of relationship, evidence does not suggest it is one  akin
       to marriage and seems to be one of merely being friends.


    2. At paragraph 44-45 the Tribunal has found that it would  be  in  the
       best interest of the appellant's son for him to remain in the UK  as
       it would disrupt his life having to spend up to 90 days  a  year  in
       Algeria ... the Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons  for
       their findings  ...  his  son  would  not  need  to  spend  90  days
       continuously in Algeria and can visit the  appellant  during  school
       holidays which would minimise any disruption ... he  and  his  child
       can continue their relationship via modern methods of  communication
       as they have been able to do during the periods  the  appellant  has
       spent in prison ... the appellant and his child can  maintain  their
       relationship if the appellant is deported.

    3. ... the Tribunal misdirected itself in law and  has  misapplied  the
       appropriate test to this case.  MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
       279 found that the lack of equivalent medical  care  in  a  person's
       country of origin might engage Article 8  but only in cases where it
       is 'an additional factor to be weighed in the  balance,  with  other
       factors, which by themselves engage Article 8'.

    4. The approach was expressed as follows:  "Supposing ... the appellant
       had  established  firm  family  ties  in  this  country,  then   the
       availability of continuing medical treatment here coupled  with  his
       dependence on  the  family  here  for  support:  together  establish
       'private life' under Article 8." (Paragraph 23).

    5. ... this test makes clear that medical  care  is  only  relevant  to
       Article 8 where an individual's personal  ties  to  the  UK  have  a
       direct bearing on their prognosis.  The question of ongoing  support
       from friends, family or community support or relationships in the UK
       does not arise in such a case.  In MM the context  was  that  family
       support in the  UK  was  a  key  factor  in  the  prognosis  of  the
       appellant, as he was suffering from schizophrenia  and  he  was  far
       more likely to stay well if he had family support.  In light of that
       ... this is not the type of case the Court of Appeal  had  in  mind,
       and this case falls to be considered under Article 3 alone.

    6. ... the Tribunal has failed to apply correctly the test set  out  in
       GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT 00397  (IAC),
       namely that "It may be that although, in  principle,  the  scope  of
       Article 8 is wider than that of Article 3, in practical  terms  that
       in a case like this where the claimant has no  right  to  remain  it
       will be a "very rare case" indeed where such a claim  could  succeed
       (see KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  279).   That  reality
       may lay at the heart of the majority's view of the Strasbourg  Court
       in N v UK when, having rejected the individual's claim under Article
       23, stated that no "separate issue" arose under Article  8  (compare
       the dissenting Judge's opinion at 1 to 6). " (Paragraph 85(8)(c)).

    7. At paragraph 40-41 the Tribunal has found on the appellant's medical
       evidence that he would not receive the necessary care for his mental
       health problems in Algeria ... the Tribunal has  failed  to  provide
       adequate reasons as  to  why  the  medical  treatment  available  in
       Algeria is not adequate or what  evidence  the  experts  have  based
       their assessment that  the  medical  treatment  in  Alger  would  be
       insufficient for his  conditions  ...  there  is  medical  treatment
       available to the appellant in Algeria as  a  response  from  MedCOI,
       (request number:  BMA  3778)  dated  2  January  2012  stated  that,
       outpatient and inpatient treatment by a psychiatrist is available in
       Algeria.  The request  further  confirmed  that  psychotherapy  like
       cognitive behavioural therapy by psychotherapist or psychiatrist  is
       available in Algeria.  These facilities are available at the "Centre
       Hosptialier Universitaire Mustapha Bacha' (Project MedCOI 2  January
       2012).

    8. Furthermore, the World  Health  Organisation  'Mental  Health  Atlas
       2011, Algeria,  published  2011,  stated:  "An  officially  approved
       mental health policy exists  and  was  approved,  or  most  recently
       revised, in 2009.  Mental health is also specifically  mentioned  in
       the general health policy'.  'A mental health plan  exists  and  was
       approved, or most recently revised, in 2009.  The mental health plan
       components include:

               i. Timelines for the implementation  of  the  mental  health
                  plan.

              ii. Funding allocation for the implementation of half or more
                  of the items in the mental health plan.

             iii. Shift of services and resources from mental hospitals  to
                  community mental health facilities.

              iv. Integration of mental health services into primary care.

    9. "Dedicated mental health legislation exists and  was  initiated,  or
       most recently revised in 1985.  Legal provisions  concerning  mental
       health are also covered  in  other  laws  (eg  welfare,  disability,
       general health legislation etc)."

   10.  The   World   Health   Organisation   further   noted:"Prescription
       regulations authorize  primary  health  care  doctors  to  prescribe
       and/or  to  continue  prescription  of  psychotherapeutic  medicines
       without restrictions. In contrast, the department of health does not
       authorize primary health care nurses to prescribe and/or to continue
       prescription of psychotherapeutic  medicines.   Similarly,  official
       policy does not permit primary health care nurses  to  independently
       diagnose and treat mental disorders within the primary care system.

   11. 'The majority of primary health care doctors have received  official
       in-service training on  mental  health  within  the  last  5  years,
       whereas the  majority  of  primary  health  care  nurses  have  not.
       Officially approved manuals  on  the  management  and  treatment  of
       mental disorders are not available in the majority of primary health
       care clinics.  Official referral procedures  for  referring  persons
       from primary care to secondary/tertiary care exist, as  do  referral
       procedures from tertiary/secondary care to  primary  care."   (World
       Health Organization, Mental Health Atlas  2011,  Algeria,  published
       2011.  http://www.who.int/mental  health/evidence/atlas/profiles/dza
       mh profile/ pdf. Date accessed 5 July 2013).

   12. ... the Tribunal has made no findings as to the appellant's risk  of
       re-offending and therefore their proportionality findings are flawed
       ... the appellant's criminal record shows both a propensity  to  re-
       offend and an escalation in seriousness  ...  there  is  a  lack  of
       evidence the appellant has addressed the behaviour that has lead  to
       his offending and  that  he  continues  to  remain  a  risk  of  re-
       offending.  Furthermore, warnings given by the  Secretary  of  State
       previously in regards to future deportation action if  he  continues
       to re-offend have failed to prevent him from further  offending  and
       his wife and child have been unable to influence him to prevent  him
       from offending ... given his continuing  risk  of  re-offending  and
       lack of evidence that he will not do so it is submitted that  it  is
       proportionate to deport him.

   13. ... had the Tribunal taken  these  issues  into  consideration  they
       would have found that his deportation is proportionate.



6) On 18 October 2013 Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lewis  granted
   permission to appeal, giving the following reasons:

        2. ...  the  appellant's  mental  health  weighed  heavily  in  the
           consideration of the Tribunal, which discussed it at  paragraphs
           38 to 41, noting in paragraph 41 and again at paragraph  47  the
           concerns of Dr Quinn in the penultimate paragraph of his  report
           (page 11of the appellant's bundle) that "If Mr Hamideche were to
           be returned to Algeria, I have concerns whether he would receive
           the care required for the treatment of such a disorder".  Though
           undoubtedly  an  expert  witness,  as  a  Consultant    Forensic
           Psychiatrist, Dr  Quinn  does  not  assert  that  his  expertise
           extends to the availability of treatment for  mental  health  in
           Algeria.   The  decision  of  the  Respondent  at  V5   of   the
           Respondent's bundle cites background evidence to the effect that
           mental health services and medication are readily  available  in
           Algeria.  The determination does not  reflect  consideration  of
           this evidence.  At paragraph 47 the  medical  opinion  that  the
           appellant may not receive the care required for the treatment or
           schizophrenia in Algeria contributes to  "make  the  appellant's
           case one where the exceptional circumstances combine to make the
           public interest in deportation outweighed by other factors".


        3. The apparent omission to weigh contrary background evidence, and
           the expertise attributed to what is perhaps the only  non-expert
           statement within an expert report, are arguable errors  of  law.
           The other grounds adduced are less cogent but arguable.

        4. Permission to appeal is granted on all grounds.

7) In a  written  response  to  the  grant  of  permission  the  appellant's
   solicitors submitted as follows:

              1) The Grounds of Appeal are merely a  disagreement  with  the
                 findings of fact of  the  Immigration  Judge,  and  do  not
                 disclose any material error of law.


              2)  The  Immigration  Judge  gave  detailed  reasons  for  the
                 findings, and applied the guidance in MM (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD
                 [2012] EWCA Civ 279, in that he considered the  appellant's
                 dependency on his family (wife and son) as  a  factor,  and
                 also his continuing medical treatment as a further factor.

              3) The medical opinion of the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist
                 was merely an expression of concern as to  whether  medical
                 treatment of the nature required by the appellant would  be
                 available to him in Algeria.  The Immigration Judge's  view
                 was that the Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, who assessed
                 the appellant, has raised his own concerns.   This  is  not
                 conclusive  of  whether  or  not  medical   treatment    is
                 available, but rather an expression of concern,  which  the
                 expert and the Immigration Judge are entitled to  give  due
                 weight.

              4) The Immigration Judge clearly considered  the  respondent's
                 Country  of  Origin  report,  at  paragraph  41,   on   the
                 availability of  medical  and  mental  health  services  in
                 Algeria, and weighed this in  the  balance.   However,  the
                 Immigration Judge  preferred  to  consider  other  factors,
                 including the Dr Quinn's concerns about the availability of
                 the particular treatment needed by the appellant,  as  well
                 as the significant impact on his fragile mental  health  if
                 deported.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge considered in
                 great detail the implication for  the  appellant  in  being
                 separated from his son, the best interests  of  the  child,
                 etc, in coming to the conclusion.

              5) The Immigration Judge, in fact, carried out a comprehensive
                 proportionality assessment  in  coming  to  the  conclusion
                 reached, which she is entitled to do.


8) Further to the grounds of appeal, Mr Matthews submitted that  there  were
   only two significant factors by which the  appeal  succeeded  -  (a)  the
   appellant's relationship with his son and (b) perceived lack  of  medical
   care for the appellant, as a schizophrenic, in Algeria.  The  case  would
   not have succeeded but for  the  panel's  understanding  of  that  second
   factor,  as  was  clear  from  paragraphs  47  and  56.    The   grounds,
   particularly at paragraph 7, identified material  error  on  that  point.
   The medical reports disclosed that medical professionals in  the  UK  had
   concerns over whether the appellant would receive the necessary  care  in
   Algeria.  As identified in the grounds of appeal  and  in  the  grant  of
   permission, the authors of these reports might well raise  such  concerns
   but the question whether such concerns  were  justified  was  not  to  be
   answered by reference to the reports, not  being  within  their  area  of
   expertise.  The respondent did not accept that the panel  could  instruct
   itself as to the absence of care in Algeria on the basis of the  reports.
   This was a case where the Article  8  assessment  had  both  foreign  and
   domestic implications.  The panel failed to  address  themselves  to  the
   evidence  about  mental  health  care  provision  and   availability   of
   medication similar to that taken  by  the  appellant  in  Algeria.   They
   failed to evaluate what the impact of removal would  be.   It  is  within
   public and judicial  knowledge  that  the  Secretary  of  State  arranges
   removal so as to minimise any adverse impact on mental health.  There are
   relatively well developed mental health facilities  and  availability  of
   medication in Algeria, which was made  part  of  the  respondent's  case.
   The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider whether it was likely that the
   appellant  would  access  suitable  treatment  in  Algeria,  given   that
   background.  That was an error such  that  the  determination  could  not
   stand.

9) The second point developed by Mr Matthews arose from paragraph 12 of  the
   grounds.  The panel made no explicit finding on the appellant's  risk  of
   re-offending, but appeared to accept that there was no such risk.  He has
   been convicted on 16 occasions of 36  offences.   His  offences  show  an
   escalating pattern.  His last offence was much the most  serious,  having
   resulted in  a  sentence  of  31  months'  imprisonment.   The  panel  at
   paragraph 48 accepted that the appellant  had  been  drug  free  for  two
   years, and found this "a  very  positive  step"  in  his  rehabilitation.
   However, he was in prison for the later of those two years, and his  last
   offence was committed about one year after he claimed to have become drug
   free.  The panel's conclusion  on  this  point  was  insupportable.   The
   nearest the determination came to an assessment of risk  of  re-offending
   was at paragraph 48, accepting the statement  in  a  social  work  report
   obtained in advance of the appellant's  sentencing  to  the  effect  that
   there were "no obvious  public  protection  issues."   It  had  not  been
   possible to obtain a transcript of the Sheriff's sentencing remarks,  but
   the report also recommended a "community based disposal".   The  sentence
   of imprisonment made it plain that the Sheriff did  not  agree  with  the
   assessment in the report.  The assessment went  against  the  appellant's
   history, had not commended itself to the Sheriff and should not have been
   given such credit by the panel.  Although  it  is  not  recorded  in  the
   determination, Mr Matthews had a note that the Presenting Officer in  the
   First-tier Tribunal made a submission on the  escalating  nature  of  the
   appellant's offending and on the risk of re-offending.

10) Mr Matthews finally submitted that there was inadequacy of reasoning  on
   two key matters, such that the determination should be set aside, and the
   case should be sent for a fresh decision in the First-tier  Tribunal,  or
   at a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

11) I queried whether the outcome should require any further hearing,  given
   that both parties had placed before  the  panel  all  the  evidence  they
   thought fit.  If a fresh decision was needed, the Upper Tribunal at  this
   hearing was as well placed  as  any  other  Tribunal  to  reach  it.   Mr
   Matthews said that there was nothing further to say on the SSHD's side as
   to the appropriate outcome.  For all the reasons put forward, deportation
   of the appellant was proportionate and justified.

12) Mr Ndubuisi dealt firstly  with  the  assessment  of  the  risk  of  re-
   offending.  He submitted that the panel had considered that, and  it  was
   open to them to rely on the social work report.  It is  to  be  found  at
   Item 46, pages 105-111 of the appellant's inventory of productions in the
   First-tier Tribunal.  The report reflected that it had come to light that
   underlying the offending the appellant had serious mental health problems
   for which he was only quite recently prescribed anti-depressants and anti-
   psychotic medication.  The authors of the social  work  report  wished  a
   fuller assessment of his mental health issues and  other  aspects  to  be
   carried out.  The  panel  had  considered  the  absence  of  any  earlier
   psychiatric assessment, and had psychiatric  reports  before  them.   The
   appellant having been diagnosed as schizophrenic it was not difficult  to
   see why it followed that there was  a  very  much  reduced  risk  to  the
   public.  The psychiatric report showed that he was  undergoing  treatment
   and had become drug free.  The panel did  not  overlook  the  appellant's
   criminal history or the nature of his convictions,  but  correctly  found
   that there was no ongoing risk, once  it  was  accepted  that  there  was
   social work involvement and medical intervention and that  the  appellant
   had taken steps while in custody to co-operate in his rehabilitation.  Mr
   Ndubuisi accepted that the Presenting Officer's made a valid  point  that
   the appellant's offending appeared to have occurred in the middle of  the
   period during which he claimed to have been drug free.  However,  it  was
   not only persistent drug abuse  but  mental  health  problems  which  had
   underlain his offending, and these were now being addressed.   Given  the
   whole background, there was no error in the assessment of re-offending.

13) Turning to the mental health aspect of  return,  Mr  Ndubuisi  submitted
   that it was open to the UK medical experts to conclude  that  deportation
   would have an  adverse  effect.   There  were  three  reports  which  all
   expressed the same concern.  The finding that  the  appellant  would  not
   receive necessary care was  reached  at  paragraphs  41  and  42  of  the
   determination.  Mr Ndubuisi accepted that may not correctly have  been  a
   question that Dr Quinn could be expected to answer, but  the  panel  also
   had before it information about mental health provision in  Algeria,  and
   referred to it indirectly at paragraph 41.  Mr Ndubuisi drew attention to
   Item Y of the  bundle  provided  by  the  respondent  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, a Country  of  Origin  Information  Service  response  entitled
   "Overview of availability of medical treatment and drugs".  At  Y1  there
   is reference to occasional "stock outs" of medicines.  In further  detail
   within the report at 26.02 onwards there is reference to difficulties and
   inequalities in accessing health care.  At 26.37 there  is  reference  to
   problems with mental health  care  (mainly,  reluctance  of  families  to
   consult psychiatrists unless in extreme circumstances).  Those  materials
   justified the conclusions reached by the panel.  The panel perhaps  ought
   to have based their conclusions on that information rather  than  on  the
   reports by UK medical professionals, but they would have reached the same
   result.  The indirect allusion to  that  evidence  at  paragraph  41  was
   sufficient to  justify  the  conclusion.   The  criticisms  made  by  the
   respondent did not disclose  anything  so  material  as  to  require  the
   determination to be set aside.  The outcome in terms  of  proportionality
   was open to the panel and was adequately reasoned.

14) Mr Matthews in response said that the panel  had  not  referred  in  any
   meaningful way to the background  evidence  about  medical  provision  in
   Algeria, but that in any event it did not support the conclusion reached.
    The appellant has been diagnosed and is in receipt of  medication.   The
   background evidence suggests that such medication  is  readily  available
   and at very low cost.  The evidence does not show any shortcomings likely
   to affect him in any serious way.  The  conclusion  reached  should  have
   been that he could access his medication, and that his case had no strong
   basis on medical grounds.

15) I reserved my determination.

16) As to the evaluation of the  mental  health  aspect  of  the  case,  the
   crucial paragraph of the determination is 41:

    Having studied the full report by Dr Alex Quinn, we are concerned  that
    there is significant evidence ... that the appellant  has  a  psychotic
    mental  illness  and  experiences  consistent  with  a   diagnosis   of
    schizophrenia.  We have particular concern that Dr Quinn's analysis  is
    that he has concerns whether the appellant would receive the  necessary
    care in Algeria ... the reasons for refusal letter does refer  to  some
    information in the Country of Origin  report  on  the  availability  of
    medication and mental health services in Algeria.  However, it is clear
    to us that  the  medical  professionals  who  have  actually  seen  the
    appellant have concerns firstly, that the appellant may not receive the
    necessary care for the treatment of  schizophrenia  and,  secondly,  to
    deport him from the UK would itself have a significant  impact  on  the
    appellant's fragile mental health.


17) The panel there does not base its decision on  the  background  evidence
   indirectly referred to but sets that aside  and  reaches  its  conclusion
   based on the concerns expressed by the  medical  professionals.   It  may
   have been a function of those professionals to raise such  concerns,  but
   not to resolve them.  The panel though that  the  expression  of  concern
   provided the answer needed, but that answer was not there.

18) The Presenting Officer's  subsidiary  point  here  was  that  the  panel
   concluded  without  giving  reasons   that   deportation   itself   would
   significantly impact on the appellant's fragile mental health.  That is a
   conclusion which required some further explanation, and it was  correctly
   pointed out that the panel  should  have  taken  into  account  that  the
   Secretary of State has mechanisms for  managing  sensitive  removals  and
   minimising the adverse impact (cf. J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and  Y  v
   SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362).

19) There is also error in relation to the risk of re-offending.  The  panel
   accepted uncritically the observations in the  social  work  report  that
   there were no obvious public protection issues  and  that  his  case  was
   suitable for community based  disposal.   The  panel  did  not  have  the
   advantage of the sentencing remarks, which might have  cast  a  different
   light, but was aware of the criminal history, and that the case  resulted
   not in  a  community  based  disposal  but  in  a  substantial  custodial
   sentence.  The panel takes it as a very positive step that the  appellant
   has been drug free for  nearly  two  years,  overlooking  that  his  most
   serious offending took place in the middle of that period.   Mr  Ndubuisi
   sought to justify this aspect of the panel's finding by reference to  the
   social work report itself and to the  later  medical  reports.   However,
   such reasoning is not to be found in the determination, and  it  puts  an
   optimistic gloss on the appellant's situation.  It is  difficult  to  see
   how his history of convictions can be read as "not having caused any harm
   in the past" and as raising "no obvious public protection  issues".   The
   report  itself  is  somewhat  self-contradictory.   Between   these   two
   quotations it  analyses  risk  thus:  "There  is  a  likelihood  that  Mr
   Hamideche will offend in the future if he is unable to  maintain  a  drug
   free lifestyle and unable to obtain state benefits."  The  report  opines
   on a further page that if the appellant were given a  custodial  sentence
   that would "... not reduce his  drug  (sic)  of  returning  to  the  same
   lifestyle and behaviour patterns upon his eventual release."

20) The Upper Tribunal should be slow to  interfere  with  a  conclusion  on
   proportionality which it was within the scope of the First-tier  Tribunal
   to reach, and  should  not  do  so  simply  because  an  outcome  appears
   surprising or over-generous; but the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  to  give
   legally adequate reasons.  I am driven to conclude  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal gave no such reasons on either of the  two  significant  aspects
   focussed in the Presenting Officer's submissions.  It is  revealing  that
   in response Mr Ndubuisi could  not  find  the  justification  for  either
   conclusion within the determination.  It had to be sought  elsewhere.   A
   determination does not have to deal with every item of evidence  or  with
   every possible point, but in this case  the  respondent  is  entitled  to
   complain that there was no  sustainable  explanation  of  why  the  panel
   concluded as it did.  The determination cannot stand.

21) Neither party suggested that there is any further relevant  evidence  to
   be brought, so a fresh decision falls to be made now upon  the  materials
   available.  The relevant considerations have all been rehearsed  on  both
   sides.

22) Mr Ndubuisi did not point to any evidence  to  support  the  proposition
   that the deportation process in itself would be significantly adverse  to
   the  appellant.   No  doubt  that  outcome   would   be   unwelcome   and
   disappointing to him, but there is no evidence  that  it  would  lead  to
   significant deterioration in his mental health.

23) The background evidence to which Mr Ndubuisi referred does not  disclose
   that there would be difficulty in the appellant obtaining anti-depressant
   and anti-psychotic medication at low cost.  His treatment  is  likely  to
   consist mainly of such medication, whether he is in the UK or in Algeria.
    There is no evidence which would justify the conclusion that deportation
   will be significantly adverse to his mental health longer term outlook.

24) The appellant is separated  from  his  wife,  although  they  remain  on
   speaking terms.  He has a daughter from an earlier  relationship,  at  or
   nearing adulthood, with whom he has no meaningful relationship.  His  son
   is now 15 years of age.  He has an ongoing  relationship  with  his  son,
   which would be disrupted through deportation.  That would not be  in  the
   best interests of the child, and that  is  the  most  significant  factor
   against  deportation;  but  such  are  the  outcomes  which   deportation
   sometimes carries.

25) The appellant's son could carry on a relationship with  him,  and  could
   visit him in Algeria.  I note that the  panel  thought  the  respondent's
   position on this point to be at odds with the respondent's view  that  it
   would be unreasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the  UK.   I
   do not agree.  There is a big difference between the proposition  that  a
   15 year old may go to  live  permanently  in  another  country,  and  the
   proposition that he may visit his father there from time  to  time.   His
   primary carer is his mother, in whose household he  can  be  expected  to
   continue to thrive.

26) The appellant is not in the category of a young offender, many  of  whom
   cease offending at an early age.  He has been a persistent offender  over
   a number of years, and his offences have escalated.   He  was  warned  at
   least two  or  three  times  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  if  his
   convictions continued he might be considered for deportation - May  2010,
   February and March 2011.  This had no impact on his offending  behaviour.
   I do not find the view expressed in the social work report  prepared  for
   the court to be justified, as discussed above.  I prefer the Secretary of
   State's view  in  the  refusal  letter  that  the  appellant's  behaviour
   presents a risk of harm to the public and a risk of re-offending.

27) I find there  to  be  a  strong  public  interest  in  deportation,  not
   counterbalanced   to   any   significant   extent   by   mental    health
   considerations. I do not find it to be  sufficiently  outweighed  by  the
   appellant's relationship with his son, or by the best  interests  of  his
   son.   On  balance,  I  find  that  deportation  is   a   justified   and
   proportionate step in the public interest.

28) The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the
   following decision is substituted: the appellant's appeal, as brought  to
   the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.





                               [pic]
                                28 November 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
