
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00630/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2019                            |On 13 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Tadas [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mohzam, of Burton and Burton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                 (Decision given orally on 25 October 2019)

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. I shall refer to Mr [B] as the claimant herein.

 2. The claimant is a Lithuanian national born in 1996.  He appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  20
    July 2018 to remove him from the United  Kingdom  -  a  decision  taken
    pursuant to regulation 23(6)(b) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  that  appeal,  concluding  that  the
    claimant did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of the  United  Kingdom.   Tribunal
    Judge Feeney granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, paragraph 3 thereof stating:

         "The judge has arguably erred in  law  by  not  providing  adequate
         reasons as  to  why  the  appellant  would  face  very  significant
         obstacles to his integration into Lithuania and  why  he  does  not
         pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  given  the
         findings the judge made in paragraph 24 of the decision."

Concession

 4. For the reasons which follow, Mr Mohzam  accepted,  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant, that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an error  of
    law and that it should be set aside. I concur.

Discussion

 5. The claimant entered the United Kingdom as an  EEA  national  in  2007,
    when he was just 11 years old.

 6. The trigger for  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  remove  the
    claimant was the  claimant's  conviction  at  Lincoln  Crown  Court  of
    possessing Class B controlled drugs with intent to supply and supplying
    Class B controlled drugs, for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of
    fifteen months' imprisonment.

 7. It is prudent to identify at this stage that the claimant had  by  this
    time accumulated a number of convictions, albeit for  lesser  offences.
    The claimant was cautioned on 25 June 2013 for theft.  Thereafter,  the
    claimant  was  convicted  on  8  February   2016   of   "making   false
    representation to gain for self or another or cause loss  to  other  or
    expose risk", which led to a community order.  On 22 February 2017, the
    claimant was convicted of "driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol,
    using  a  vehicle  whilst  uninsured  and  driving  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with a licence", leading to a fine  and  a  disqualification
    from driving.

 8. The core of the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the  claimant's
    appeal, reads as follows:

         "22. I find that the appellant's criminal  behaviour  did  threaten
             one of the fundamental interests of society, that of  tackling
             offences, such as those  relating  to  the  misuse  of  drugs,
             likely to cause harm to society.  I also take account  of  the
             fact that the judge considered that the supply of drugs by the
             appellant had been ongoing on a regular basis for a period  of
             a year.

         23.  I have to consider whether the appellant's conduct  represents
             a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests of society.  I am hampered in
             this regard by the absence of an OASys Report or any  kind  of
             independent risk  assessment  of  the  appellant.   Mr  Mohzam
             brought this to my attention at the outset of the hearing  but
             his instructions from the appellant were to proceed  with  the
             hearing in any event.

         24.  In attempting to assess future risk I note the fact  that  the
             appellant committed his offences while he was  working  -  the
             fact  that  he  has  always  worked  has  not  prevented   his
             offending.  I also note the respondent's point that  there  is
             no evidence the appellant has undertaken any kind of course to
             address his offending behaviour.  On the other  hand,  I  take
             into account the fact that the judge found that the  appellant
             was of previous  good  character;  that  his  offence,  though
             serious, was at the lower end of the scale  of  offences  that
             trigger a decision to deport; and that these proceedings  mean
             that the appellant now has the  clearest  possible  indication
             that any future offending is highly  likely  to  lead  to  his
             being swiftly deported.

         25.  On balance I find the appellant's conduct does not represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to one of the
             fundamental interests of society."

 9. Mr Mohzam accepted, and I agree, that paragraph 24  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision contains the following two errors:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that the  claimant
             was of previous good character, by which I take it to mean  he
             was of good character prior to the commission of  the  offence
             which led to his  imprisonment.  This  is  simply  wrong.  The
             appellant had received a caution and had two convictions prior
             to his most recent  conviction.    The  First-tier  Tribunal's
             conclusion appears to have  been  drawn  from  the  sentencing
             remarks of the criminal judge who sentenced  the  claimant  to
             fifteen months' imprisonment.  However, the criminal judge did
             not state that the claimant was of  previous  good  character,
             rather he stated that the claimant had no previous convictions
             relevant the sentencing exercise he was required to undertake;



         ii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in treating as a matter relevant
             to the assessment  of  the  level  of  risk  of  the  claimant
             reoffending, the fact that the offence for which the  claimant
             was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment was at the lower
             end of the scale of the type of offences that might trigger  a
             decision to remove/to deport,.   There  is  no  logical  nexus
             between the two and,  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
             otherwise, then it  was  incumbent  upon  it  to  explain  its
             rationale; for doing so.




10. Each of the aforementioned errors is sufficient to render  the  finding
    in paragraph 25 flawed.




11. In addition to the errors identified above, and accepted by Mr  Mohzam,
    I find  there  are  a  number  of  further  errors  in  the  First-tier
    tribunal's decision. First, I find there is an absence of  evidence  to
    support the approach taken by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  last
    sentence of paragraph 24 of its decision. In addition, I conclude  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in its consideration of whether there are
    very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration into  life  in
    Lithuania.  Assuming such a consideration to be relevant  at  all,  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to engage with  the  approach  set
    out in Kamara and in  failing  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusion reached at paragraph  21  of  its  decision.   I  also  have
    concern as to the lawfulness of the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion on
    the issue of whether the claimant has established a permanent right  of
    residence in UK.  There is no engagement  at  this  juncture  with  the
    relevance of the claimant's time in the UK as a student.


12. Given all that I have said above, it seems to me appropriate  for  this
    appeal to be determined afresh. The significant level of  fact  finding
    that is required leads me to further conclude that it is appropriate to
    remit the matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  undertake  such  a
    consideration.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  de  novo
by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal judge Place

Signed
Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
8 November 2019
