
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00647/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th March, 2014                            |On 26th March, 2014          |
|(Given extempore)                             |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR STEPHEN NAMBWE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw of counsel instructed by Bolton CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department.  I shall, for convenience,  continue  to
    refer to her  as  "the  respondent"  and  to  Stephen  Nambwe  as  "the
    appellant".




Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Liberia, who was born  on  8th  February,
    1994.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 19th November, 2004, when he
    was 10 years of age.  He is now 20 years of age.  He arrived  with  his
    mother, Ms Plo Swen.  They had both been given recognised status  under
    the Gateway Protection Programme administered by the UNHCR.

Appellant's Criminal Conviction

2.   The appellant was convicted on  19th  August,  2011,  of  assault  with
    intent to rob, for which he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of
    three years.  He was also convicted of robbery which resulted in a  two
    year sentence of imprisonment, both sentences to run concurrently.  The
    appellant  had  earlier  convictions  which  had  prevented  him   from
    obtaining naturalisation which he applied for in August 2010.  On  20th
    February, 2012 the appellant was served with a notice of  liability  to
    deportation questionnaire and issued with a Section 72  warning  letter
    asking him to rebut the  presumption  that  he  was  a  danger  to  the
    community and that he had been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious
    offence.  On 13th March, 2013 the  respondent  decided  to  revoke  the
    appellant's  refugee  status  under  Article  1(c)(v)  of  the   Geneva
    Convention and on the same day made the decision to  deport  him  using
    her powers under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

Appeal to the First Tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cheales on 24th September last at Birmingham.  In a determination
    promulgated on 16th October, 2013, she allowed his appeal, having found
    that deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
    the appellant, such that  deportation  would  not  be  a  proportionate
    response on the part of the Secretary of State.

Secretary of State for the Home Department's Application

4.   The Secretary of  State  challenged  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cheales on two grounds.  The first was in respect of the
    assessment of the appellant's Article 8 rights. The Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department suggested that the Tribunal had failed to  have
    regard to the requirements of the Immigration Rules and, as  a  result,
    the Article 8 assessment was unsustainable and incomplete.  The  second
    challenge suggests that the Tribunal failed to provide adequate reasons
    why the appellant has reformed and will not re-offend in future,  given
    that he was bound to constitute a danger to the community.  The grounds
    suggest that the:

              -    Tribunal  "has  also  placed  a  lot  of  weight  on  his
                  behaviour in prison" and suggested that  this  was  not  a
                  plausible excuse for the appellant's behaviour

         -    appellant remains a risk to the public  and  at  risk  of  re-
                  offending and that the decision to deport him is  entirely
                  proportionate;

         -    Tribunal failed to consider why the appellant cannot  continue
                  his family life from Liberia; and that the

         -    Tribunal  had  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  it
                  concludes that the appellant has no ties in Liberia.

5.   Before me Mr Harrison told me that he was content  solely  to  rely  on
    the grounds and agreed that there was nothing perverse  in  the  public
    law sense in the Tribunal's decision.  He entirely  properly  and  very
    fairly pointed out to me that the appellant had never lived in Liberia,
    because he was actually born in Sierra Leone.  Harrison  accepted  that
    there was no evidence that he had any connection with Liberia.  He also
    very fairly accepted that whilst the determination  fails  to  identify
    any insurmountable issues, the fact that the appellant has never  lived
    in Liberia amounts to such an insurmountable issue, or at  least  could
    be regarded as such.  I indicated that in the circumstances I  did  not
    need to hear from Mr Bradshaw.

6.   The Secretary of State's grounds amount to no more, in my view, than  a
    disagreement with the judge's decision.

7.   The judge quoted from the remarks made by  the  sentencing  judge  (see
    paragraph 11 of the  determination)  and  demonstrates  that  she  very
    carefully examined all the evidence before  her,  including  the  OASys
    report of September 2012.  At paragraph 48 of  her  determination,  the
    judge quote from the report and noted that as at the date of the report
    risk of re-offending was assessed as being medium to high and  risk  of
    serious harm was assessed as being high towards the public  and  medium
    towards staff.  At paragraph 52  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellant
    having been born in Sierra Leone and his mother having left Liberia  in
    1990.  At paragraph 57  the  Tribunal  expressly  recognised  the  very
    considerable weight to be attached to the public interest in  deporting
    foreign criminals.  At paragraph 59 the  judge  specifically  indicates
    that she has considered the nature and seriousness of the offence.  She
    noted that it was committed when he was 16 years of age and that  since
    he had not committed any further offences she quite properly noted that
    for the majority of the time since the commission of the  offences  the
    appellant  has  been  in  custody.   The  judge  took  account  of  the
    sentencing remarks at paragraph  61  of  the  determination.   She  was
    clearly impressed by the evidence of Mr  Cook  who  indicated  that  he
    would provide support for the appellant should he need it.

7.   The judge quite properly recognised  that  were  the  appellant  to  be
    returned to Liberia, he and his family would be separated  permanently.
    He does not speak the language, he is still a very young  man,  and  he
    has been in the United Kingdom and been educated in the United  Kingdom
    for the last ten years.

8.   The finding of the judge was one which I believe she  was  entitled  to
    reach on the evidence before her.  She very clearly did take account of
    the very serious nature of the offences which were committed  when  the
    appellant was 17; he is now 20.  He has spent a very large part of  his
    life in the United Kingdom.  The judge noted the progress the appellant
    had made and the responses on his part to help offered to him.  She was
    entitled to place weight on the evidence of progress he made during his
    time in prison and she was right to recognise that the September  2012,
    report was a report made at that time.  Whilst I  may  very  well  have
    reached a different conclusion on the outcome of this appeal,  that  is
    not the test.  On the evidence before her, the judge's decision was one
    which was open to her to make.

9.   I have concluded that the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cheales contains no error on a point of law and it is upheld.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

