
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00291/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|at Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |                                     |
|On 24 July 2020                      |On 6 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              ZIGMANTAS SVELNYS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abdullah, instructed by UK International Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 14  July  1958  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Lithuania. He appealed against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 8 January 2019  refusing  to  revoke  a  deportation  order.  The
    appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  in  2009  exercising  Treaty
    Rights as an EEA national. He appealed against the decision  to  refuse
    to revoke the deportation order to the First-tier Tribunal which, in  a
    decision promulgated on 17 February 2020,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Details of the appellant's offending are  set  out  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision at [3]. Many of the offences which he  has  committed
    whilst in the United Kingdom  have  involved  violence.  The  appellant
    lives in United Kingdom with his wife, Ms Sveliene.  A  number  of  the
    appellant's offences arose from incidents of domestic violence.  It  is
    the respondent's case that the appellant was involved in  49  incidents
    involving violence necessitating the attendance at the appellant's home
    of the ambulance service and police. The appellant denies that  he  was
    involved in so many incidents.

 3. There are four grounds of appeal. First, the appellant argues that  the
    judge has provided insufficient reasoning for his  finding  that  there
    are  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  justifying  the  appellant's
    deportation to Lithuania. He asserts that at [36-40]  judge  failed  to
    provide a proper assessment by reference to the evidence of his reasons
    for reaching his decision. In his oral  submissions,  Mr  Abdullah  who
    appeared for the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal, complained that there had been no assessment by the judge  of
    the contents of appellant's witness statement and his claims,  set  out
    in that statement, that he is taking steps  to  manage  his  anger  and
    alcohol consumption. The judge had paid inadequate regard to the  OASys
    report which indicated that the appellant remained a  serious  risk  to
    his wife and the police/ambulance services.

 4. I do not consider there to be merit in this ground of appeal. There was
    plainly a dispute between the parties as to the  facts,  in  particular
    whether  or  not  there  had  been  as  many  as  49  visits   by   the
    police/ambulance services to the appellant's home following reports  of
    incidents of violence there. The appellant  appears  to  be  suggesting
    that the judge should have accepted his evidence  that  there  had  not
    been as many incidents as the respondent states in the decision  letter
    (based upon records kept by the police/ services) and  that  the  steps
    which he had taken to address his violent propensities should have been
    given greater weight. There was no obligation upon the judge to  accept
    the appellant's evidence, which he clearly did not. It was open to  the
    judge to prefer the respondent's evidence and to find  that  there  had
    been 49 incidents at the appellant's home. It was open to the judge  to
    consider that such a number of incidents amounted to  serious  criminal
    behaviour on the part of the appellant which undermined  his  claim  to
    have reformed his conduct. As Mr Bates admitted, the judge has  focused
    upon the risk presented  by  the  appellant  'going  forward'.  It  was
    plainly open to the judge, notwithstanding the  claim  that  there  had
    been no incidents for some time and that the appellant was reformed, to
    find that there existed serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security  justifying  the  appellant's  deportation.  In  essence,  the
    frequency of past incidents and the repetition of violent behaviour  on
    the part of the appellant led the judge to conclude that, although  the
    appellant's wife may continue to cohabit and  that  the  last  reported
    incidents of violence some time ago, the appellant continues to pose at
    this time a clear threat  to  his  wife  and  to  the  police/ambulance
    services. The appellant's ground of appeal amounts to nothing more than
    a disagreement with  findings  available  to  the  judge.  It  was  not
    necessary for the judge to refer to and reject each and every  item  of
    the appellant's evidence, such  as  what  he  says  regarding  his  own
    conduct in his witness statement. Any reading of the  decision  reveals
    that  the  judge  has  based  his  findings  and  conclusion   upon   a
    consideration of all the evidence.

 5. The second ground of appeal complained that the judge  failed  to  take
    into account the factors set out at Regulation 27(5)  and  (6)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016:

         '(5) The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.'

    Mr Abdullah complained that there was no mention of proportionality  or
    of any of the factors set out in the regulation; instead, the judge had
    simply rejected the appellant's evidence. There was little  mention  of
    the health concerns of the appellant himself or of his wife or  of  how
    the appellant and his wife act as each other's respective carer. Whilst
    the judge had referred to the fact that the couple would be a burden on
    the taxpayer in the United Kingdom [47] Mr Abdullah submitted that  the
    appellant had  worked  in  the  past  that  he  was  not  involuntarily
    unemployed, a matter which to which the judge had not made reference.

 6. The ground of appeal is without merit. There is no reason  to  consider
    that the judge has not had regard to the regulation 27 factors  and  to
    the principle  of  proportionality  in  reaching  his  conclusion.  The
    factors in regulation  27  are  addressed  throughout  the  appellant's
    evidence and some of them are referred to directly by the judge in  his
    account of that evidence. Given the particular facts in this  case  and
    the judge's acceptance of the account of the appellant's conduct  given
    by the respondent and rejection of that given by the  appellant,  there
    is nothing perverse nor irrational in  the  judge's  dismissal  of  the
    appeal; it was open to the judge to find that the appellant represented
    a present threat to public order through his violent conduct to  reject
    the appellant's claim to have reformed. The judge was plainly aware  of
    the appellant's medical condition and that of his wife and of the  fact
    that the  appellant  had  worked  in  the  past.  Notwithstanding  that
    knowledge, it was open to him to reach the findings  conclusions  which
    he has in this decision. He did not fall into legal error by failing to
    refer to each and every factor in regulation 27  or  to  make  explicit
    reference to the principle of proportionality.

 7. Ground 3  challenges  the  decision  for  its  failure  to  accept  the
    appellant's contention that he was remorseful for his past actions  and
    that he intended never to repeat such behaviour  again.  There  was  no
    obligation upon the  judge  to  accept  that  evidence.  Moreover,  the
    argument that the OASys should have attracted little weight because  it
    was three years old is without merit. The judge was entitled to  decide
    the case on the basis of the  evidence  before  him.  No  evidence  was
    presented, other than the appellant's own assertions  which  the  judge
    rejected, to suggest that the OASys assessment was no longer relevant.

 8. Finally, the appellant submits that the judge failed have regard to the
    'compelling medical evidence' relating to both the  appellant  and  his
    wife in determining the appeal on Article 8  grounds.  This  ground  is
    without merit. The judge concluded that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    (also a Lithuanian citizen) could  continue  to  care  for  each  other
    thereby maintain their family life in Lithuania  and  that  they  could
    receive appropriate medical treatment there. No evidence was adduced to
    indicate that they  could  not.  The  judge's  conclusion  was  plainly
    available to him on the evidence. There was  nothing  in  the  evidence
    medical or otherwise which indicated that family life by necessity  had
    to take place within the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom.

 9. For the reasons which I have given above, this appeal is dismissed

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 24 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


