
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00366/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th February 2020                        |On 09th March 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Jackson, instructed by BID
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Latvia born in 1971. She appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bristow,  promulgated  on  6
    November 2019, dismissing her  appeal  against  deportation  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 [2016 Regulations].

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the judge  made  the
    following errors of law:-

      1) Failing to apply  the  correct  burden  of  proof  under  the  2016
         Regulations;

      2) Making irrational findings in relation to risk of re-offending;

      3) Failing to properly approach the proportionality test;

      4) The Appellant was  entitled  to  permanent  residence,  relying  on
         further evidence submitted after the appeal before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, requiring the higher level of protection under Regulation
         27.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Callaghan
    on all grounds on 24 December 2019. He states:

         "It is arguable that by  referring  to  the  automatic  deportation
         process and section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 at [32] of the  decision  that  judge  has  erred  in  his
         proportionality consideration."



Appellant's conviction

4.   On 22 June 2018, the Appellant was convicted after a trial of  wounding
    with intent to do grievous bodily harm contrary to section  18  of  the
    Offences against the Person  Act  1861  and  sentenced  to  four  years
    imprisonment. The Appellant stabbed her partner in  the  left  shoulder
    after an argument when both were drunk. The Appellant made  no  attempt
    to call the emergency services. The sentencing judge accepted "he  laid
    hands on her" but there was no suggestion that the Appellant  acted  in
    self-defence.



Appellant's submissions

5.   Ms Jackson relied on her skeleton argument in which  she  set  out  her
    submissions in relation to the admission of the new evidence from HMRC,
    Ground 4. She made the following submissions in respect of grounds 1 to
    3:

Ground 1: Failure to apply correct burden of proof

6.   Although the judge, acknowledged the correct burden at [20] he did  not
    apply it. At [18] the judge set out the issues in dispute and stated at
    [18.c]: "whether the Appellant is able to provide substantive  evidence
    of not demonstrating  a  threat  through  demonstrating  that  she  had
    successfully reformed or rehabilitated."  Further  at  [38]  the  judge
    found that the Appellant had not provided substantive evidence that she
    had successfully reformed or rehabilitated. Ms  Jackson  accepted  that
    rehabilitation was an issue, but it was not for the Appellant to  prove
    it. The judge was focusing  on  the  Appellant  and  not  on  what  the
    Respondent had to prove.

Ground 2: The findings on the Appellant's evidence were irrational

7.   The judge correctly quoted the OASYS report that the Appellant  was  at
    low risk of re-offending, but his conclusion that she  was  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat was  not  sustainable.  On  the
    evidence in the OASYS report the judge was not entitled to find she was
    a threat under the 2016 Regulations

8.   The judge relied on the sentencing remarks but failed to  consider  the
    Appellant's desire to address her binge drinking. The judge  failed  to
    engage with the Appellant's evidence and gave no reason for disagreeing
    with it. His  finding  that  alcohol  misuse  was  a  risk  factor  for
    reoffending failed to take into account the current situation. Further,
    the judge failed to properly consider the Appellant's evidence that she
    was a victim of domestic violence.  His  finding  that  domestic  abuse
    played no part in the offence was irrational.

Ground 3: proportionality

9.    The  judge's  approach  to  future  prospects  of  rehabilitation  was
    contrary to MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC).
    There was evidence of the Appellant's attempts to rehabilitate  and  of
    family support. The judge concluded the Appellant was not rehabilitated
    and failed to apply his mind to future rehabilitation.

10.  The independent social worker's [ISW] report  was  clear  on  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's daughter [HE], namely for the Appellant to
    remain in the UK. There was no evidence to go  behind  that  conclusion
    and no evidential basis for the  judge's  finding  at  [43]  which  was
    contrary to the opinion of the ISW.

11.   Ms  Jackson  did  not  make  submissions  on  the  judge's  Article  8
    assessment nor did she refer to paragraph 15 of her skeleton  argument,
    which submitted the judge erred in considering section 117C.



Respondent's submissions

12.   Ms Cunha submitted the judge considered the best interests of  HE  (at
    [41] onwards) as a primary not paramount consideration. The emphasis in
    the ISW's report was different. The  judge  was  entitled  to  look  at
    Article 8 as a ground of appeal and it was clear that  the  Appellant's
    deportation would not be unduly harsh on HE. The judge was entitled  to
    attach weight to the public interest and his  findings  were  safe  and
    sustainable.

13.  The judge did not attach undue weight to the issue  of  rehabilitation.
    The Respondent had shown that the Appellant was a threat by  virtue  of
    her  conviction  and  criminal  behaviour.  The  judge  considered  the
    aggravating factors and the Appellant's 'not guilty' plea. Although the
    OASYS report referred to a low  risk  of  reoffending,  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider whether aggravating factors could give rise  to  a
    future risk. There was no  evidence  the  Appellant  had  rehabilitated
    because she was still in prison.

14.  The judge looked at the  case  holistically  and  applied  the  correct
    burden  of  proof.  He  properly  considered  and  applied   the   2016
    Regulations. The judge's findings were open to him. The  Appellant  had
    committed a serious offence and  had  been  sentenced  to  four  years'
    imprisonment.  Her  behaviour  met  the  threshold   under   the   2016
    Regulations.

15.  The fresh evidence could  have  been  obtained  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and did not change the position. It should not be admitted. It
    was clear from the judge's findings that his Article 8  assessment  had
    not infected his analysis under the 2016 Regulations. He made clear and
    separate findings on each issue. His findings were not irrational.  The
    Appellant had not demonstrated why  her  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh given the ISW report.

16.  In response, Ms Jackson submitted the judge's Article  8  findings  had
    infected his earlier findings. In anticipating  his  conclusions  under
    section 117C, he applied a stricter test under  the  2016  Regulations.
    The judge's findings at [42] onwards  were  not  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. There was no reason to go behind  the  opinion  of
    the ISW. The judge's findings on the best interests of the  child  were
    flawed and therefore his  proportionality  assessment  was  flawed.  He
    should have considered future rehabilitation.



Conclusions and reasons

Fresh evidence

17.  I find that the fresh evidence does not meet the Ladd v Marshall  test.
    The letter from HMRC could have been obtained with reasonable diligence
    prior to the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  letter  was
    incapable of showing that the Appellant  was  engaged  in  genuine  and
    effective employment such that she could  arguably  establish  she  had
    been exercising Treaty rights for five years.  It  would  not  have  an
    important influence  on  the  result  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances where the interests of justice required its admission.

Ground 1

18.   The  judge  quoted  from  paragraph  5  of  Schedule  1  of  the  2016
    Regulations at [34]. The wording of  [18c]  and  his  finding  at  [38]
    reflect his application of that paragraph. The judge properly  directed
    himself on the burden of proof at [20]. Further, he  properly  directed
    himself on the test to be applied under the 2016 Regulations at [26] to
    [31]. There was no misapplication of the burden of proof.

Ground 2

19.  The judge considered the Appellant's claim to have  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence and gave adequate reasons for rejecting it  at  [35].
    The judge attached weight to the OASYS report, but given  the  contrary
    evidence in the sentencing judge's remarks and the witnesses' evidence,
    it was open to him to conclude that domestic violence was not  part  of
    the background to the offence.

20.  The judge considered the Appellant's GP  records,  what  the  Appellant
    told her support worker, the  Appellant's  statement  and  her  current
    situation. He acknowledged that the Appellant now accepts that  alcohol
    is an issue and she intends to access support on her release  at  [36].
    The judge's conclusion that alcohol misuse continued to be a factor was
    open to him on the evidence before him.

21.  The judge clearly considered the OASYS report at  [37]  and  took  this
    into account in addition to his assessment of risk factors.  The  OASYS
    report was only one element of the judge's consideration.  It  was  not
    determinative. The judge found the Appellant's  conduct  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  It  could  not  be  said  that  this
    conclusion was not one which no reasonable tribunal, properly directed,
    could have come to.

Ground 3

22.  It is evident from [35],  [36]  and  [42]  that  the  judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's intention to seek help on release  from  prison
    and the support of her family. He considered the  reasonable  prospects
    of the Appellant ceasing to commit crime, not the mere  possibility  of
    rehabilitation, which was only one of the  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account. The judge adopted a holistic approach  to  his  assessment  of
    proportionality. There was no misdirection following MC Portugal.

23.  The judge set out the conclusions of the ISW  at  [42]  and  took  into
    account all relevant matters in assessing the  best  interests  of  HE.
    Contrary to  Ms  Jackson's  submission,  the  ISW's  opinion  that  the
    Appellant should not be deported was not determinative. HE did not live
    with the Appellant from 2010 to 2015 and from June 2018  to  date.  The
    ISW recommended HE continue to live with  EE  and  her  family  and  to
    continue her education. That position would not change if the Appellant
    is deported. The judge stated at [44]: The  absence  of  the  Appellant
    would affect the prospects of  reparative  work  [between  HE  and  the
    Appellant] but in the circumstances I do  not  find  this  renders  the
    decision disproportionate."

24.  The judge took into account HE's best interests as  identified  by  the
    ISW at [42]. His conclusion at [43] was not contrary to  that  opinion.
    Whether the Appellant should be deported was a matter  for  the  judge.
    There was no arguable error of law, irrationality or lack of reasons in
    the judge's findings on the best  interests  of  HE.  On  the  evidence
    before the judge, the Appellant's deportation was proportionate.

25.  The Appellant was served with a one stop notice under section  120  and
    was therefore able to raise Article 8 issues on appeal.  The  Appellant
    relied on Article 8 in her grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    and therefore the judge was  obliged  to  deal  with  it.  The  judge's
    findings on Article 8 were entirely separate to  his  assessment  under
    the 2016 Regulations. The judge found that the Respondent's decision to
    deport  the  Appellant  was  justified  in  accordance  with  the  2016
    Regulations [46]. He then went on to consider Article  8  and  properly
    applied section 117C.  There  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    approach.

Ground 4

26.  It was agreed that the Appellant did not have  permanent  residence  at
    the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  applied  the
    correct threshold test. The fresh evidence  is  not  admitted  for  the
    reasons given at paragraph 17 above. This evidence was insufficient  to
    establish a right to permanent residence in any event.

27.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                              Date: 24 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 24 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
