
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 October 2016                       |On 26 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ANTONIO FERREIRA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Ms C Fielden, Counsel, instructed by Lester Dominic
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (SSHD)  appeals
        against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Henderson,
        promulgated on 25 August 2016, in which she allowed the  appeal  of
        Antonio Ferreira (the Claimant), against the SSHD's decision of  15
        December 2015 to make a deportation order against him  pursuant  to
        the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006
        Regulations).


   Background


     2. The Claimant is a national of Portugal born on 8 December 1994.  He
        entered the United Kingdom aged 6 with his mother. He has  remained
        here ever since. The Claimant has a long criminal history  for  one
        so young. He first  began  committing  offences  aged  13.  Between
        November 2009 and 10 October 2014 he was convicted on 22  occasions
        in relation to 38 offences. His offending included offences against
        property, theft, drug offences, and offences relating to  offensive
        weapons. On  12  September  2014  the  Claimant  was  convicted  of
        conspiracy to destroy or damage property and received a sentence of
        48 months imprisonment in a Young Offender Institution.


     3.  The SSHD decided to the  deport  the  Claimant  under  regulations
        19(3)(b) and 21 of the 2006 Regulations. There was said  to  be  no
        evidence that the Claimant, his mother or siblings,  had  exercised
        treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The  SSHD  was  not  satisfied
        that the Claimant had attained permanent residence under regulation
        15 of the 2006 Regulations. The SSHD was  not  satisfied  that  the
        Claimant qualified for enhanced protection under  regulation  21(4)
        (10 years residence) because his overall length of residence in the
        UK could not be determined and because of the amount of  time  that
        he had spent in prison in the UK. In assessing  the  factors  under
        regulation 21(5) the SSHD relied on an OASys report indicating that
        the Claimant posed a high risk of harm to the public  and  that  he
        posed a very high risk of reoffending. Having  concluded  that  the
        Claimant had not adequately addressed the causes of  his  offending
        behaviour, the SSHD was of the view that the Claimant was still  at
        risk of re-offending. Reference was made to his  claim  to  have  3
        children in the UK and a partner but the SSHD was satisfied, having
        regard to the Claimant's age (mistakenly given as 31 years old) and
        health, that it would not be  disproportionate  to  remove  him  to
        Portugal.

     4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (on 03  August  2016)
        it was conceded on behalf of the Claimant that he could not provide
        evidence of having exercised his treaty  rights  for  a  continuous
        period of 5 years and so could  not  claim  a  permanent  right  of
        residence [12]. At [56] the judge confirmed that both parties  were
        in agreement that the Claimant did not have the right to  permanent
        residence as he had never worked in the UK. At the  Upper  Tribunal
        hearing I expressed my concern to both representatives at the basis
        for this concession.  Paragraph  56  of  the  decision  appears  to
        proceed on the basis that the Claimant must have worked in  the  UK
        in order to have attained permanent  residence.  This  is  not  the
        case. Under regulation 15(1)(a) of  the  2006  Regulations  an  EEA
        national who has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
        the regulations for a continuous period of 5  years  shall  acquire
        the right to reside in the UK permanently. The Claimant entered the
        UK as a 6-year-old,  presumably  being  supported  by  his  mother.
        Various references in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  (e.g.  at
        [39]) suggested the  Claimant  was  financially  supported  by  his
        mother and that he helped her  on  occasion  with  her  work  as  a
        cleaner. If the Claimant's mother was a worker or  a  self-employed
        person when she entered the UK, she would be a qualified person for
        the purposes of regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations. The  Claimant
        would, in this case, be the family member of a qualified person  as
        he was the direct descendant of his mother and was either,  at  all
        material times, under 21 years of  age,  and/or  dependent  on  his
        mother. This point does not seem  to  have  been  fully  considered
        either by the Claimant's solicitors or his Counsel. The  First-tier
        Tribunal  judge  cannot  be  criticised  for  not  going  behind  a
        concession made by the Claimant's representatives, but  the  First-
        tier Tribunal would be entitled to revisit this issue on remittal.


     5. The First-tier Tribunal judge heard evidence from the Claimant  and
        his sister. His mother did not attend the hearing. This was said to
        be because she was unwell but no medical evidence was  provided  in
        support. Nor did the Claimant's claimed partner (the mother of  his
        three children)  attended  the  hearing.  Nor  did  she  provide  a
        statement. From [28] to [45] the judge recorded the evidence  given
        by the Claimant and by his sister. This included evidence  relating
        to some courses he had completed and  evidence  that  he  had  been
        entrusted with the position of Violence Reduction Representative at
        his prison. Throughout her recording of the Claimant's evidence the
        judge appeared to make some factual findings. For example, at  [37]
        the judge stated that the certificates  produced  by  the  Claimant
        merely confirmed his attendance and that he had not shown,  on  the
        balance of probabilities, and that the findings of the OASys report
        had been overridden. The judge found a  number  of  inconsistencies
        between the evidence given by the Claimant and his sister.


     6. At [54] et seq the  judge  took  into  account  the  Supreme  Court
        decision in SSHD v  Frank  Vomero  (Italy)  [2016]  UKSC  49.  This
        authority  concerned  the  circumstances  in  which  the   enhanced
        protection provisions contained in Article 28(3)(a)  of   Directive
        2004/38/EC (the  free  Movement  Directive)  could  be  applied  to
        someone who did not have a permanent right of residence. A majority
        of the Supreme Court favoured the view that possession of  a  right
        of permanent residence was not needed in order  to  enjoy  enhanced
        protection  under  article  28(3)(a).  Nevertheless,   a   minority
        regarded the position as being unclear and so required a  reference
        to the CJEU. The questions posed included a query  as  to  how  the
        period of residence for the relevant  10  year  period  was  to  be
        calculated.


     7. At [62] the judge concluded that, in light of the referral  by  the
        Supreme Court, there was  a  sufficient  lack  of  clarity  on  the
        question of whether a permanent right of residence was required  in
        order for the Claimant to avail himself of the enhanced  protection
        in  regulation  21(4).  The  judge  therefore  concluded  that  the
        respondent's decision of December 2015 was therefore flawed.


     8. The SSHD's Grounds of Appeal contended that the First-tier Tribunal
        judge was not entitled to rely on the majority view of the  Supreme
        Court as the Court was unable to reach a definitive  conclusion  as
        to whether the Claimant benefited from enhanced protection.


     9. A Rule 24 Response drafted by Ms Fielden agreed that the First-tier
        Tribunal should not have treated Vomero  as  definitively  deciding
        the issue of enhanced protection. The Rule 24 Response additionally
        criticised the judge's decision on the basis  that  she  failed  to
        reach any conclusions in respect of regulation 21(5)  of  the  2006
        Regulations. This provision requires that a relevant decision  must
        accord with the following principles - (a) the decision must comply
        with the principle of proportionality; (b)  the  decision  must  be
        based exclusively on the personal conduct of the person  concerned;
        (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
        genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
        the fundamental interests of society; (d) matters isolated from the
        particulars of the  case  or  which  relate  to  considerations  of
        general prevention do not justify  the  decision;  (e)  a  person's
        previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves  justify  the
        decision.

    10. I additionally noted the requirements of regulation 21(6):  "Before
        taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  or
        public security in relation to a person  who  is  resident  in  the
        United  Kingdom   the   decision-maker   must   take   account   of
        considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
        economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
        in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
        into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
        his country of origin."


    11. After some discussion it was accepted at the hearing by Ms Fijiwala
        that, although the  judge  criticised  the  SSHD's  decision  under
        regulation 21(6) (at [60]),  she  had  not  herself  considered  or
        applied those requirements to the factual matrix before her. Indeed
        it was difficult to discern a full range of factual findings by the
        judge. The judge's assessment at [60] was more akin to a review  of
        the lawfulness of the SSHD's underlying  decision  rather  than  an
        independent merits  assessment  as  required.  I  also  accept  the
        criticism mounted by Ms Fielden in relation to the failure  by  the
        judge to clearly consider or apply the requirements  of  regulation
        21(5).


    12. In these circumstances it was agreed by both  representatives  that
        the most appropriate course of action would be to remit the  matter
        back to the 1st tier Tribunal for an entirely  fresh  hearing,  all
        issues open.






Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The matter will be remitted for a full fresh hearing at Taylor House  before
a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Henderson.


No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               25 October 2016


