
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th July 2019                     |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                WALDEMAR [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken, instructed by UK Migration Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside by me  (following  a
         hearing at which the appellant was represented by Mr J Rendle),  in
         a decision promulgated on 7th May 2019 for the following reasons:

               1. By a decision promulgated on 29th January 2019, First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge  Kaler  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
                  against deportation. Permission to appeal  was  sought  on
                  rather confusing grounds but granted on  the  judge  being
                  able to identify one issue namely  that  it  was  arguable
                  that  the  judge  had  impermissibly  changed  the   OASys
                  assessment of future risk to medium from low.

               2. Mr Rendle very helpfully identified  another  ground  upon
                  which he relied namely that there was an absence of weight
                  attached      to      the       appellant's       imminent
                  fatherhood/relationship  with  his  girlfriend.  He   also
                  sought permission to amend the grounds in order to seek to
                  challenge the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that  the
                  appellant's mother had not been exercising Treaty  Rights,
                  submitting that the evidence before the  Tribunal  pointed
                  to her being self-sufficient  for  a  relevant  period  of
                  time.

               3. Mr Walker had no objection to the widening of the  grounds
                  relied upon. I granted permission to amend.

               4. Although  Mr  Rendle  submitted  that  the  three  grounds
                  cumulatively were such as to amount to an error of law,  I
                  indicated that I did not consider the lack  of  weight  on
                  the imminent fatherhood/relationship to be an error  given
                  the  lack  of  evidence  before  the   tribunal   of   the
                  relationship, I nevertheless accepted the  submission  (to
                  which Mr Walker did not object) that there was an error of
                  law in  the  finding  that  the  appellant  did  not  have
                  permanent residence and that  there  was  just  enough  to
                  sustain the submission that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
                  had failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusion the
                  appellant was at medium risk of causing future harm.  That
                  the outcome to the appeal will be any different  does  not
                  necessarily follow.

               5. In the circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  to  be
                  remade.

      2. I made directions for the future conduct of the hearing, with which
         both parties complied.

      3. Mr Walker accepted  the  appellant's  mother  had  been  exercising
         Treaty Rights at the required time and that Mr [M] had, at the date
         of  the  index  offence,  conviction  and   deportation   decision,
         permanent residence as an EU citizen. As such  his  deportation  is
         predicated upon whether there are serious grounds of public  policy
         and security that require his deportation. Mr Aitken accepted that,
         although there has been  an  appeal  filed  on  Article  8  grounds
         following the service on the appellant of a s120 notice, the issues
         of the proportionality of the  decision  are  subsumed  within  the
         appeal under the regulations; if the  appellant  does  not  succeed
         under the Regulations he would be  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         succeed on human rights grounds.

      4. There was no dispute as to the factual matrix; consequently, I  did
         not hear oral evidence. I heard submissions from Mr Walker, did not
         trouble Mr Aitken and on conclusion of  the  hearing  informed  the
         appellant that I allowed his appeal and my  written  reasons  would
         follow.

         Undisputed facts

         (i)  The appellant, who was born on 28 July 1995 is a dual  citizen
             of Portugal and Mozambique. He left Mozambique aged 2 and  has
             not been there since. He has been in the UK since the  age  of
             12 and has Permanent Residence as an EU national.  He  remains
             close to his mother, stepfather and siblings who reside in the
             UK. He has no relatives or other  ties  in  Portugal,  whether
             practical or emotional, other than a knowledge of  social  and
             cultural mores having  been  brought  up  by  his  mother  and
             stepfather.

         ii) Although he has now been resident in the UK for more  than  10
             years, he  does  not  qualify  for  the  higher  threshold  of
             protection.

        iii) He attended school until aged 16; he is now working as a  tyre
             fitter.

         iv) He is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms  Webb-
             Hamden, a British Citizen. She has a  child  from  an  earlier
             relationship who calls the appellant  "dad"  and  who  has  no
             contact  with  her  birth  father.  Ms  Webb-Hamden  and   the
             appellant have a new baby together. They do not live together.

          v) On 3rd June 2016, aged just short of  21,  he  was  sentenced,
             following a plea of guilty, to a total of 3 years and 9 months
             in a Young Offenders Institution for dealing in crack  cocaine
             and heroin. The judge's sentencing remarks refer, rightly,  to
             such drugs as dealing in death and refer  to  the  appellant's
             role  as  being  significant  and   motivated   by   financial
             advantage.

         vi)  Whilst  serving  his  sentence,   the   appellant   had   two
             adjudications against him: possession of a Samsung phone and 2
             USB charging leads; possession of a SIM card  and  an  unknown
             herbal substance.

        vii) He was convicted of driving without insurance in December 2018
             for which he received 6 penalty points.

       viii) The OGRS score, which estimates the percentage probability  of
             re-offending for years 1 and 2 after discharge, is 8% and  15%
             respectively.

         ix) The appellant has spent nearly half his life in the UK.  Prior
             to the index offence he was a person of good character and  is
             socially and culturally integrated in the UK.

          x) The OASys report prepared on 19th September 2017 records  that
             the  appellant  recognises  the  impact  and  consequences  of
             offending on victims, community  and  wider  society;  records
             that he was at that time in various plans for  rehabilitation.
             Various certificates  confirm  completion  of  some  of  these
             courses.

         xi) The appellant was released from prison on 29th  January  2018;
             his licence expires on 14th December 2019.

         Discussion

      5. The principles to be  considered  in  a  deportation  such  as  the
         appellants are well  known  and  are  set  out  succinctly  in  the
         decision letter of the SSHD dated  25th  January  2018.  Mr  Walker
         relied upon the content of that letter, the particular very serious
         nature of the appellant's index  offence  and  that  in  the  OASys
         report he was considered to be at medium risk of re-offending.

      6. The Guidance to interpreting OASys information states

             "... evidence suggests that offenders in the Low likelihood of
             reoffending band  are  unlikely  to  benefit  from  additional
             interventions to reduce their  offending,  such  as  cognitive
             skills programmes,  while  the  intensity  of  probation  case
             management varies in line with the likelihood  of  reoffending
             band as well as Risk of Serious Harm....

             In the case of a serving prisoner, the assessment of  Risk  of
             Serious Harm is based on the following:

                . Identified controls are in place at the  time  of  release
                  into the community, most typically  through  the  licence,
                  and

                . The Offender Manager monitoring the offender's  compliance
                  with these controls on an ongoing basis until the sentence
                  end date

             ...

             It is vital to remember, therefore, that all assessments  take
             into account the likelihood of a further offence occurring and
             the level of impact of that harm should an offence occur.

             ...

             The risk of serious harm is only considered to be low  in  the
             community if the appropriate controls are in place  to  manage
             and monitor the offender throughout and can be acted  upon  to
             reduce harmful behaviours occurring ..."

      7. The appellant has without doubt been convicted of  a  very  serious
         offence. He received a lengthy sentence for  a  first  offence  and
         there is no doubt but that the supply of drugs of this nature has a
         severe and negative impact on society as a whole as well as for the
         individuals who become addicted. There is evidence  in  the  bundle
         that the appellant has completed some of  the  recommended  courses
         but not all. He remains on  licence,  and  as  said  in  the  OASys
         guidance, the assessment of  risk  is  predicated  upon  him  being
         subject to controls. In the decision letter  the  respondent  takes
         the view that in the absence of  an  improvement  in  his  personal
         circumstances or that he has addressed the issues which caused  him
         to offend, then it was reasonable for the  respondent  to  conclude
         that there remained a risk of him reoffending.

      8. The OASYS report as it appears in the bundle does not  specifically
         state whether the appellant is considered to be at low,  medium  or
         high risk of  re-offending.  Taking  account  of  the  guidance  to
         interpreting OASys reports I am satisfied that he is at low risk. I
         do however note  that  the  OASys  report  is  predicated  upon  an
         offender being subject to some form of control and I am aware  that
         he remains on licence at present. I have taken this into account in
         my overall assessment.

      9. I  am  satisfied  there  has  been  a  significant  change  in  the
         appellant's personal circumstances. He not only has his  own  child
         with his partner, but her toddler looks to him and  treats  him  as
         her father. He is  working  full  time  and  provides  considerable
         effective emotional input to the family as a father and partner.

     10. The available evidence does not indicate a propensity to  reoffend.
         The OASys report does not consider this  to  be  significantly  the
         case and,  although  he  remains  on  licence  and  has  a  driving
         conviction since release, he has not been recalled off licence  and
         has not come to police attention in connection with  drugs  related
         issues. Deterrence and public revulsion do not play  a  significant
         part in the decision to be taken in  this  case;  this  appellant's
         conviction cannot be described as an  exceptionally  serious  case.
         Although  the  respondent  refers  to  the  evidence  indicating  a
         propensity to  reoffend,  the  decision  letter  does  not  provide
         references to information that led to the respondent reaching  that
         conclusion and Mr Walker did not draw  my  attention  to  any  such
         information. On the evidence before me I cannot reasonably conclude
         that the appellant has a propensity to reoffend.

     11. Taking full account of the  appellant's  conviction,  that  he  has
         permanent residence in the UK and his personal circumstances  I  am
         satisfied t hat the decision to deport him is not proportionate.

     12. The respondent's decision to deport the appellant is not  justified
         on grounds serious grounds of public policy. I  allow  the  appeal.



    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


     Date 9th July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
