
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00154/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2017                           |On 11 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                               MR AHMED SALIH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Junior, Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has an unhappy history, having already  visited  the  Upper
    Tribunal once before with the result that it was remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing, and this was the context in which it  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill on 23 August 2017. Before him
    was the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 2  March  2016  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ["EEA  Regulations"]  to   make   a
    deportation order pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(b). The Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Sweden. The trigger for the decision under  appeal  was  his
    most recent conviction on  2  December  2015,  for  the  possession  of
    cannabis with intent to supply a class B controlled drug, upon his  own
    guilty plea.  The sentence that  followed  was  one  of  eight  months'
    immediate imprisonment.   That  conviction  had  however  followed  two
    earlier similar convictions for the possession of drugs with intent  to
    supply them; on 19 June 2014 when the  penalty  imposed  was  a  twelve
    month youth rehabilitation order, and  on  22  January  2015  when  the
    penalty imposed was a fine.  The Judge allowed the appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 7 September 2017, and permission to appeal that decision
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted to the Respondent by  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on  28  September  2017.   Thus  the
    appeal comes before us today. This is the decision of us both.

 2. The first central point of challenge to the Judge's decision is that he
    failed to properly analyse the evidence before him in order to  resolve
    the disputed issue of whether or not the Appellant  had  established  a
    permanent right of residence in  the  UK  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
    There was obviously concern raised at the hearing by both parties as to
    what the true circumstances were, so that notwithstanding the terms  in
    which the decision had been written, and the previous hearings upon the
    appeal, the Respondent applied at the outset of the hearing before  the
    Judge for an adjournment in order to seek to remedy what were perceived
    to be deficiencies in the evidence, and in the  decision  letter.   The
    Judge refused that adjournment, but it is argued by the Respondent,  he
    failed nonetheless to engage with the evidential difficulties that were
    identified to him, and failed to apply the EEA Regulations properly  to
    the evidence that was before him.

 3. The Appellant's case was that he had travelled to the UK in 2006 at the
    age of 10. He claimed to  have  resided  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations ever since, so that at a point in time  which  was  not  in
    fact identified  in  his  evidence,  he  claimed  to  have  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence. His case was that he had done so, as  the
    dependent son of his father, an EEA national exercising  Treaty  rights
    in the UK, before his conviction in December 2015, and thus  before  he
    had been sentenced to imprisonment. The Judge appears to have proceeded
    on the basis that this claim was correct, without asking himself why it
    was that all of the members of the Appellant's family had been  refused
    the issue of a residence card to confirm that they enjoyed a  permanent
    right of residence on 1 February 2012,  and  what  the  status  of  the
    different family members was thereafter. It was  common  ground  before
    the Judge that the Appellant's father had made  an  application  for  a
    residence card  to  confirm  that  he  enjoyed  a  permanent  right  of
    residence, which was refused on 1 February 2012. The Appellant's mother
    and siblings were dependents upon  that  application.  A  copy  of  the
    decision in question has been produced to us, and it  states  in  terms
    that his father had failed to produce evidence to show that he had been
    exercising treaty rights prior to April 2010.  The  Appellant's  father
    chose not to pursue his application for a residence card further by way
    of appeal. He  had  instead  applied  for,  and  been  issued  with,  a
    residence card to confirm his exercise of  treaty  rights  in  December
    2012. Thus, to the extent that the Appellant claimed to  have  acquired
    prior to December 2015 a permanent right of residence in reliance  upon
    his position as his father's son, it was by no means easy to  see  that
    this claim was tenable. Indeed, the evidence that was placed before the
    Judge, did not establish that this was the case.

 4.  There  was  also  a  second  problem  that  the  Appellant  faced   in
    establishing that he enjoyed a permanent right  of  residence,  to  the
    extent that he relied upon his own status as a "student".  Although  he
    had indeed been enrolled in full-time publicly funded education in  the
    UK as a child both at secondary school, and latterly at university,  he
    had never provided either  to  the  Respondent  or  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal any evidence to suggest that he had ever been the  beneficiary
    of comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the UK. Thus, he had never
    produced the evidence required to demonstrate that at any date  he  met
    the definition of "student" provided for in Regulation 4(1)(d)(ii). The
    Judge failed to deal with that issue.

 5. We note that the Judge was unlikely to be helped  by  a  representative
    who neither conceded that a  permanent  right  of  residence  had  been
    acquired, nor advanced any argument as to why it had not. Nevertheless,
    in our judgment the Judge  was  obliged  to  consider  the  matter  for
    himself, and having done so ought to have concluded that  the  evidence
    did not establish that a permanent right of residence had accrued prior
    to December 2015. He ought therefore to have considered the  appeal  in
    the context of the lower  level  of  protection  provided  by  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 6. Before us today has been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  the
    argument that the decision could be read in such a way  as  to  suggest
    that the  Judge  did  indeed  do  so.   The  argument  rests  upon  the
    references made by the Judge  in  paragraphs  12,  20  and  22  of  his
    decision to Regulation 21(5).  We are not satisfied that  the  argument
    has merit. There is no reference to  Regulation  21(1),  and  when  the
    decision is read as a whole it is plain that the Judge  considered  the
    Appellant's position upon the mistaken assumption that he was  entitled
    to a permanent right of residence. We conclude therefore that the Judge
    simply failed to undertake the requisite fact-finding analysis  in  the
    correct context, and that the references  to  Regulation  21(5)  cannot
    save the decision.  The Tribunal would be bound to consider  Regulation
    21(5) if it were to  properly  direct  itself,  because  the  issue  of
    proportionality arises whatever the level of protection enjoyed by  the
    individual.

 7. There is upon our analysis of the decision no adequate analysis of  the
    Appellant's circumstances prior to the removal from the UK  to  Sweden,
    and nor is there any adequate analysis of the relevant public policy in
    favour of deportation. That being so, with regret, we conclude that the
    challenge to the decision is made out to the extent  that  there  is  a
    material error of law of such gravity that it requires the appeal to be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo.  We are  not
    satisfied that any findings of fact can be preserved.

 8. As set out above, it appears unlikely that the Appellant has acquired a
    permanent right of residence in the UK although we do not rule out  the
    possibility of the Appellant being able to adduce evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at the remitted hearing to establish that that  was
    in fact the case.

 9. In the circumstances the decision discloses a  material  error  of  law
    that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision  must
    in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  We  have  in  these
    circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  or  whether  to  proceed  to
    remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where it would appear
    that the relevant evidence has not  properly  been  considered  by  the
    First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of  law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for her case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial
    fact finding exercise is such that having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  25
    September 2012. Having reached that conclusion, with the  agreement  of
    the parties we make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo at  the  Taylor  House  hearing
        centre. The  appeal  is  not  to  be  listed  before  either  Judge
        Cockrill,  or,  Judge  Barrowclough.  No  findings  of   fact   are
        preserved.
    ii) An Arabic interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) There are  presently  anticipated  to  be  family  members  of  the
        Appellant providing oral evidence, and the time estimate  is  as  a
        result, 2 hours.

Notice of decision


10. The decision promulgated on 7 September 2017 did involve the making  of
    an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


