
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00017/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2015                      |On 24 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LESLEY SMITH


                                   Between

                                 aJ (Gambia)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lams, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This matter has a reasonably substantial history which has included a
       hearing before the Court of Appeal  with  a  decision  under  neutral
       citation [2014] EWCA Civ 1636.  There the Court of  Appeal  concluded
       in relation to the present case that at an earlier hearing the  Upper
       Tribunal had not applied the new Rules correctly and had thus  fallen
       into a material error of law.  The  Court  of  Appeal  recorded  that
       there was a desire on the part of AJ to adduce further evidence  that
       would be relevant to the assessment required under Article 8 in light
       of the decision of the Court of Appeal and on the  footing  that  the
       Court of Appeal came to the conclusion, as it  did,  that  there  had
       been a material error of law.  The parties were, the Court of  Appeal
       recorded, agreed that the  case  should  be  remitted  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal for a new decision to be made.  In those  circumstances  the
       matter comes before us today.

    2. It is valuable to set out paragraph 46 of the decision of  the  Court
       of Appeal which is in these terms and in the  judgment  Lord  Justice
       Sales (with which Sullivan LJ and Newey J agreed):

           "In my view  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  have  approached  the
           assessment of the claim under Article 8 by  application  of  the
           new rules and in particular (since the appellant could not bring
           himself within paragraphs 399 and 399A  of  the  new  rules)  by
           asking itself whether there were very compelling reasons  within
           the 'exceptional circumstances'  rubric  in  paragraph  398,  to
           outweigh the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
           appellant's case.

           In addressing that  question,  the  Upper  Tribunal  should,  of
           course, have given due respect to the guidance  from  the  Grand
           Chamber in Maslov at paragraph [75] of the judgment (reading  it
           in the context of  the  general  guidance  given  by  the  Grand
           Chamber at paragraphs [68] to [76] of the judgment),  but  as  a
           matter to be brought into the overall  assessment  and  balanced
           against the strong public interest in deportation to  which  the
           UK Borders Act 2007 and the new  rules  give  expression.  On  a
           proper approach under the new rules, in  relation  to  a  person
           assessed to have active ties  to  his  country  of  citizenship,
           without a relevant family life in the United Kingdom  and  whose
           serious offending had occurred when he was an adult, I think the
           more natural conclusion would be that deportation would be found
           to be justified in a case like this."

       Towards the end of that citation are the  subject  areas  with  which
       today's hearing and the submissions and evidence provided to us  have
       been most engaged.

    3. The starting point is the presence of serious offending on  the  part
       of AJ when he was an adult.  He is now 24.  The point  is  made  that
       the offending was now some six years ago.  We bear that, as with  all
       other considerations, in mind but the offending was serious  and  the
       offence was not a single isolated offence.

    4. The areas of active ties  to  country  of  citizenship  and  relevant
       family life in the United Kingdom are areas to which, in  undertaking
       the exercise that we are bound to undertake with  its  components  of
       balance and proportionality, that we turn.  So far as relevant family
       life in the United Kingdom is concerned we have had  further  written
       evidence including from AJ and from his mother.  We  have  seen  them
       give oral  evidence  briefly  under  cross-examination  conducted  on
       behalf of the Secretary of State.   We  have  also  been  shown  some
       documentation.

    5. A central aspect concerns the health and especially the mental health
       of AJ's mother. The submission is made that the mother  suffers  from
       serious depression and that that has caused suicidal thinking and  on
       an occasion the context has been one in which premises  were  set  on
       fire.  There is evidence of the medication that AJ's mother takes and
       of the support  from  professionals  that  she  now  receives.   That
       support is received by her on a weekly basis now but in the  past  it
       has been more frequent and at one point  there  was  some  in-patient
       treatment of her in relation to her mental health.

    6. The documentation is regrettably sparse in  terms  of  an  evidential
       contribution from the health professionals rather  than  the  account
       that AJ and his mother between them can give.  We do have a letter of
       27 October 2014 from Barnet, Enfield and Haringey NHS Trust  that  we
       have considered in all of its terms.  It does not in terms  reference
       serious depression although it does  reference  depressive  or  mood-
       related conditions.  It does not in terms reference suicide  although
       it does reference risk of self-harm and related matters.  We have had
       little explanation from AJ's mother and indeed from AJ himself as  to
       why the letter which apparently was written  after  the  fire-related
       episode does not contain more information than it does and AJ himself
       has  told  us  that  he  sought  further  material  from  the  health
       professionals but it has not been forthcoming.  We are in a  position
       in which we must do the best we can with the material  we  have  got,
       thus having regard to what the letter does  say,  and  having  regard
       also to what we have been told about it by both AJ and his mother.

    7. The overall assessment we make in relation to this aspect, the aspect
       of his mother's health and the contribution that he makes in relation
       to her and the support that she needs and he would wish  to  provide,
       is that there is, no doubt, a contribution that he could make but the
       most important  contribution  to  be  made  is  that  of  the  health
       professionals given her condition.  We do not  consider  that,  taken
       overall, the mother's condition and the role and involvement  he  has
       in supporting that condition is at the level of a  powerful  or  very
       compelling reason.  That said these are factors that we  continue  to
       have regard to in the overall assessment required.

    8. Emphasis is also placed by Counsel for AJ on the fact, focusing on AJ
       himself as an individual, that he arrived in this country at the  age
       of 9 and so has been here for fifteen years now. We are asked to have
       particular regard to the fact that his life here in the UK  commenced
       at an early age and has continued for some time.  It is one of  those
       cases where the person has been here since childhood and rightly that
       is a material factor in the overall balancing exercise.

    9. A further dimension of course expressly referenced by  the  Court  of
       Appeal is the dimension of active ties to the country of citizenship,
       in the present case Gambia.  It is the evidence of AJ that he has, to
       use his language of his most recent witness statement:

           "... no-one to return to in Gambia, a country I only lived there
           from the age of two years to  nine  years  old.   I  am  not  in
           contact with anyone in Gambia.  I have no family  in  Gambia  to
           whom I can turn.  I have no contact  with  my  father  and  half
           siblings.  I have not had any contact with my father since I was
           a child. ... I cannot remember the Gambia.  I will be  destitute
           there with no prospects of life.  I will be very  depressed  and
           not know where to commence living in a country that is alien  to
           me."

   10. After the passage that I have just  quoted  AJ  rightly  acknowledges
       that what he himself terms 'a connection" with Gambia exists  in  the
       form of his uncle and two aunts.  There is evidence before  us,  more
       evidence now than at previous stages in  the  proceedings,  that  the
       uncle is in poor health and a pensioner and that one of the aunts  is
       undergoing treatment for her mental health, the other aunt is elderly
       and in  poor  health.   A  written  contribution  was  apparently  in
       materials that were prepared in advance of  the  hearing  before  the
       Court of Appeal, from the uncle and dated  9  July  2014,  where  the
       uncle indicates that he and the two aunts live in a two bedroom house
       with the two sisters sharing a bedroom. The  uncle  adds  that  their
       health and situation means that they  would  not  be  able  to  "take
       responsibility" for AJ in the Gambia nor would  their  income  extend
       beyond their current financial commitments.

   11. That material, and looking at all the material  available  to  us  in
       this connection, shows that of course this is not a case where by any
       stretch AJ would be able in Gambia to take up immediate residence  in
       an existing family household and  be  supported  there  for  whatever
       period of time it takes before he, as a young and apparently  fit  24
       year old,  can  find  useful  employment  and  perhaps  even  make  a
       contribution to those elderly relatives that he has in Gambia in  the
       form of his uncle and two aunts.  We cannot reach a  conclusion  that
       there is no active tie to the country of citizenship.  Indeed we take
       the view that there is the presence of an active tie.  In some  cases
       the ties would be much stronger, in other cases perhaps they will  be
       weaker. The overall situation whilst not straightforward does not  in
       our assessment come near the mark of being one of powerful difficulty
       or challenge as opposed to a situation of more moderate compass.

   12. With the assistance of  the  submissions  we  have  had,  which  have
       directed us to various passages in previous  decisions  made  in  the
       course  of  this  case  and  various  materials  from  which  I  have
       referenced but a few of the more relevant, more recent  examples,  we
       do feel able to undertake the  exercise  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
       required the Upper  Tribunal  to  undertake.   We  have  taken  close
       account of the written and  oral  submissions  that  have  been  very
       usefully provided by Mr Lams on behalf of AJ and we  have  considered
       the authorities and the emphasis that he would draw to our  attention
       within the authorities and within the Rules in the  course  of  those
       submissions.  The summary given by Mr Lams, after his examination  in
       submissions of the matters I have referred to, is that "the appellant
       AJ is socially and culturally integrated in the UK and there would be
       very significant obstacles to his integration  into  the  country  to
       which it is proposed he is deported".

   13. Our own assessment is that, with great respect and with understanding
       of the submission, that submission overstates  the  position  and  in
       particular the degree to which AJ is truly integrated in the  UK  and
       to which he would face obstacles in Gambia in  terms  of  making  his
       life forward from the age of 24 years. We do not find that the  link,
       as was urged by Mr Lam in oral submissions, with Gambia is  "tenuous"
       or "without meaning" to use the two words or  phrases  that  we  were
       invited to consider in the course of oral submissions.   In  all  the
       circumstances we have concluded that against the fundamental backdrop
       of the public interest in deportation and after  examination  to  see
       whether there are very  compelling  reasons  within  the  exceptional
       circumstances rubric, and having given all due regard to the guidance
       in Maslov, the present case is one that must see the  appeal  of  the
       Secretary of State allowed and  the  challenge  on  the  part  of  AJ
       refused.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  human  rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Mr Justice Knowles

