
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00506/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Given extempore                          |On 15th March 2016                  |
|On 1st February, 2016                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MS BRIDGETTE CHARMAINE INKIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The appellant in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State is the  appellant  and  Bridgette
    Charmaine Inkin is the respondent.  To avoid confusion I  am  going  to
    refer to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as  being  "the
    claimant".
2.   The respondent is a citizen of Jamaica, who first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 28th July, 1990 and was granted six months' leave  to  enter
    as a visitor.  The respondent returned to  Jamaica  on  28th  December,
    1990 and then sought entry again on 25th May  1992.   She  was  granted
    entry to the United Kingdom for one year  and  subsequently  granted  a
    working holiday visa from 22nd January, 1993 until 21st January,  1995.
    She then returned to Jamaica on 23rd April, 1994 and sought to re-enter
    the  United  Kingdom  on  4th  July,  1994.   She  was  questioned  and
    subsequently granted leave to enter until 12th January, 1995.  On  20th
    August, 1994, she gave birth to her daughter.  On  20th  January,  1995
    she claimed  asylum,  claiming  that  she  feared  persecution  if  she
    returned to Jamaica.  Her screening interview took place on 20th March,
    1995 and while the asylum application was pending  the  respondent  was
    sentenced in the London Crown Court to  four  years'  imprisonment  for
    wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm.  The conviction was
    on 30th August, 1996.  Whilst in prison the respondent was  interviewed
    on behalf of the  claimant  and  following  that  interview  an  asylum
    interview was conducted.  The  notice  of  decision  was  made  on  4th
    August, 1998.

3.   The Reasons for Refusal Letter of 18th July, 1998 was attached to  that
    notice of decision, together with a memorandum from a Mr F Edmiston  of
    the Immigration Service dated 12th August, 1998,  presumably  addressed
    to the Governor of the prison  where  she  was  being  held,  that  the
    Secretary of State had decided to make a deportation order against her.
     An appeal was lodged on behalf of the claimant and while  that  appeal
    was pending the respondent made an application for leave to  remain  as
    the wife of a person present and settled here.   That  application  was
    made on 27th January, 1999.  Nothing seems to have happened until after
    a visit by Immigration Officers which took place on 18th July, 2000.  A
    report was made by the Immigration Officers dated  27th  October,  2002
    after the respondent had been subsequently  arrested  for  shoplifting.
    No further action was taken on that.

4.   The Immigration Officer noted that the respondent  was  still  awaiting
    the outcome of her application made on the basis of her  marriage.   It
    appears that the Immigration Service were under the impression that the
    respondent had withdrawn her  appeal  lodged  in  August  1998  against
    refusal of asylum following her marriage.  It was on 11th August,  2006
    that a letter was written by her MP to  a  Minister  at  the  House  of
    Commons enquiring about the application.   On  4th  January,  2007  the
    claimant wrote to the respondent's Member of Parliament.  In April 2010
    letters had been written by  the  respondent's  Member  of  Parliament,
    again enquiring about the progress, and a response was received on 27th
    April, 2010 from  the  Border  Agency  which  set  out  at  length  the
    respondent's immigration history and went on to state that  the  writer
    was not able to give an exact date when the respondent's case would  be
    resolved and at that time was awaiting allocation to a case owner.   It
    was again noted that the respondent had applied for  asylum  which  had
    been refused and had subsequently applied for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of her marriage.  Attached to a copy of that letter is  a  Minute
    of 27th April,  2010,  noting  that  the  respondent's  solicitors  had
    submitted an appeal against the refusal of her asylum  but  the  appeal
    had not been processed and that the respondent had made an  application
    for leave to remain on the basis of her marriage and that had not  been
    resolved either.

5.   On 28th August, 2010, the respondent's Member of Parliament,  Mr  Simon
    Hughes MP, again wrote to the Home Office and on 8th  September,  2010,
    in a response from the Home Office, the claimant advised that an  exact
    date when the matter would be resolved could  still  not  be  provided.
    Enquiries were made subsequently by solicitors acting on behalf of  the
    respondent and pointing  out  that  there  had  been  a  delay  in  the
    conclusion of the respondent's application and in consideration of  her
    appeal.  On 15th December, 2011 the Secretary of  State  wrote  to  the
    respondent informing her that she had been convicted of an  offence  on
    30th August, 1996, at Inner London Crown Court, and that the  Secretary
    of State was considering her liability to deportation.  The  respondent
    was asked to make further representations.  The  claimant  referred  to
    Article 33(2) and indicated that since the respondent would be a danger
    to security of the country or was convicted of a  particularly  serious
    crime, then she  would  not  be  entitled  to  benefit  from  the  1951
    Convention.  The claimant decided that  Section  72  of  the  2002  Act
    applied and that the respondent was considered to constitute  a  danger
    to the community.  Numerous letters appear to have been written by  the
    respondent's  solicitors  requiring  that  the  respondent's  case   be
    processed further and the  claimant  again  requested  details  of  the
    respondent's background and circumstances on  5th  November,  2012.   A
    further letter was written by the claimant which was  responded  to  by
    the respondent's representatives.  A Statement  of  Evidence  Form  was
    submitted on 14th  February,  2014,  in  respect  of  the  respondent's
    application and a further asylum interview took  place.   The  claimant
    then decided to refuse the  respondent's  application  and  to  make  a
    deportation order.  The reasons  are  set  out  in  a  letter  of  27th
    February, 2014.

6.   The respondent gave Notice of Appeal and her appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 4th August, 2014 and  14th  January,  2015.
    At paragraph 41 of the determination the judge said this:

         "All the submissions on behalf of the [claimant] were under the new
         Immigration Rules and Section 117C of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
         Section 117C states that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
         the public interest.  I will consider  this  appeal  in  accordance
         with the Immigration Rules referred to above and  further  consider
         the [respondent's] private  and  family  life  in  accordance  with
         Article 8 under the Convention rather than as defined  in  Appendix
         FM and Section 276ADE.  I remind myself that the burden is  on  the
         [respondent] to establish the facts that  she  relies  on  and  the
         standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities."


7.   Elsewhere in the determination the judge makes it  clear  that  she  is
    applying the law as she believes it would have been at the time of  the
    deportation decision, rather than as it was at the date of the  hearing
    and as it is today.  The judge found that there was  no  evidence  that
    the claimant had produced to show that  the  respondent  constituted  a
    danger and concluded that the respondent's Article 8  rights  would  be
    breached by her removal, given the inordinate delay on the part of  the
    claimant.  The  claimant  challenged  the  decision.   The  grounds  of
    application contended that there was no  provision  for  a  deportation
    appeal to be allowed  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules  and
    reference was made to case law  firmly  establishing  in  jurisprudence
    that the Rules under deportation are a complete code and any  allowance
    on appeal by an appellant must be seen through the lens of  that  code.
    By allowing an appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules,  was,  it  was
    suggested, an error of law.

8.   Mr Avery argued that it was a material error.  The  judge  should  have
    applied the law at the date of the hearing, not as it was at  the  date
    of the deportation order.  She should have looked at Article  8  within
    the framework of the  Immigration  Rules,  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    respondent was convicted of an offence which carried a four year prison
    sentence.  There had been delay acknowledged, but the respondent should
    not necessarily benefit from that delay when she should have  left  the
    United Kingdom following the making of the order.

9.   The respondent appeared before me in person and confirmed that she  had
    no solicitors acting on her behalf.  I explained  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing and the submissions made by Mr Avery to  the  effect  that  the
    judge had erred in law in the decision.  The respondent indicated  that
    she did not know what was going on, but I explained that  it  was  said
    that the determination of the judge could not stand and it was proposed
    by Mr Avery that the matter should be re-heard afresh since  there  has
    effectively been no fair hearing, the judge applying the wrong Rule.  I
    believe  that  after  my  explanation  the  respondent  understood  the
    situation.

10.  In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the  decision  is  flawed.
    The Judge should have proceeded to deal with the issues on the basis of
    the law as it is today and not as she believed it was at a time in  the
    past when the order was made.  As a result,  the  respondent  has  been
    denied a fair hearing.  It may well be that the decision is  the  same,
    but First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird's determination cannot be  permitted
    to stand.  I remit this for a hearing afresh  by  a  Judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird.  It is not immediately apparent  to  me
    why it would have taken two days to hear this appeal but  if,  after  a
    review it appears that two days is necessary  to  hear  the  appeal,  I
    would urge the First-tier Tribunal to allocate two days to  it,  rather
    than end up with a situation where an appeal is heard on  two  separate
    days with a space of some four months.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

