
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00986/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Issued on                    |
|on 1 August and 3 September 2013              |On 6 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              KAMIL CZARNIECKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr. S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors

For the Respondent:      On 1 August 2013, Mr. A Mullen, and on 3 September
                     2013, Mr.   M Mathews, both Senior Home Office
                     Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION and REASONS

 Following the hearing on 1 August 2013, reasons for finding error  of  law
 in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  were  issued,  in  terms  of
 paragraphs 1 - 14 below.


 1) The appellant is a citizen  of  Poland,  born  on  27  July  1994.  (No
    anonymity order has been requested or made.)

 2) The appellant decided to deport the appellant for reasons explained  in
    a letter dated 5 November 2012, under reference to regulations 19(3)(b)
    and 21 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the regulations").

 3) A panel of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge Reid  and  Dr  C  J
    Winstanley dismissed the appellant's appeal for reasons explained in  a
    determination promulgated on 12 April 2013.

 4) The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on the following grounds:

   Ground One


   The panel were referred to the case law of  Boultif  and  Maslov  by  the
   appellant's  representative  during  submissions.   The  panel  have  not
   considered either of these cases in their Decision and Reasons.


   ... The panel have failed to consider all of the evidence before them and
   have therefore erred in law.


   Ground Two


   At paragraph 72 of the Determination it states that:


   "We found the appellant to be a young man who demonstrated no remorse for
   the index offence; displayed a lack  of  insight  into  his  offence  and
   consequences; had not demonstrated that  he  had  changed  his  views  or
   modified his behaviour.  The index offence was a  premeditated  one  with
   the appellant going armed with a weapon to commit a robbery."


   ... The Panel have failed to consider all of the  evidence  before  them,
   particularly all of the evidence contained in the Criminal Justice Social
   Work Report and the appellant's own evidence.


   At page 62 of the List of Productions for the appellant, page 3 of  8  of
   Criminal Justice work Report it states:


   "Mr Czarniecki advises that custody afforded him time to reflect  on  the
   incident which occurred on 10 August 2011.  He recognises that  his  then
   circumstances influenced his judgment and with reflection concludes  that
   this was the wrong thing to do ... Mr Czarniecki stated that he is  sorry
   to have hurt the shopkeeper."


   The appellant in his witness statement has stated that  he  "has  learned
   his lesson".


   ... The panel have failed to  consider  all  of  the  evidence  and  have
   therefore erred in law by reaching the conclusion that they did.


   Ground Three


   At paragraph 78 of the Determination it states that:


   "There is no evidence of a reconciliation  with  his  father  beyond  his
   father's witness statement.  The father did not attend the hearing and no
   satisfactory explanation was provided."


   At paragraph  35  of  the  Determination  the  witness,  Mrs  Czarniecki,
   explained the absence of her husband that he was  unwell  with  an  upset
   stomach.


   The appellant's father also provided a witness statement to  support  the
   appellant and his appeal.  It is well-documented that the appellant had a
   turbulent relationship with his father.  However, there is no  reason  to
   disbelieve the explanation provide by the witness as to  the  appellant's
   father's  absence.   The  appellant's  father  states  in   his   witness
   statement, at paragraph 6 (page 315 of appellant's List  of  Productions)
   the following:


   "I want Kamil to come back home and live with us as  a  family  unit.   I
   hope he will change.  I can see  a  desire  in  Kamil  to  change."   The
   appellant's father's absence cannot be used against the appellant."


   ... the appellant's father's witness statement was duly given and  signed
   some seven days prior to the appeal hearing ...There is clear evidence of
   reconciliation between the appellant and his father.  The panel's failure
   to acknowledge this is an error of fact resulting in an error of law.


   The appellant's immediate family unit is in the United Kingdom .


   Ground Four


   The respondent seeks to remove the appellant under Regulation 19(3)(b) of
   the EEA Regulations.  Regulation 19(3)(b) states the following:


   (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has been admitted to,
   or acquired a  right  to  reside  in,  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
   Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if -


   (b) he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the United Kingdom  under
   these Regulations but the Secretary of State has decided that his removal
   is justified on the grounds of public policy, public security  or  public
   health (our emphasis) in accordance with regulation 21."


   The panel at paragraph 84 of the Determination have concluded that:


   "We have come to the conclusion that the appellant's  youth  and  limited
   family life with his parents and siblings does not  outweigh  the  public
   interest in the appellant's deportation as a violent criminal.  It cannot
   be said that the appellant's case  is  one  which  displaces  the  public
   interest in his removal"


   ... the Panel have failed to have regard to the Risk  Assessment  Section
   of the Criminal Justice Social Work Report  on page 64 of the appellant's
   List of Productions namely that:


   "There do not appear to be  significant  public  protection  issues,  and
   should Mr Czarniecki receive a  community  based  Court  disposal  it  is
   anticipated that he could be safely managed in the community."


   ... by failing to acknowledge the above evidence has resulted in an error
   of fact and thus an error of law.

 5) On 8 May 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson refused permission to
    appeal, on the view that it was not arguable that  the  panel  did  not
    have in mind the Boultif and Maslov criteria, and the grounds  were  no
    more than an attempt to re-argue the merits of the case.

 6) The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, referring to Essa v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1718  on  the
    distinction between proportionality in Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and  in
    regulation 21, and on failure to distinguish  between  the  appellant's
    prospects of rehabilitation in the UK and in Poland.  On 29  May  2013,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley granted permission to appeal.



 7) Mr Mullen argued that there  was  no  error  of  law,  because  without
    referring to case law the  panel  in  effect  did  take  the  "European
    dimension" and the relative prospects of rehabilitation in the  UK  and
    in Poland into account, and said all that would have been required.

 8) While no two cases are exactly alike, I prefer  the  submission  by  Mr
    Winter that the respondent's argument here fails for the  same  reasons
    as a similar argument failed in Essa (paragraph15):

           ... although this submission is not unarguable, in  the  end  it
           does not hit its target. Even when benevolently  construed,  the
           tribunal cannot be said to have done what Tsakouridis and Lang J
           required of it...

 9) The outcome in Essa can now be followed up at [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC).


10) A fresh decision must be based on up to date circumstances and  further
    evidence.

11) Paragraph 8 of Essa  records  the  Advocate  General's  view  that  the
    authority taking an expulsion decision must state precisely in what way
    that decision does not prejudice the  offender's  rehabilitation.   The
    appellant appears now to have completed 5 years residence.  That brings
    in a higher criterion to justify deportation, which has  also  not  yet
    been considered by the respondent.

12) One practical way forward might be for the respondent to  withdraw  the
    decision currently under appeal, with a view to making a  comprehensive
    fresh decision.  That would require the Upper Tribunal's consent  under
    Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, but such
    consent would readily be granted.  Any such application should be  made
    as soon as possible.

13) The respondent, if not choosing to  proceed  in  accordance  with  that
    suggestion, is directed to provide not less than 7 days before the next
    hearing a  note  of  further  reasons  to  justify  deportation,  under
    reference to (a) the principles explained in the case law and  (b)  the
    relevant criterion in regulation 21(3).

14) The appellant is of course  under  a  duty  to  advise  the  respondent
    without delay of any circumstances not yet made known which he may cite
    against deportation.

 UKBA letter of 23 August 2013.

15) This letter runs:


    Since the directions ... no further evidence has been received ...


    Regulation 21(3).


    The subject claimed to have arrived in the UK in April  2007.   He  was
    remanded ... on 23 January 2012 and ... convicted on 26  July  2012  of
    assault and robbery to injury and sentenced to  2  years'  imprisonment
    and a 6 months supervised released order.  His  sentence  ended  on  19
    January 2013.  On 18 February 2013 he was granted temporary  admission.




    Regulation  21(3)  states  that  a  permanent  right  of  residence  is
    generally acquired after 5 years  continuous  residence  in  accordance
    with  the  regulations  on  exercising  treaty  rights  ...  continuous
    residence was broken by time spent in prison ... as he  does  not  have
    permanent residency ... he may be deported on grounds of public  policy
    or public security ...
    Rehabilitation.


    ... Essa concerned the prospects of rehabilitation in  the  context  of
    deportation decisions.  It established that in applying Regulation 21 a
    decision maker must consider whether a decision to deport may prejudice
    the prospects of rehabilitation from offending in the host country  and
    weigh that risk in the balance  when  assessing  proportionality  under
    Regulation 21(5)(a).


    There is no evidence that the subject has undertaken any rehabilitative
    work while in custody.


    The social work reports states that the subject was  homeless  when  he
    committed the offence and that his parents had thrown the  subject  out
    of the family home on two occasions before the  offence.   The  subject
    confirmed that he has a number of acquaintances  who  are  involved  in
    criminal  behaviour.   The  report  identified  several  risk   factors
    including  the  subject's  difficult  relationship  with  his  parents,
    training and employment, criminal acquaintances and  substance  misuse.
    It identified a moderate risk of recidivism as the subject would return
    to the same area on release and the situation  would  be  identical  or
    worse than prior to incarceration.


    The subject resided in the UK for 4 years and 9 months  before  he  was
    imprisoned and has demonstrated  no  significant  integration  ...  the
    subject has been unsuccessful finding employment  in  the  UK  ...  the
    skills he has obtained during his time here  are  transferable  and  he
    confirms ... that he has retained the Polish language.  He last visited
    Poland in 2009 for one month.  He stayed with his grandmother and uncle
    who continue to reside in Poland ... He spent his  formative  years  in
    Poland.


    ... The subject's parents reside in the UK, however he has a  difficult
    relationship particularly with  his  father.   When  granted  bail  his
    parents did not act as cautioners and the address provided was that  of
    a friend not of his family.  In the absence of evidence to the contrary
    it is considered [his family] are unlikely to provide the subject  with
    the necessary support to aid rehabilitation and reduce the risk of  re-
    offending.


    The Immigration Judge found that:


    The appellant said that if returned to Poland he  would  probably  fall
    back into the same behaviour but in Scotland he would not.   There  was
    no satisfactory explanation for this geographical change in attitude.


    ...There is no reason why  the  subject  could  not  continue  to  work
    towards rehabilitation in Poland with the  support  of  family  members
    living there and he does not need to remain in the United Kingdom to be
    rehabilitated.

 Further Evidence for the Appellant .


16) In a supplementary statement dated 28 August 2013  the  appellant  says
    that he has stayed out of trouble since his release on immigration bail
    on 22 January 2013.  He has no intention of  getting  into  trouble  in
    future, has learned his lesson and grown up a lot.  He has  no  contact
    with his previous associates and has stopped smoking cannabis.  He  has
    complied with bail reporting.  On 8 August  2013  his  bail  conditions
    were amended to allow him  to  reside  with  his  mother,  his  younger
    brother and his sister.  He is very close  to  them.   His  father  was
    jailed for assaulting his mother  from  May  until  August  2013.   His
    mother is now obtaining legal assistance with a view  to  divorce.   He
    has been applying for jobs  although  without  success.   He  has  been
    involved in an allotment project for  2  years,  growing  produce.   He
    would like to enter horticulture as a  career  and  is  hoping  for  an
    interview at college.  He does  not  wish  to  be  separated  from  his
    mother, his brother and his sister.


17) In a statement dated 28 August 2013  the  appellant's  mother  confirms
    that the appellant is now living with her.  Her husband has twice  been
    jailed for violence against her and she  is  now  to  initiate  divorce
    proceedings.  The appellant has good contact with her and the  2  other
    children.  "I cannot imagine Kamil living in Poland, we  only  have  my
    grandmother in Poland, and 2 of my brothers stay with her."

18) Mr Winter also filed copies of a letter dated 4 June 2013 from Langside
    College to the appellant, inviting him to an informal interview  on  18
    June 2013 regarding a Level  1  course  in  Horticultural  Practice;  a
    letter dated 14 June 2013 from solicitors  to  the  appellant's  mother
    regarding an exclusion order to be sought in respect  of  her  husband;
    and a letter dated 19 August 2013 from  Social  Work  Services  to  the
    appellant offering him a voluntary aftercare appointment on 27 August.

The hearing on 3 September 2013.

19) The appellant adopted his supplementary statement as evidence-in-chief.
     In cross-examination he said that he left school at the end of 2009 or
    early in 2010, at the age of 15.  He has never obtained employment.  He
    was  on  a  college  course  after  leaving  school  and  had  training
    placements.  He was never in any trouble at school  and  did  not  then
    take drugs.  He only associated with people taking drugs after  leaving
    school.  He has not smoked cannabis since November 2011.   He  did  not
    have access to drugs while in prison.  Other drugs he has mentioned  he
    tried only once, but his cannabis use was daily.  He confirmed that  he
    explained his offending by drug taking and lack of money.  It  was  put
    to him that he had therefore committed the robbery  to  get  money  for
    drugs, which he denied.  He said he committed  the  robbery  to  obtain
    money to spend and to feed himself.   At  the  time  he  had  not  been
    claiming Job Seeker's Allowance or other benefits and was homeless.  He
    remains unemployed.  He moved in with his mother around 24 August.   He
    asked to change address because  he  could  no  longer  live  with  his
    friend's mother.  She did not have money to feed him,  his  friend  and
    his friend's brother.  If he had to go to Poland  the  only  person  he
    could live with is his maternal grandmother.


20) In re-examination the appellant  was  unable  to  explain  any  further
    assistance he might obtain from Social Services.  He was hoping to find
    a course through Careers Scotland and has an appointment on the  Friday
    following the hearing.  He no longer takes any drugs.  At the  time  of
    his offence he was not eligible for Job Seeker's Allowance  as  he  was
    still in education.  He believes he is eligible to receive Job Seeker's
    Allowance now, and he has applied.

21) In response to my questions the  appellant  said  that  since  he  left
    prison he has seen his father a couple of times by chance in the  local
    area.  He does not know where his father is living now and has no plans
    to see him again, but it is probable that he may bump into him  in  the
    street.

22) Neither representative had  any  further  questions  arising  from  the
    evidence I had elicited.

23) Following development of the issues in submissions, Mr Winter was given
    the  opportunity  to  put  some  further  questions  to  the  appellant
    regarding the nature of his residence in the UK since his release  from
    prison.  The appellant confirmed that he has not  been  employed  since
    his release in January 2013, nor  has  he  attended  any  courses.   He
    believed that he had received Job Seeker's Allowance in  June  to  July
    2013.  He had believed that it was a condition of his bail that he  did
    not take employment and did not receive benefits, but later was advised
    that he could claim.  His solicitor then advised him that  he  was  not
    entitled, so he withdrew his claim again.  [It was common  ground  that
    if the appellant was given such advice, it appears to be incorrect.]

24) Mr Matthews adopted the position in the UKBA's further letter that  not
    only  was  continuity  of   residence   broken   by   the   appellant's
    imprisonment, the period starts to run again from his release.  He said
    that the proposition is contentious, but did not wish to  elaborate  on
    it further.  He submitted that the appellant did not reach the  5  year
    threshold in any event, because  he  has  not  resided  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the regulations.  The legal  nature  of  his  residence
    since arriving as a child is obscure, and he could not show that he had
    been residing in the UK in accordance with the regulations since he was
    released.  He thus fell at the  lowest  of  the  three  thresholds  for
    removal.  His offence was very serious - robbery of  a  shop  involving
    the use of an imitation firearm and a crowbar, associated with  illegal
    drugs, and involving injury to  the  shop-owner.   The  sentence  of  2
    years' imprisonment reflected that, notwithstanding that the  appellant
    was aged under 18 at the time and tendered a guilty plea.  Although the
    appellant had not reoffended during his 8 months of  liberty  to  date,
    the assessment of risk was moderate, not low.  The  factors  identified
    in the Social Work Report which might tend to recidivism  were  not  in
    the appellant's favour at present.  He had no offer of  employment  and
    although he appeared to be eligible for Job  Seeker's  Allowance  there
    was no real prospect of his obtaining employment, which he  had  failed
    to do to date.  In view of his mother's non-attendance at the  hearing,
    little weight should be given to  the  evidence  in  her  supplementary
    statement.  The reason given for non-attendance was lack of funds,  but
    that was a poor explanation, as she lives in Glasgow.  The  appellant's
    father has been only a negative influence in the past.   There  was  no
    evidence from his siblings, and no explanation of why  they  could  not
    provide statements or attend the hearing.  There was no suggestion that
    they would be adversely affected by his departure, and they could visit
    him in Poland.  There was  no  evidence  of  any  significant  positive
    family influences in the appellant's life  in  the  UK.   He  had  been
    reported for one incident while in prison.  Removal did not always have
    to be justified by a risk of reoffending, but in any case such  a  risk
    was present here.  The prospect of rehabilitation was only one  factor,
    but there was little, if anything, to suggest that  the  appellant  was
    more likely to be rehabilitated in the  UK  than  in  Poland.   He  has
    substantial links there, being fluent in the language  and  having  his
    grandmother and uncles with  whom  to  reside.   He  lived  until  very
    recently apart from his family in the UK and is not shown to  have  any
    strong links with them.  He has reached the age when a person would  be
    expected to be establishing his own life apart from his  birth  family.
    There was no evidence the appellant had been a worker in the  past,  so
    he has not ceased economic activity.  Even if he could be  regarded  as
    seeking employment, there was nothing to show that he had  any  genuine
    chance of finding it.  He therefore fell under the  lowest  test.   His
    removal would be proportionate in the interests of  public  policy  and
    public security, and would be justified even if  the  test  of  serious
    reasons applied.


25) Mr Winter in course of submissions produced a record of the appellant's
    indications of seeking employment for purposes Job  Seeker's  Allowance
    indication of seeking employment.  He argued further as  follows.   The
    appellant's  periods  of  residence  were  in   accordance   with   the
    regulations and should be taken cumulatively (no authority was  cited).
    The circumstances which led the appellant to be assessed as  presenting
    moderate risk of reoffending are  now  mitigated  by  his  up  to  date
    situation.  He has been on immigration bail since January 2013, and has
    stayed out of  trouble.   He  is  not  in  contact  with  his  previous
    associates.  There are  hopeful  signs  in  the  direction  of  further
    education and eventual employment.  He has the benefit of  living  with
    his mother and siblings.  The problematic influence of  his  father  is
    absent.  He appears now  to  be  properly  eligible  for  Job  Seeker's
    Allowance, which should alleviate any financial  problems  which  might
    lead  to  criminal  behaviour.   He  has  consistently  maintained   an
    involvement in community work on an allotments project.   He  would  be
    able to provide emotional support to his mother who is evidently  going
    through a difficult period.  All those factors tend to suggest that  he
    will  be  better  rehabilitated  in  the  UK  and  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate to return him to Poland.  The  factors  identified  in
    Essa at paragraphs 33 and 34 are all in his favour, and he  is  not  in
    the same vulnerable situation as prior to his incarceration.  He is  no
    longer homeless  and  has  prospects  of  employment  or  at  least  of
    training.  Mr Winter accepted that the record of contact with employers
    showed no positive response, but even if he could not be found to  have
    a  genuine  chance  of  being  employed,  it  should  be  found  to  be
    disproportionate to remove him, even on the lowest test.


 Conclusions.


26) Notwithstanding the ground of appeal against the First-tier Tribunal on
    the point, no submission was made that in remaking the  decision  there
    is any point of distinction between proportionality in Article 8 of the
    ECHR and in regulation 21.   I find  nothing  which  might  have  force
    under Article 8 which would not equally apply under the regulation.


27) I also record my views on the grounds of appeal which were not  pressed
    once Essa became the focus. Ground one: there was  no  need  to  recite
    case law, and relevant matters in light of those cases were  all  taken
    into account.  Ground two: an expression of regret made to  the  author
    of a social work report did not require  the  panel  to  conclude  that
    there was no risk of reoffending, which they had to consider on all the
    evidence, including  the  professional  assessment  of  moderate  risk.
    Ground three: the panel was entitled to find the reasons given for non-
    attendance of the father unsatisfactory, and to reject  the  suggestion
    that he and the appellant were reconciled.  Ground four: an  assessment
    that the appellant could be managed in the community did  not  displace
    the risk assessment, nor did it remove the public interest in  removal.
    Nothing in the grounds,  other  than  omission  to  take  the  relative
    prospects of rehabilitation in the UK and in Poland into account, would
    have required the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  set
    aside.  However, the further decision has to be a fresh one in light of
    up to date circumstances.


28) In the absence of any useful submissions, I assume in  the  appellant's
    favour that his residence prior to imprisonment was in accordance  with
    the regulations; that the clock does not reset to zero; that  any  such
    residence after his release would be added  on;  and  that  if  he  has
    resided since release in accordance with the regulations,  his  removal
    would now have to be justified by the higher test of  serious  reasons.
    There was no dispute that he  has  been  seeking  employment.   It  was
    common ground that on this approach the decisive question is whether he
    "has a genuine chance of being engaged", in  the  words  of  regulation
    6(4).


29) I do not think that a genuine chance means a probability  in  the  near
    future, but it must be more than a remote prospect.  The appellant  has
    never had a job.  He was able to show that he has made a series of  job
    enquiries, all with negative results.  The plain if rather sad  reality
    is that these relate more to retaining Job Seeker's Allowance than to a
    chance of obtaining a job,  and  that  at  present  his  prospects  are
    negligible.

30) By the test agreed  between  representatives,  the  appellant  has  not
    acquired a permanent right of residence under  regulation  15  and  his
    removal may be  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
    security under regulation 21(1).

31) The latter regulation includes the following:

       (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of  public  policy
       or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
       preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance with
       the following principles-
             (a)  the  decision  must   comply   with   the   principle   of
       proportionality;
             (b) the decision must be  based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;
             (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent
             a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests of society;
             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify
             the decision;
             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not   in
       themselves justify the decision.


       (6) Before taking a relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of  public
       policy or public security in relation to a person who is resident in
       the  United  Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take  account   of
       considerations such as the age, state of health, family and economic
       situation of the person, the person's length  of  residence  in  the
       United Kingdom, the person's social and  cultural  integration  into
       the United Kingdom and the extent of the  person's  links  with  his
       country of origin.



32) There is little dispute on the primary facts affecting  the  appellant.
    The significant differences of interpretation of  them  in  submissions
    went to the prospects of employment (resolved above), the  strength  of
    family links, and the level of risk of re-offending.

33) The  Presenting  Officer  expressed  some  scepticism  on  whether  the
    appellant moved back in with his relatives for family  reasons,  or  to
    enhance his case.  I do not find any cynical motive, but I note that he
    explained the move not by any strong desire  on  his  part  or  on  his
    relatives' part to live together but because he no  longer  could  stay
    where he was.  There was a  weak  explanation  for  his  mother's  non-
    attendance at the hearing, which involves  a  matter  of  great  family
    importance if bonds are  close.   There  was  no  explanation  for  the
    absence of evidence  from  the  appellant's  siblings.   There  is  now
    acknowledged to be no  meaningful  relationship  with  the  appellant's
    father.  Scarcely anything has emerged about family relationships which
    would promote anyone's  interest  in  the  appellant's  residence  here
    rather than in Poland.

34) The appellant has not re-offended  from  January  this  year,  but  the
    assessment of the risk of re-offending as moderate  remains  realistic.
    There has been no change to justify changing that assessment to low.

35) There has been no reference to anything which significantly varies  the
    prospects of rehabilitation or the chances of re-offending between  the
    UK and Poland.  Although it was not prayed in aid, there would  be  the
    threat of deportation hanging over the appellant if he were to reoffend
    in the UK, but I do not think that can make the difference.   He  is  a
    young man with an unfortunate background  who  has  seriously  offended
    once and says he has decided not to do so  again.   Whether  he  learns
    from experience and sticks to that is essentially up to him, in  either
    country.  There is not shown to be substance to any prospect of  access
    to useful courses or programmes here.  Poland is a fully fledged member
    of the European Union, and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the
    appellant's chances of training or  employment  are  any  worse  there.
    Although he has spent a significant part of his formative  years  here,
    speaks English fluently (with a readily identifiable local accent)  and
    is culturally assimilated, he is a native Polish speaker,  lived  there
    in his early years, and has relatives with whom  he  would  propose  to
    live, at least initially.  His Polish links and UK  links  are  roughly
    equivalent.

36) No considerations set out in  the  regulations,  when  applied  to  the
    circumstances of the  appellant,  significantly  favour  his  remaining
    here.



37)  Given the nature of the crime and all that is narrated above, there is
    a public interest in removing the appellant as a serious  offender  who
    presents some future risk.  In the round, removal  to  Poland  has  not
    been shown to be significantly against the appellant's interests, while
    such removal is in the UK public interest.

38) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  but  the
    decision is remade by again dismissing the appeal.


                               [pic]
                                6 September 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
