
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00545/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 December 2013                              |On 22 January 2014         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            Osarumwese James Ekpa
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Pickup, instructed by Abbotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwyncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Osarumwese James Ekpa, was born on 8 April 1974  and  is
    understood to  be  a  male  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The  appellant  was
    convicted of theft (shoplifting)  and  of  being  in  possession  of  a
    controlled identity document with intent and sentenced to a  period  of
    twelve months' imprisonment.  By a decision dated 6 March 2013,  notice
    was given of the intention of the Secretary  of  State  to  deport  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom under the UK Borders Act  2007.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Fisher  and  Mrs  R  M  Bray  JP)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25 June 2013, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground is that "the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to determine whether it would  be  reasonable  for
    the appellant's wife and children  to  accompany  him  if  deported  to
    Nigeria and, if not, to assess the proportionality of breaking up  this
    family".  In her oral submissions, Ms Pickup criticised the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination for the failure to identify and determine what
    exactly were the best interests of the children in  this  appeal.   The
    appellant's partner (Sichelesile Dlamini - hereafter referred to as  Ms
    Dlamini) have lived together since 2005.  There are two children of the
    relationship, a son (date of birth 24 February 2003 who is, in  effect,
    the appellant's "stepchild" and who has lived with the appellant  since
    he was aged 2 years) and a daughter (date of birth 7 July 2007, who  is
    the natural child of the appellant and Ms Dlamini).  Ms Dlamini herself
    is a British citizen of Zimbabwean origin.  Both children  are  British
    citizens.

 3. The Tribunal was well aware of its obligations  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration under  Section  55
    of the 2009 Act.  They refer also to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4.   At
    [22] the Tribunal noted that the respondent accepted that  family  life
    existed between the appellant, Ms Dlamini and the  two  children.   The
    Tribunal went on to record that, "we accepted  that  [the  appellant's]
    deportation would interfere with that family life.   Equally,  however,
    that interference will be in accordance with the law and in pursuit  of
    the legitimate aim of preventing crime and disorder.  The issue for  us
    to determine, in those circumstances, is whether  the  deportation  was
    proportionate."  The Tribunal found [20]  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Dlamini were two "thoroughly dishonest individuals who were prepared to
    lie to anything about anything if it assists them in their aims and  we
    decided that we could not rely on anything which they told us unless it
    was supported by other  forms  of  evidence."   The  Tribunal  at  [24]
    accepted that "no distinction can be drawn between the elder child [and
    the younger child] given that the appellant has assumed  responsibility
    for him over a substantial period of time ..."  The Tribunal  noted  at
    [26] that the appellant's offence  was  serious  but  did  not  involve
    violence or drugs and  was  not  of  a  sexual  nature.   The  Tribunal
    considered in some detail  at  [26]  the  aggravating  factors  in  the
    appellant's offending; the appellant had used his  false  documents  to
    find three jobs including two working with  vulnerable  children.   The
    appellant had been able to circumvent checks imposed  by  the  Criminal
    Records Bureau (CRB).  The Tribunal noted the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113 where  "the  Court  of  Appeal
    expressed  the  view  that  the  public  interest  in  preventing   the
    fraudulent use of passports was of considerable importance and deserved
    protection and it was intimately bound up with the protection of public
    order afforded by the system  of  passports."   At  [27]  the  Tribunal
    considered the  appellant's  risk  of  reoffending  and  gave  detailed
    reasons for concluding that "the risk of reoffending [is]  higher  than
    that assessed by the probation  officer  ..."   At  [29]  the  Tribunal
    examined the particular nature of the public interest concerned in this
    case with the prevention of crime and disorder.  The Tribunal  reminded
    itself of the importance in that public  interest  of  the  element  of
    deterrence.

 4. At [30] the Tribunal noted that it had "no evidence from schools  or  a
    social worker ... to show  us  the  likely  effect,  if  any,  of  [the
    appellant's] deportation on the children."  The Tribunal's  conclusions
    are contained in [32]:

         Having considered the best interests of the children in this  case,
         we came  to  the  conclusion  that  they  were  outweighed  by  the
         combination  of  the  gravity  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
         appellant the risk of reoffending and the strong public interest in
         deterring others from  committing  offences  of  this  nature.   In
         respect of his relationship with his wife, given that she was aware
         of his lack of status throughout, and she lived of the proceeds  of
         his offending and  had  been  a  party  to  deception  in  previous
         applications, as well as lying before us,  we  concluded  that  the
         public interest by far outweighed their  relationship  in  the  UK.
         The appellant did not show that  he  had  any  private  life  which
         warranted consideration beyond his family life.  We found that  his
         deportation was proportionate and so we dismissed his appeal.

 5. The appellant does not submit that the Tribunal fell into the  familiar
    error of having regard to evidence which was not relevant  or  ignoring
    relevant evidence.  The  Tribunal  recorded,  the  factual  matrix  was
    limited in detail, especially as regards the children and the effect of
    the appellant's deportation upon them.  Rather, the  appellant  asserts
    that the Tribunal failed to articulate the choices before it as regards
    the removal of the  appellant  on  his  own  or  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the entire family to accompany him.  In  addition,
    it is asserted that the Tribunal could not properly evaluate  the  best
    interests of the  children  in  the  proportionality  exercise  without
    defining those various scenarios.

 6. Ms Pickup relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas [2013]
    UKSC 74.  Drawing on previous jurisprudence, the Supreme Court set  out
    at [10] the legal principles which arise in cases such as these:
        10.In their written case counsel for Mr Zoumbas set out legal
        principles which were relevant in this case and which they derived
        from three decisions of this court, namely ZH (Tanzania) (above), H
        v Lord Advocate2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of
        the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338. Those principles are not in
        doubt and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary of State did not
        challenge them. We paraphrase them as follows:
      (1) The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
      proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
      (2) In making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be a
      primary consideration, although not always the only primary
      consideration; and the child's best interests do not of themselves
      have the status of the paramount consideration;
      (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed by the
      cumulative effect of other considerations, no other consideration can
      be treated as inherently more significant;
      (4) While different judges might approach the question of the best
      interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask oneself
      the right questions in an orderly manner in order to avoid the risk
      that the best interests of a child might be undervalued when other
      important considerations were in play;
      (5) It is important to have a clear idea of a child's circumstances
      and of what is in a child's best interests before one asks oneself
      whether those interests are outweighed by the force of other
      considerations;
      (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination of
      all relevant factors when the interests of a child are involved in an
      article 8 assessment; and
      (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not
      responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.




    At [13], the Supreme Court added a further consideration:

    We would seek to add to the seven principles  the  following  comments.
    First, the decision-maker is required to assess the proportionality  of
    the interference  with  private  and  family  life  in  the  particular
    circumstances in which the decision is made. The evaluative exercise in
    assessing the  proportionality  of  a  measure  under  article  8  ECHR
    excludes any "hard-edged or bright-line  rule  to  be  applied  to  the
    generality of cases": EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at para  12.  Secondly,  as
    Lord Mance pointed out in H(H) (at para  98)  the  decision-maker  must
    evaluate the child's best interests and in some cases  they  may  point
    only marginally in one, rather than another, direction. Thirdly, as the
    case of H(H)  shows  in  the  context  of  extradition,  there  may  be
    circumstances in which the weight of another primary consideration  can
    tip the balance and make the interference proportionate even  where  it
    has very severe consequences for children.  In  that  case  an  Italian
    prosecutor issued a European arrest warrant seeking the surrender of  a
    person who had earlier broken his bail conditions by leaving Italy  and
    ultimately seeking safe haven  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  been
    convicted of very serious crimes.  This  court  held  that  the  treaty
    obligations of the United Kingdom to extradite him prevailed  over  his
    children's best interests. The third principle  in  para  10  above  is
    subject to the first and second qualifications and  may,  depending  on
    the circumstances, be subject to the third. But in our view, it is  not
    likely that a court would  reach  in  the  context  of  an  immigration
    decision what Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para 172) as the  "firm
    if bleak" conclusion in that case, which separated young children  from
    their parents.

 7. I find that the Tribunal has carried out a careful examination  of  all
    the relevant factors concerned with the children's best interests.  The
    Tribunal may not  entirely  have  fulfilled  the  requirement  to  "ask
    oneself the right questions in an  orderly  manner"  (Zoumbas  at  [10]
    above) because it does not state in terms that the only likely scenario
    in this appeal is that the appellant will be deported whilst Ms Dlamini
    and the children remain in the United Kingdom.  However,  the  Tribunal
    has not fallen into the trap  of  undervaluing  the  interests  of  the
    children as a consequence.  Although it would have been helpful if  the
    Tribunal  had  stated  precisely  the  scenario  or  scenarios  it  was
    contemplating in its Article 8 assessment, there are clear  indications
    in the determination that the Tribunal accepted that Ms Dlamini and the
    children would remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   At  [25]  and  whilst
    considering the Court of Appeal's decision in SS (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 550 the Tribunal wrote, "the child in SS would not have to move  to
    Nigeria as he would continue to be looked after by his mother, who  was
    his primary carer, as he had whilst the appellant was in prison.  Given
    that the children in the appeal before us  are  British  citizens,  the
    same would apply to them."  I find that passage is a  clear  indication
    that the Tribunal did not contemplate the entire  family  returning  to
    Nigeria with the appellant.

 8. I find also that the Tribunal was well aware  that,  ideally,  children
    are best brought up by both of their parents (see  [24]).   The  detail
    with which the Tribunal considered the public interest indicates to  me
    that the Tribunal was well aware of the gravity of any  decision  which
    would, in effect, break up this family.  The Tribunal  was  aware  also
    that it was not dealing with a "usual" serious  offence,  that  is  one
    involving  violence,  drugs  or  sexual  activity.    The   fact   that
    deportation where such offences may be involved is very often justified
    does not, of course, mean that an offence which does not  have  any  of
    those aggravating factors cannot lead to deportation.  I find that  the
    Tribunal had a very clear idea  of  the  importance  of  deterrence  in
    considering an offence of this sort and it clearly  took  an  extremely
    dim view of the appellant's immigration history and both  his  and  his
    partner's propensity to tell lies when it suited them.  I find that the
    Tribunal addressed those issues in the correct manner; they do not seek
    to punish the appellant (and,  by  extension,  the  children,  who  are
    blameless of their parents' conduct)  for  having  a  poor  immigration
    history but instead examined the question from the perspective  of  the
    public interest.

 9. Ms Pickup did not disagree when I suggested to her  that  this  was  an
    appeal where the facts demanded that the  appeal  must  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds and that no other outcome was possible.   In  my
    judgment, the Tribunal has been aware throughout that deportation would
    lead to the appellant being separated from children with whom he has an
    active relationship.  It based its decision  on  all  the  all  of  the
    available evidence, that is  the  oral  and  written  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his partner.  The Tribunal's failure to  state  in  terms
    what the children's best interests required does not, in  my  judgment,
    undermine its conclusion.

10. The second ground of appeal challenges the determination  for  what  is
    said at [30]:

         The appellant placed no evidence from schools, or a social  worker,
         before us to show the likely effect, if any, of his deportation  on
         the children.  If deported it would be open to him to apply for the
         revocation of the order and then to return  to  the  UK  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  Mr Nyawanza [for the appellant] referred us  to
         paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  that   regard.
         However, as we pointed out to him, that provision is  discretionary
         in its application.

    As the grounds point  out,  the  Immigration  Rules  would  effectively
    prevent the appellant from applying for entry clearance  for  at  least
    ten years.  The appellant asserts the Tribunal's comments at  [30]  has
    distorted its Article 8 ECHR analysis.

11. I do not agree with that submission.  What the  Tribunal  says  in  the
    determination regarding the discretionary nature of  paragraph  320(11)
    is strictly accurate.  More importantly, I do  not  consider  that  the
    Tribunal's comments about the appellant returning to the United Kingdom
    having been deported form any part of the  ratio  of  its  analysis  as
    regards the best interests of the children or Article 8 ECHR generally.
     This is not a case in which the  possibility  of  applying  for  entry
    clearance from abroad has tipped the balance against the appellant.

12. Although it would have been helpful if the Tribunal had stated  clearly
    what it considered to be the children's best interests  and  how  those
    interests might be affected by his removal from the family unit,  I  am
    in no doubt that the Tribunal had in mind only  one  possible  scenario
    (the appellant's deportation whilst the family remained in  the  United
    Kingdom). Its conclusion that the best interests of the children (which
    are, as the Tribunal clearly observed, to be brought up by  both  their
    parents)  were  here   outweighed   by   a   combination   of   serious
    countervailing factors which are  described  in  the  determination  at
    [32].   In  the  circumstances,  I  find  that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 4 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


