

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00040/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August  2014                             |On 08th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              mr HAKAN KAVAKLI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai (Instructed by Leonard & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant  with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Oliver and Mrs S Singer) promulgated on 28th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on  15th  December  1975.  On
    12th December 2013 the Secretary of State  refused  his  second  asylum
    application and on 17th December 2013 made a decision to deport him  to
    Turkey as a result of a conviction in 2006 of  possession  of  a  false
    passport which led to an 18 month prison sentence and a  recommendation
    by the trial judge for  deportation.  It  was  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against those decisions which came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    1st May 2014. The Tribunal dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 3. In the application for permission to appeal the Appellant  raised  four
    grounds; firstly that the Tribunal gave inadequate consideration to the
    best  interests  of  the  child,  secondly   that  the  Tribunal   gave
    inadequate consideration to the question  of  whether  the  Appellant's
    British wife and British child could relocate to Turkey  and  erred  in
    suggesting that they could, thirdly that the Tribunal made no  findings
    under paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules and fourthly  and  finally
    that the Tribunal erred in refusing an application to adjourn  when  an
    Intelligence report was produced at the  hearing  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

 4. Before me Mr Rai expanded upon the grounds.  Dealing  with  the  fourth
    ground first regarding the adjournment application following production
    by Presenting Officer of the  Intelligence  Report,  I  note  that  the
    determination is  silent  about  an  adjournment  application.  I  have
    checked the Judge's Record of Proceedings and there is no record  there
    of an adjournment request either. I am  therefore  unable  to  conclude
    that there was in fact an adjournment application that was  refused  by
    the Tribunal. In any event, even if there had been, the significance of
    that intelligence report to the overall findings of  the  Tribunal  are
    peripheral and not determinative of the outcome.

 5. Mr  Rai  took  me  to  the  intelligence  report.  It  arises  from  an
    application by the Appellant  for  a  driving  licence  with  which  he
    submitted, as proof of identity, a  Turkish  passport  without  any  UK
    entry stamps or visas.  That indicated that  he  was  a  failed  asylum
    seeker. The intelligence report itself indicates that  the  address  on
    the application for the applicant is an  address  in  Southampton.  The
    photograph, accompanying the application  was  certified  by  Ms  Linda
    Cheung (the Appellant's wife) but she gave her address as Glasgow.

 6. The report concludes with a paragraph stating that a check of the  DVLA
    databases suggests that there was another application originating  from
    the same Glasgow postcode for a different man but that  the  photograph
    appeared to be that of this Appellant. That latter part forms  no  part
    of the determination, quite rightly as the photo image is not produced.
    The remainder of  the  intelligence  report  simply  recites  that  the
    Appellant made an application for a driving licence, which  he  accepts
    that he did. That application was accompanied by his  photograph  which
    was  authenticated  by  Miss  Cheung  giving  an  address  in   Glasgow
    suggesting that was her home address. She admitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that she has signed the photograph but was unable  to  explain
    why she put the Scottish address. As a  result  of  that  the  Tribunal
    found at paragraph 49 that Miss Cheung was complicit in  deceiving  the
    authorities as  to  her  husband's  current  address  because  she  had
    knowingly put down a false address on his driving licence  application.
    That was a finding properly based on the evidence,  confirmed  by  Miss
    Cheung.

 7. Any errors in relation to the contents of the intelligence report  are,
    as I have indicated peripheral only and therefore even if there was  an
    error it was not material to the outcome.   There  are  numerous  other
    reasons for the Tribunal  finding  against  the  Appellant;  the  Intel
    report did not contain determinative evidence.

 8. With regard to the third ground as to paragraph 399  and  the  lack  of
    findings; that cannot possibly  avail  this  Appellant.  Paragraph  399
    could have applied to the Appellant  only  if  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British child and  there  was  no  other
    family member able to care for the child in the UK.  That  is  not  the
    case here. Miss Cheung is the child's mother and capable of caring  for
    it and therefore paragraph 399 could not possibly assist the Appellant.
    Therefore while it might have been preferable for the Tribunal  to  say
    that it had considered paragraphs 397-399 of the Immigration Rules  but
    given that they do not apply, failing to refer to them is not an  error
    of law. In fact what the Tribunal does do, at paragraph 49, is indicate
    that  the  Respondent  clearly  had  in  mind  the  contents  of  those
    paragraphs but that the  only  realistic  Article  8  claim  that  this
    Appellant had was his relationship with  his  current  wife  and  their
    child. That is in fact the case.

 9. The first and second grounds merit closest consideration, alleging that
    the Tribunal erred in considering  that  the  Appellant's  partner  and
    child could  relocate  to  Turkey  and  in  failing  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the best interests of the  child.  However,  what  the
    Tribunal did at paragraph 49 was to conclude that  whilst  Miss  Cheung
    may have a genuine relationship with the Appellant it was more hesitant
    about confirming the genuineness of the Appellant's  relationship  with
    her. It was mindful of the sentencing judge's remarks about his use  of
    his first wife as a ticket to remain in the UK. The Tribunal also  took
    into account Miss Cheung's putting an incorrect address when certifying
    her husband's photograph. Bearing in mind the background and history of
    this case the Tribunal went on to find that it was not  satisfied  that
    the child's best interests would be served by the  continuing  presence
    in his life of this Appellant. However, it nevertheless went on to  say
    that if it was wrong  about  that,  in  the  interests  of  immigration
    control it was appropriate  for  the  child's  mother  to  resolve  the
    dilemma which the Appellant's conduct had created for her and it was  a
    matter for her whether she and her child could or  should  relocate  to
    Turkey.

10. It is not the case therefore that the Tribunal  found  that  the  child
    and his mother could relocate to Turkey, rather it suggested as  Sedley
    LJ did in  AD  Lee  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  348  that  "the  tragic
    consequence is that this family... Would be broken up forever,  because
    of the appellant's bad behaviour. That is what deportation  does."   As
    in AD Lee  deportation will have harsh consequences for family  members
    and the wife will be faced with a difficult choice, remaining in the UK
    with her child but without the Appellant or for  her  and  her  British
    child to relocate to Turkey to be with him.

11. It is  not  the  case  therefore  that  the  Tribunal  gave  inadequate
    consideration to the best interests of the child or of  the  effect  on
    them of having to leave the UK; they do  not  have  to  leave  the  UK;
    whether they do is a matter for them. I have no hesitation  in  finding
    that  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  interests   of
    immigration control outweigh the child's best interests  in  this  case
    even if they were that his father should remain in the UK.  This  is  a
    deportation appeal as well as an appeal against refusal of asylum. As a
    deportation appeal the public interest in this Appellant's removal from
    the United Kingdom is considerable.  The  Tribunal  clearly  took  into
    account the Appellant's appalling history  in  the  UK  which  I  shall
    summarise.

12. The Appellant arrived in the UK, using a false passport in  March  2001
    and claimed asylum. That was refused in  April  2001.  His  appeal  was
    dismissed by a Tribunal Judge who noted numerous inconsistencies in his
    account.

13. In 2003 the Appellant had acquired for himself  a  Polish  partner  and
    they had a daughter together.

14. In October 2004 the Appellant made  an  application  under  the  Ankara
    agreement which was refused in March 2007.

15. In June 2005 the Appellant married his  Polish  partner,  and  on  that
    basis made an application for leave to remain as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national. That application  was  refused  and  his  wife  then  started
    divorce proceedings in June 2006 with the decree  absolute  granted  in
    January 2007.

16. The Appellant apparently only  ever  had  indirect  contact  with  that
    child.

17. The Appellant was convicted in 2006  of  using  a  false  passport  and
    sentenced to 18 months imprisonment in 2007. In his sentencing  remarks
    the Judge suggested that the Appellant had used his Polish wife  in  an
    attempt to remain in the UK.

18. After his conviction the Appellant was sent the  usual  letter  by  the
    Secretary of State  asking  for  any  reasons  why  he  should  not  be
    deported. Removal directions were set but then  cancelled  due  to  the
    Appellant  lodging  a  judicial  review  application.  That  was   then
    dismissed as being without merit.  However,  the  Appellant  then  went
    missing and this was reported by his surety in July 2007. The Appellant
    failed to attend either the Family Proceedings Court  or  his  judicial
    review hearing.

19. The Appellant then made an application under the  legacy  programme  in
    September 2007 which was rejected. He was next located in October  2009
    having been missing over two years. Shortly after this his new  British
    partner Linda Cheung gives birth to their son in November 2009.

20. The Appellant then made a fresh asylum claim in May 2013.  In the  same
    month a domestic violence incident was reported to the  police  by  his
    partner who told police that he did not live with her.

21. The fresh asylum claim was  refused  on  12th  December  2013  and  the
    decision to deport made on 17th December 2013. Those are the  decisions
    that were appealed against in these proceedings.

22. Undeterred by those decisions, the Appellant and Miss Cheung married in
    February 2014. It is against that background that  the  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant was nowhere near as committed to his family  as  his
    family was to him. It is  unsurprising  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found deportation a proportionate response and that even if it  was  in
    the child's best interests, which it did not believe it  was,  that  he
    should remain, those  best  interests  are  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest in removing this man.

23. I cannot determine  any  error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's  logic  or
    reasoning, nor can I countenance any other possible  outcome  for  this
    Appellant.

24. Accordingly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not make an  error
    of law material to the outcome and accordingly the  Appellant's  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 7th August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
