
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00535/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2014                                |On 30 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                           GERALDINE ADESUWA UGOWE
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr M Karnik, Counsel instructed by Binas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the determination of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McClure and Ms J A Endersby)  in  which  they  allowed  the  claimant's
    appeal against a decision by the respondent made on  27  February  2013
    and that she is a foreign criminal to whom  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 applies and should therefore be deported.

 2. The claimant's grandmother came to the United Kingdom with her husband,
     lawfully, in 1966 and whilst here on 21 September 1967 she gave  birth
    to  claimant's  mother  appellant  at   Queen   Charlotte's   Hospital,
    Hammersmith.  The family later returned to Nigeria where  the  claimant
    was born.  Until 1983, British Nationality  law  discriminated  on  the
    basis of gender, and thus, by reason of her gender,  her  mother  could
    not pass on her British Citizenship to her; had she been  born  in  the
    UK, or had she been born after 1  January  1983,  or  had  the  British
    Citizen parent been male, she would have been British by birth.

 3. The claimant was brought up for the greater part of her life  believing
    that her mother (who had been 14 at the time  of  her  birth)  was  her
    sister and that her grandmother was her mother.  She was  then  brought
    to the United Kingdom where she was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain.



 4. In 1997 the claimant gave birth to a son who was a British  citizen  by
    birth given that he was born here after  she  had  acquired  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 5. On 6 July 2006 the claimant was convicted of arson, being  reckless  as
    to whether life should be endangered and  three  offences  of  robbery.
    She was sentenced to an indefinite sentence for the protection  of  the
    public with a direction that she should serve a minimum of six years in
    custody before a parole board could consider her release.

 6. In passing sentence the judge did take into account the  evidence  that
    the appellant is suffering from serious  mental  ill-health  which  she
    contributed to the  commission  of  her  offences.   On  26  July  2012
    following an oral hearing the parole board directed that the  appellant
    should be released.

 7. The respondent's case is set out in  the  decision  dated  27  February
    2013.  In summary, although noting that  the  appellant's  child  is  a
    British citizen and was in contact with her and that  the  relationship
    between them is subsisting,  she  could  maintain  communication  using
    other means of communication as she had done while in prison  and  that
    of the 21 years and one month she  had  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom
    approximately seven years had been spent in prison that she  had  spent
    her  formative  years  in  Nigeria  and  it  would  therefore  not   be
    unreasonable to expect her to readjust  to  her  life  there.   It  was
    submitted that there was no evidence to suggest that she was now  in  a
    position of being "estranged" from her country of origin to the  extent
    that reintegration in to family and private life in the  country  would
    amount to undue hardship and  that  whilst  a  decision  to  remove  to
    Nigeria would interfere with her rights under Article 8 and  might  not
    be in the best interests of her child, it was in  accordance  and  with
    the permissible aim of prevention of disorder  and  crime  noting  that
    there were no  significant  and  compelling  factors  apparent  in  her
    private life such that she should not be deported to Nigeria.

 8. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, submitting [10]  that
    she has no family to return to in Nigeria,  has  not  seen  her  father
    since 1991 and speaks to her son on a daily basis.   Deportation  would
    ultimately end the relationship between  the  appellant  and  her  son,
    modern communication not being a substitute  to  a  family  unit;  that
    removing her to Nigeria would expose her to great danger of going  back
    to drugs and the violent life and her mental health problems  that  had
    caused  her  criminal  behaviour   and   her   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate given that she was now of low risk of reoffending.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. In what was clearly a complicated case, the Tribunal heard evidence  on
    6 August  2013  and  10  January  2014.   In  a  careful  and  detailed
    determination they dealt  first  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    nationality [4] to [36] finding that the claimant was not  entitled  to
    British nationality by descent because under the provisions of  Section
    5 of the British Nationality Act 1948 which is applicable, children  of
    female British citizens born  outside  the  UK  were  not  entitled  to
    nationality by descent and the appellant could not now  be  allowed  to
    acquire nationality by registration due to  her  criminal  convictions.
    The panel noted also that the historic discrimination is a factor to be
    taken into account in assessing the appellant's circumstances [36]  and
    that all the other members of her  family  now  appear  to  be  British
    citizens and to be in the United Kingdom.

10. The Tribunal found that:-

      i) the appellant was liable to deportation under Section 32(5).

     ii) as the appellant had been sentenced to a term of  imprisonment  for
         at least over four years it was necessary to look outside the Rules
         for relief on the basis of Article 8 grounds [44];

    iii) in light of the Strasbourg jurisprudence and  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 1192 that the Rules are not to be regarded  as  a  perfect
         mirror;

     iv) the use of the term "exceptional  circumstances"  is  to  emphasise
         that in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  due  acknowledgment
         should be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         criminals and it is only exceptionally that such foreign  criminals
         should succeed under Article 8, noting that  in  carrying  out  the
         proportionality test it has to be recognised that  the  scales  are
         weighted in favour of deportation and that there must be  something
         compelling which warrants setting aside of the decision to deport;

      v)  having  had  regard  to  the  probation  report  the   appellant's
         immigration history they found that  the  appellant  had  no  other
         family members in Nigeria to whom  she  could  turn  for  help  and
         assistance;

     vi) that although she was a Nigerian national it was due to  historical
         circumstances that she was not able to  claim  British  citizenship
         [85];

    vii) that she had had serious mental health issues, the continuing abuse
         of cannabis and possibly alcohol leading to mental health  problems
         and that but for being introduced to such substances she would  not
         have committed the criminal offences; that they took  into  account
         the nature of the offences and  the  seriousness  of  the  offences
         themselves; that  she  had  managed  to  find  employment  and  was
         maintaining it [90]; that she was free from drugs  and  cooperating
         with the authorities [91]; that she has  a  family  life  with  her
         grandmother, brother and child in the UK [93]; and

   viii) taking into account all the relevant factors including  nature  and
         seriousness of the  offences  including  the  length  of  time  the
         appellant had been in the United Kingdom and  the  consequences  to
         her and her family of expulsion and that it would be  in  the  best
         interests of the child that his mother remain here that it was  not
         proportionate to deport her.

11. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) the panel had erred in allowing the appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
         outside the Rules, contrary to MF (Nigeria);

     ii) that the Tribunal had erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  proper
         position as regards the Government's view on what  are  exceptional
         circumstances, and that an appellant would need to demonstrate  the
         circumstances above and beyond that set out in 399(a) or 399(b) and
         had failed to state why they considered that it was in the  child's
         best interest for the appellant to be involved in her life; that as
         the claimant had spent her youth and formative years in Nigeria and
         could adapt to life there and remain in  contact  with  the  family
         through modern methods of communication and visits there  being  no
         consideration of her ties to Nigeria other than family ties;

    iii) that the appellant's circumstances are not exceptional and her  own
         separation has not only been caused by her own actions  but  it  is
         proportionate to deport her, there being no factors to set it apart
         from an ordinary family life claim and in the circumstances are not
         strong enough to outweigh the  public  interest  in  line  with  SS
         (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550;

     iv) that the Tribunal failed to give any consideration to the Secretary
         of State's public interest  policies  given  the  severity  of  the
         offence committed, ignoring the fact that the appellant has  had  a
         number of adjudications in prison which led to an extended stay;

      v) that the legitimate aim in preventing crime and disorder is not one
         dimensional it has the effect not only  of  removing  the  risk  of
         reoffending by the deportee himself but of deterring other  foreign
         nationals in the same position and that the deportation of  foreign
         criminals creates public confidence in the system of control  whose
         loss would otherwise turn towards crime and disorder and  that  the
         appellant had not given sufficient  weight  to  the  strong  public
         interest in deportation.

12. On 30 April 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge C E Roberts granted permission to
    appeal stating that:-

         "Whilst it is clear that the panel has treated with care, as it  is
         tasked to do, the evidence of the appellant's circumstances, it  is
         arguably unclear that it has fully engaged with  the  Secretary  of
         State's public interest policies  encompassed in

          i) society's revulsion against violent crime;

         ii) the needs to deter others AM v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1634."

13. In response, by way of a  letter  pursuant  to  Rule  24  the  claimant
    submitted:-

      i) that the respondent was now putting forward her case on an entirely
         different basis having not previously referred  to  deterrence  and
         revulsion as aspects of the public interest which was not  referred
         to in the refusal letter;

     ii) that the Upper Tribunal gave full consideration of and  recognition
         to the public interest as set out in their determination the  panel
         having properly directed themselves that there  must  be  something
         compelling which warrants setting aside the decision to deport [9];
         that the panel had not acted irrationally in taking full account of
         the evidence from the parole board in finding  that  the  appellant
         was no longer at risk; at any rate this was a  compelling  case  in
         which the claimant's interests outweigh the public interest.

The Hearing

14.  Ms  Johnstone  submitted  that  there  was  no   indication   in   the
    determination that the panel had taken into account the public interest
    as set out in  the  refusal  letter  of  2013  nor  had  they  properly
    addressed the issue of what amounted to exceptional circumstances.  She
    did, however, concede that this was a reasons challenge.

15. Mr Karnik submitted that on that basis, it could not properly be argued
    that this was a decision to which the  Tribunal  was  not  entitled  to
    reach.  He submitted it is evident from the decisions it now had [42 to
    44] as well as at [47], [48] expressly  addressed  the  issues  towards
    directing themselves properly as to the public interest.  He  submitted
    that viewed properly, the facts of this case are  in  fact  exceptional
    and that the particular circumstances in which the  offences  committed
    in this case arose should be taken into account, it not being  disputed
    she was mentally ill at the time.

16. Mr Karnik submitted that the panel had set out in ample detail why they
    had reached the conclusions reached,  having  had  due  regard  to  the
    public interest.

17. In reply Ms Johnstone asked me to note that the  panel  had  failed  to
    take into account the adjudications against  the  appellant  in  prison
    which again are referred to by the parole board at pages 22 and  23  of
    their report.

Decision

18. It is evident that the Tribunal  considered  the  issue  of  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules as did the Upper Tribunal in MF (Nigeria)
    rather than within the context of paragraph 398 of the Rules. That  was
    properly described by the Court of  Appeal  as  not  being  a  material
    error, merely being one  of  form  rather  than  substance.   The  same
    applies here.

19. It is evident from the case law that, contrary to what  is  averred  by
    the Secretary of  State,  the  Tribunal's  task  is  not  to  look  for
    "exceptional circumstances"  but  to  undertake  a  balancing  exercise
    albeit one in which the starting point is that the scales  are  heavily
    weighted in favour of the Secretary of State, that weight flowing  from
    the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals. There is  no
    test of exceptionality; but the result  of  carrying  out  a  balancing
    exercise in which the public interest in deportation is so strong means
    that it is rare that a decision to deport a foreign criminal  will  not
    be proportionate, and thus such cases will be exceptional.

20. There is no merit in Mr Karnik's submission that  it  is  inappropriate
    for the respondent to raise the decision in AM v SSHD  at  this  stage.
    It is not arguable that the public interest is not involved in a multi-
    dimensional approach.

21. The Tribunal refer in detail to the test to be applied following MF  at
    [47] having directed themselves clearly as to  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules [43],  [44]  and  the  relevant  case  law  [45].  Of
    particular note is the self-direction at [47]:-

         "The  Rules  expressly  contemplate  weighing  public  interest  in
         deportation against  all  other  factors,  which  are  relevant  to
         proportionality and all those other factors have to be  taken  into
         account.  As was recognised in paragraph 40 of MF the  use  of  the
         terms exceptional circumstances  is  there  to  emphasise  that  in
         carrying out the balancing exercise due acknowledgement  should  be
         given to the public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals  and
         that it is only exceptionally that foreign criminals should succeed
         under Article 8.  It is accepted that it is not introducing a  test
         of  exceptionality  but   rather   that   in   carrying   out   the
         proportionality test within Article 8 it has to be recognised  that
         the scales are weighted in favour of  deportation  and  that  there
         must be something  compelling  which  warrants  setting  aside  the
         decision to deport.  It is also acknowledged  that  the  new  Rules
         constitute a complete code".

22. It is evident also from  the  Tribunal's  comments  to  the  claimant's
    offences being serious [94] that they took that  factor  into  account,
    but is not sufficiently evident that in weighing the  public  interest,
    they took into account that the sentence passed in this case was for an
    indefinite sentence with a minimum of six  years.  That  is  in  itself
    indicative of just how  serious  the  offences  were;  the  nature  and
    severity of the crimes were a factor to be  weighed  and  there  is  no
    indication that this was properly taken  into  account.   There  is  no
    proper  indication  of  the  public   interest   considerations   being
    considered alongside the factors in the claimant's favour, and had they
    taken these into account, it is not at all certain  that  the  Tribunal
    would have come to the same conclusion.

23. In the circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    reaching a conclusion that was not one open to it, and for  which  they
    had not given adequate reasons.  The error is,  in  the  circumstances,
    material, and thus the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set
    aside.  The findings of fact with respect to the claimant's nationality
    and parentage are preserved.

DIRECTIONS

 1. It is arguable that the remaking of the decision must take place in the
    light of the changes introduced by section 117 of the  2002  Act.    In
    the circumstances, and given that fresh findings of fact will  need  to
    be made, I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


