
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00974/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated                       |
|On 13 November 2014               |On 15 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                       THE HON MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MR A H I A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Reza a solicitor from Alexander & Partners


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ("the
   Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen  of  Tanzania  who  was
   born on 20 August 1992 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of  State  appeals
   against the determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Creswell  ("the
   FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's
   decision of 13 May 2014 to make a deportation  order  against  him  as  a
   foreign criminal (as defined by section 32 (1)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
   2007) on the grounds that his deportation was  conducive  to  the  public
   good under 32 (4).

2. At the end of the hearing, we reserved our decision which we now  provide
   together with our reasons.

3. On 2 April 2012 at Harrow Crown  Court  the  claimant  was  convicted  of
   handling stolen goods and driving without a  licence  and  insurance.  He
   received a community order, penalty points and  a  fine  of  �30.  Whilst
   tagged for that offence he breached the tagging order which  led  to  his
   arrest, and also to the Secretary of State serving him with a notice that
   he was an over-stayer. The subsequent and index offence was committed  on
   the evening of 19 May 2012, when he was 19 years  old,  and  led  to  his
   conviction after trial at the Central Criminal Court on 16 May  2013  for
   violent disorder.  On  7  June  2013  he  was  sentenced  to  30  months'
   detention in a young offender institution.  He  did  not  appeal  against
   conviction or sentence. The claimant was part of a gang  involved  in  an
   attack where two men, father and  son,  were  stabbed  and  the  son  was
   killed. Two of his co-defendants were convicted of  murder  and  one  was
   convicted of manslaughter.  Others,  including  the  claimant's  brother,
   were like him convicted solely of violent disorder. The offending and the
   part played in it by the claimant are  described  in  greater  detail  in
   paragraph 16(xii) and (xiii)  of  the  determination  of  the  FTTJ.  The
   sentencing judge was satisfied that he was "very actively engaged in  the
   call to arms and played a clear role in the violent disorder."

4. The appellant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision and  the
   FTTJ heard the appeal on 28 August 2014. Both parties  were  represented,
   the claimant by Mr Reza who appeared  before  us.  The  FTTJ  heard  oral
   evidence from the claimant, his partner and his mother and father.

5. The FTTJ applied the provisions of paragraphs 397, 398 and  399A  of  the
   Immigration  Rules.  He  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 399 but  did  meet  those  of  paragraph  399A.
   Excluding time spent in prison, he had spent over half his  life  in  the
   UK, had no ties to Tanzania and his knowledge  of  the  Swahili  language
   would have ended sometime between ages six and nine. It was credible that
   he had spoken English at home  in  the  UK  because  his  stepfather  was
   Ugandan and did not speak Swahili (paragraph [19])

6. The FTTJ concluded that it was unnecessary for him to go on and  consider
   the Article 8 human rights grounds outside the provisions of  the  Rules.
   The new Rules were a complete code and there  was  no  need  to  consider
   whether there were particular compelling or exceptional circumstances  as
   the claimant met the requirements of paragraph 399A(b). The FTTJ  allowed
   the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

7. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to  appeal,
   submitting that the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the
   provisions of the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  in  particular  paragraph
   117C(4)(c), and failing to give adequate consideration to  the  Secretary
   of State's public interest policies given the severity of the offence and
   the strong public interest in favour of  the  claimant's  deportation  in
   pursuance of the legitimate aim of preventing crime and disorder and  the
   deterrence of other foreign criminals.

8. Ms Kenny submitted that the provisions of  paragraphs  117A,  117B,  117C
   and 117D of the Immigration Act 2014 had come into force before the  FTTJ
   heard the appeal and therefore should have been applied. In reply to  our
   question, she also accepted that the FTTJ had applied an earlier  version
   of the Immigration Rules (Rules 399 and 399A) which had been  superseded,
   rather than the later version which should have been applied. These  were
   material errors of law. This was not an appeal which was bound to succeed
   had the correct provisions been applied. The decision should be set aside
   and remade. It could be remade on submissions only; no  further  evidence
   was needed.

9. In her submissions as to remaking the decision,  Ms  Kenny  argued  that,
   whilst the claimant could rely on paragraph 117C(4)(a) (because,  as  she
   accepted, he had been lawfully resident in the UK for most of  his  life)
   and 117C(4)(b) (because he was socially and culturally integrated in  the
   United Kingdom), paragraph 117(C)(4)(c) did not apply because there  were
   no very significant obstacles to his integration in the country to  which
   he would be deported.  English  was  spoken  in  Tanzania  and  both  the
   claimant and his partner spoke English. His  witness  statement  revealed
   strong cultural ties to Tanzania and his mother and her partner had  been
   there on visits, even if he had not returned since he arrived in the  UK.
   Of course the claimant's uncertain immigration status may have  inhibited
   him from travelling outside the  jurisdiction.  Ms  Kenny  accepted  that
   there was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the claimant  and
   his partner but, nevertheless, she submitted that it would not be  unduly
   harsh for him to be removed.

10. We have a skeleton argument from Mr Reza. Contrary to what  is  said  in
   his skeleton argument, he accepted  that  the  provisions  of  paragraphs
   117A, 117B, 117C and 117D of the Immigration Act 2014 had come into force
   before the FTTJ heard the appeal and should have been applied. He argued,
   however, that this was not a material error. He submitted that  the  FTTJ
   applied the correct version of the Immigration  Rules,  namely  those  in
   force at the date of the Secretary of State's decision, rather than those
   in force at the date of the hearing. Exception 2 in  paragraph  117(C)(5)
   applied and it would be unduly harsh to expect his partner to go with him
   to Tanzania. Even if the FTTJ had erred in law  it  was  not  a  material
   error because, if the appropriate law was  applied,  the  conclusion  was
   bound to be the same.


11. Further or alternatively Mr Reza submitted that  the  claimant's  mother
   and stepfather had made an application for settlement for the claimant as
   their dependant as long ago as May 2001. The  supporting  documents  were
   supplied in April 2002, but for reasons  which  remain  unexplained,  the
   Secretary of State had failed to deal with that application. The FTTJ was
   highly critical of that inactivity in paragraph 16(v)  and  (vi)  of  the
   determination but otherwise said nothing about it. Mr Reza submitted that
   if the application had been dealt with  within  a  reasonable  time,  the
   claimant would at the very least have been granted  a  right  to  remain,
   probably indefinite leave in line with the leave granted to  his  mother.
   He contended that we could  infer  from  the  fact  that  the  claimant's
   mother, who was granted indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of  his
   stepfather, had been  granted  naturalisation  in  July  2003,  that  the
   claimant would have followed suit and  that  but  for  the  Secretary  of
   State's inactivity he would have been a British citizen at  the  time  of
   the index offence and thus ineligible for deportation. Mr Reza  submitted
   that this was a factor that we could and  should  take  into  account  in
   determining his Article 8  application  even  if  he  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of Exceptions 1 and 2 of what is now Paragraph 117C  of  the
   Immigration Rules, as very compelling circumstances for  concluding  that
   his removal would be disproportionate.

12. Mr Reza agreed that if we found that there was a material error  of  law
   then we could remake the decision on the basis of the FTTJ's findings  of
   fact and no further evidence or submissions were needed.

13. As both representatives accepted and we  find,  the  provisions  of  the
   Immigration Act 2014 set out where the public interest lies in paragraphs
   117A, 117B, 117C and 117D. These provisions were in force at the date  of
   the  hearing  and  should  have  been  applied  whenever  the  claimant's
   application or the Secretary of  State's  decision  had  been  made.  The
   failure to mention or apply these provisions is, we find, an error of law
   and a material error. It cannot be said that any judge properly directing
   himself or herself was bound to have reached the same conclusion.

14. We find that there also is an error of law because  of  the  application
   of an earlier version of the Immigration Rules rather than the  Rules  in
   force at the date of the decision. Contrary to Mr Reza's submissions, the
   new Rules and the 2014  Act  mirror  each  other  and  need  to  be  read
   together. The Rules provide in paragraph A362, quoted below, that  "Where
   Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under Part 13 of  these
   Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed where the requirements
   of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met, regardless of when the  notice
   of intention to deport or the  deportation  order,  as  appropriate,  was
   served." That puts the matter beyond argument. Even though  the  decision
   to deport the claimant was made in May 2014,  the  appeal  was  heard  in
   August and it was  incumbent  upon  the  FTTJ  to  consider  whether  the
   requirements of the new Rules as at 28 July 2014 were met. He did not  do
   so.

15. The failure to address the new Rules is also a material  error  of  law.
   It cannot be said that any judge properly directing  himself  or  herself
   was bound to have reached the same conclusion if the correct  version  of
   the Rules had been applied.

16. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 in force at the date  of  the
   hearing before the FTTJ and still in force now set out where  the  public
   interest lies in paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D as follows;

  "117A Application of this Part
      (1)   This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
            life under Article 8, and
         (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
            Rights Act 1998.
       (2)  In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (a)      in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
            117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
            the considerations listed in section 117C.
      (3)   In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


  117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
      (1)   The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
      (2)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.
      (3)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-
         (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.
      (4)   Little weight should be given to-
         (a)      a private life, or
         (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
            established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
            United Kingdom unlawfully.
      (5)   Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.
      (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
            relationship with a qualifying child, and
         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
            the United Kingdom.


  117C Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
      criminals
      (1)   The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.
      (2)   The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      (3)   In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.
      (4)   Exception 1 applies where-
         (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
            most of C's life,
         (b)      C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
            Kingdom, and
         (c)       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
            integration into the country to  which  C  is  proposed  to  be
            deported.
      (5)   Exception 2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
      (6)   In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.
      (7)   The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


  117D Interpretation of this Part
      (1)   In this Part-
      "Article 8" means Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights;
      "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-
         (a)      is a British citizen, or
         (b)      has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
            seven years or more;
      "qualifying partner" means a partner who-
         (a)      is a British citizen, or
         (b)      who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
            of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
      (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
         (a)      who is not a British citizen,
         (b)      who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
            offence, and
         (c)      who-
            (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
                12 months,
            (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has  caused  serious
                harm, or
            (iii)      is a persistent offender.
      (3)   For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to  an
         order under-
         (a)      section 5 of the Criminal Procedure  (Insanity)  Act  1964
            (insanity etc),
         (b)      section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland)  Act  1995
            (insanity etc), or
         (c)      Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)  Order
            1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an offence.
      (4)   In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
         (a)      do not include a  person  who  has  received  a  suspended
            sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the  sentence
            or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);
         (b)      do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period
            of imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of  being
            sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting  in  aggregate  to
            that length of time;
         (c)      include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered
            or directed to be detained, in  an  institution  other  than  a
            prison (including, in particular, a hospital or an  institution
            for young offenders) for that length of time; and
         (d)      include a person  who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
            detention, or ordered  or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
            indeterminate period, provided that it may last  for  at  least
            that length of time.
      (5)   If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."


17. Paragraphs A362, 398, 399 and 399A of the current Immigration  Rules  in
   force at the date of the hearing before the FTTJ and still in  force  now
   provide that;

  "A 362. Where Article 8 is raised in the  context  of  deportation  under
  Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed where
  the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met, regardless of
  when the notice of intention to  deport  or  the  deportation  order,  as
  appropriate, was served.


  A398. These rules apply where:
  (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his  deportation
      would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention;
  (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made  against  him
      to be revoked.


  398.     Where a person claims that their deportation would  be  contrary
  to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
  and
  (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
      good and in the public interest because they have been convicted of an
      offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
      of at least 4 years;
  (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
      good and in the public interest because they have been convicted of an
      offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
      of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
  (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the  public
      good and in the public interest because, in the view of the  Secretary
      of State, their offending has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
      persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,  the
      Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider  whether
      paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public interest
      in deportation will only be outweighed by other  factors  where  there
      are very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
      paragraphs 399 and 399A.


  399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -
  ....
  (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  partner
      who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK, and
      (i)   the relationship was formed at a time when the person (deportee)
         was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration  status  was  not
         precarious; and
      (ii)  it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the country
         to which the person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraph EX.2.  of
         Appendix FM; and
      (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain  in  the  UK
         without the person who is to be deported.


  399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -
  (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life;
      and
  (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
  (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the
      country to which it is proposed he is deported.


18. It has not been suggested that the FTTJ's findings of fact in  paragraph
   16 of the determination are flawed, and we adopt them.

19. We do not accept Mr Reza's contention that  had  it  not  been  for  the
   delay on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  dealing  with  the
   claimant's application made in May 2001 he would have  become  a  British
   citizen before the  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.  Whilst  a
   decision on the first application was still awaited a further application
   was made in 2006 which was rejected for  lack  of  a  properly  completed
   application form or payment of the fee. If the claimant (or his  parents)
   had been interested in improving his status we would have expected him or
   his parents to have renewed the application at that stage.  There  is  no
   evidence from him to say that he wished to pursue matters with a view  to
   becoming a British citizen. During the period of delay he has  been  able
   to  increase  his  assimilation  into  society  and  start  and   develop
   relationships, in particular his relationship with his partner.

20. We apply paragraphs 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D  of  the  Immigration  Act
   2014. The Secretary of State's decision and the claimant's appeal  engage
   paragraph  117A.  The  provisions  of  paragraph  117B   establish   that
   maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public  interest.
   The claimant's relationship with his partner was established  at  a  time
   when he was in the UK lawfully because at all material times  he  had  an
   outstanding application for settlement (as Ms  Kenny  now  very  properly
   concedes). As a British citizen, she is a qualifying partner.

21. The appellant is a foreign criminal and paragraph 117C  means  that  his
   deportation is in the public interest. The index offence  was  a  serious
   one and needs to be viewed in the context of the trial judge's sentencing
   remarks. However, sub-paragraphs 117C (3) to (7) do  not  apply,  because
   the claimant was not sentenced to imprisonment for 4 years or more.

22. Paragraph A398 (a) of the Rules applies, as does 398(b).  As  a  result,
   we must consider whether paragraphs 399 or 399A apply. We find  that  the
   claimant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who  is
   in the UK and is a British Citizen. Whilst the point has been  in  issue,
   it is now accepted by the Secretary of State that the claimant is and has
   been in the UK lawfully. We find that the  claimant's  relationship  with
   his partner was formed at a time when he was in the UK lawfully  and  his
   immigration status was not precarious. The  relationship  also  commenced
   before any of his convictions, whilst the claimant and his  partner  were
   still at school.

23. However we find that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  the  claimant's
   partner to live in Tanzania because of compelling circumstances over  and
   above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix  FM.  That  exception
   refers to insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  his  partner
   continuing outside the UK. In the light of the  relevant  Strasbourg  and
   domestic jurisprudence, "insurmountable obstacles" means very significant
   difficulties which would be faced by  the  claimant  or  his  partner  in
   continuing their family life together outside the UK and which could  not
   be overcome, or would entail very serious hardship for  the  claimant  or
   his partner.

24. The claimant's partner is training  to  be  a  teacher,  and  wishes  to
   complete her training. She would have to leave  her  family  behind.  She
   said in evidence that she would be prepared to go to  Tanzania  with  the
   claimant if there was no other choice but it would ruin her hopes for the
   future. We do not accept that this is necessarily the case. There  is  no
   evidence as to whether enquiries have been made as to whether  she  could
   continue her training in Tanzania. Even if she could not, she  is  in  to
   the second year of a four-year course and could join the claimant at  the
   end of her studies. At that stage her qualifications are likely to be  of
   benefit to her in Tanzania. She has been  there  before  on  holiday  and
   might be able  to  afford  to  visit  the  claimant  whilst  her  studies
   continue. She speaks English, which is one of  the  languages  spoken  in
   Tanzania.

25. We also find that it would not be unduly harsh for her to remain in  the
   UK without the claimant. It need not be an indefinite separation  if  she
   joins him at the end of her studies, and there is nothing to prevent them
   keeping in touch through modern means of communication in the meantime.

26. In relation to paragraph  399A  we  find  that  the  claimant  has  been
   lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life  and  is  socially  and
   culturally integrated in the UK. However, we conclude  that  there  would
   not be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Tanzania.
   Whilst the claimant's Swahili is likely to be rusty because  it  has  not
   been used on a regular basis since he was a child, we do not accept  that
   he would not be able to become proficient within a reasonable time. He is
   still young enough to be able to  adapt,  and  in  any  event  he  speaks
   English  which  means  that  he  is  unlikely  to  face  any  significant
   communication difficulties in Tanzania. He does not  have  any  remaining
   family in Tanzania, but there is no reason  why  members  of  his  family
   should not visit him there. They have visited that country in  the  past.
   He is in good health.

27. The FTTJ found that there was  a  risk  of  re-offending,  although  the
   evidence before the trial judge had been less than satisfactory in  terms
   of the assessment of that risk. The author of the pre-sentence report had
   concluded that the claimant  did  not  represent  an  immediate  risk  of
   significant harm to others, but had also stated that  the  potential  for
   violence in the type of offence he had committed was a real  concern.  He
   had attempted to minimise his involvement in the events which led to  his
   conviction, which did him no credit, but he had  also  expressed  remorse
   for his actions and he had received a positive  report  from  the  prison
   service about his behaviour in prison.

28. We find that deportation of the claimant would not be  contrary  to  the
   UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. He is  a
   foreign criminal and deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the  public
   interest. He committed a serious offence. There are  no  very  compelling
   circumstances which outweigh the public interest in deportation. Even  if
   there had been evidence that he  would  have  become  a  British  Citizen
   before he committed the offence, that factor would not have amounted to a
   sufficiently compelling reason to conclude that his removal  would  be  a
   disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.

29. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction because of "sensitive  issues".  We
   consider that it is appropriate and necessary to renew this. We  make  an
   order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter  likely  to  lead
   members of the public to identify the claimant, his partner or any member
   of his family.

NOTICE OF DECISION

30.  For the reasons stated above we find that the First-tier Tribunal  made
   material errors of law in its determination. We allow  the  Secretary  of
   State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, set aside the decision of the FTTJ,
   remake that decision and dismiss the claimant's original appeal under the
   Immigration Rules on Article 8 human rights grounds.



Signed:........................................    Date: 14 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

