
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00503/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 March 2019                               |On 05 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  Lukas [H]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent to deport him.  The decision to deport was on 12 July 2018.

 2. The appellant is  an  EEA  national,  being  a  citizen  of  the  Czech
    Republic.  He has a poor criminal record  and  it  is  clear  that  his
    insistence  on  taking  forbidden  drugs  is  at  the   core   of   his
    difficulties.

 3. As an EEA national he  may  well  be  entitled  to  a  high  degree  of
    protection against removal and it is essential  that  there  are  clear
    findings about his residence in the United Kingdom and  any  consequent
    degree of protection that follows.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal's finding is extremely clear.  The  judge  says
    at paragraph 13:

         "I find that the appellant has not shown to the  required  standard
         that he has been continually resident in the UK for over five years
         as either an individual exercising treaty rights or as a  dependant
         of his mother whilst she was considered to be  habitually  resident
         here."

 5. He then directed himself that the next thing to determine  was  whether
    the appellant's removal was justified on public policy grounds  and  he
    concluded that it was justified.

 6. The grounds of appeal supporting the application were not drawn  by  Ms
    Brown.  They can, I find, be divided sensibly into  criticisms  of  the
    primary findings of fact and criticisms of the application of the law.

 7. Ground 2 complains that there is a failure to consider the evidence  in
    the round on the  balance  of  probabilities  and  concludes  with  the
    assertion that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  "failed  to  give  any
    findings on the three live witness evidence"  that  the  appellant  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for a long continuous period.

 8. That, on the face of it, is a very severe criticism but  it  loses  its
    sting when the Decision is considered in  more  detail.   It  is  quite
    clear from reading he Decision that  the  judge  did  not  believe  the
    evidence of the appellant.

 9. Oral evidence was  also  given  two  other  witnesses.  They  were  the
    appellant's sister, [Ms MG], who lives in Blackpool, and a [Mr DG]  who
    lives in Halifax and who is a family friend.

10. The statement from Ms [G] confirms that the appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2002 and that he visited "home" in 2014 to obtain  an
    identity card when he stayed for about three weeks.  The  witness  says
    "to my knowledge the appellant has returned to Czech only one time  for
    his ID since 2004".  The witness then explained that "all our family is
    now in the UK" and that the appellant has "been in the UK since he  was
    a child and should be allowed to remain".

11. In his statement Mr [G] says that he was aware that the  appellant  had
    visited the Czech Republic in 2014 "for his ID" and  that  he  did  not
    like it. This is of very limited evidential value.  It does not purport
    to say that the appellant  only  visited  the  Czech  Republic  on  the
    occasion identified and, taken at its highest, as far as I can see adds
    nothing material to the appellant's case.

12. The statement of Ms [G] is more detailed.   She  asserts  unequivocally
    that she was living with the appellant and their mother at the material
    time and to her knowledge the appellant has only returned once  to  the
    Czech Republic.  It  does  not  follow  from  this  evidence  that  the
    appellant's claim to higher protection is made  out.   It  is  possible
    that the appellant left the United Kingdom  and  went  somewhere  other
    than the Czech Republic,  but  there  is  nothing  to  support  such  a
    finding.

13. It is quite clear from paragraph 31 of the Decision that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge heard evidence from Ms [S], Ms [G] and Mr  [G].   It  is
    also quite plain that to the extent that they said  the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom for many years save for  one  visit  to  the
    Czech Republic he did not believe them.  I have to ask myself if it  is
    an error of law not to have given more  express  consideration  to  the
    evidence and the reasons for disbelieving them.

14. In the case of Mr [G] there is no difficulty.  The evidence was only of
    peripheral value because it did not claim to rule out other visits.

15. Ms [G] did make such a claim and should have been in a position to have
    given reliable evidence on  the  point.   However  the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 31(8) of his Decision that he found the  when  the  appellant
    returned to the Czech Republic in September  2014  he  was  planning  a
    prolonged stay and that is why he committed criminal offences  to  make
    his life more comfortable.

16. There were also unsigned witness statements from the appellant's mother
    who did not attend to give evidence and from the mother of one  of  his
    children who was never expected to attend. Given that their  statements
    are unsigned the judge clearly cannot be criticised for not making much
    of them.  Indeed it is arguable that they were of no  evidential  value
    whatsoever in the form in which they were presented.

17. I have decided that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  err  by
    ignoring the witnesses.   He  considered  the  witnesses  and  did  not
    believe  them.   He  did  not  err  by  not  giving  a  full   detailed
    explanation.  Read carefully the point of  the  decision  is  that  the
    evidence of the appellant's conduct so  undermined  the  claimed  short
    visit that he rejected that evidence.

18. I do not accept  the  judge  erred  in  not  giving  more  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of Ms [G].  There is no material  deficiency  at
    all in not saying more about the other witnesses because they  did  not
    deal with this point.

19. The grounds further criticise the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  not
    making more detailed findings and this point is picked up in Ms Brown's
    helpful skeleton argument on which she based her oral submissions.  The
    difficulty for the appellant is that although I can  accept  that  the
    judge might have been wrong, or at  least  a  open  to  criticism,  for
    glossing over points in finding that the appellant  had  spent  "months
    out of school" without recognising that for much of that time he  would
    have been on school  holiday,  I  cannot,  notwithstanding  Ms  Brown's
    considerable assistance,  piece  together  from  the  documents  enough
    independent evidence to show there were  no  substantial  gaps  in  his
    record  of  school  attendance  or  employment  or   availability   for
    employment.

20. The short point  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    conclude from the gaps in the evidence not only that the oral  evidence
    was not reliable, but that the appellant had not lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom exercising treaty rights for long enough to acquire  more  than
    the minimum level of protection.  There is no independent evidence that
    he was in school throughout the required period or that he was  working
    throughout the required period (this has never been his case)  or  that
    he was at least looking for work.

21. Whilst it is easy to criticise the judge the appellant would do well to
    remember that the burden of proof was on him.  If he had a good case he
    should have made it clear. He was represented. He could  have  decided,
    with the help of his advisors, when precisely he lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and then produced witness statements to set  out  and  support
    his case. He could  have  produced  a  schedule  cross-referencing  the
    claims in the witness  statement  to  the  documentary  evidence  which
    clearly tends to show that he was available in the United  Kingdom  for
    some of the time he says he was there and that he  was  at  school  for
    some of the time that he claims.  If he tabulated his evidence in  that
    way it would have been much easier for the judge to have seen precisely
    what periods are not confirmed by independent evidence and whether  the
    oral evidence was unacceptable  on  its  own  or  whether  it  was  not
    reliable unless supplemented.

22. I do not agree that the criticisms of the judge are well-founded.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge has found clear gaps in  the  evidence  about
    the appellant's stay in the United Kingdom and has  found  himself  not
    satisfied that the appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  he
    claims and with it his entitlement  to  higher  degrees  of  protection
    collapses.

23. Once it is seen that the appellant has not established any high  degree
    of protection as an EEA national there is  no  room  to  criticise  the
    decision.  The appellant has been to  prison  on  three  occasions  for
    serious offences.  Although he has two children  it  seems  he  has  no
    contact with one and only skimpy contact with another of  a  kind  that
    could be easily reproduced by electronic means.  Further the  appellant
    was in trouble as recently as April 2018.  There is  no  error  in  the
    judge's conclusion that he remains a risk and a  present  risk  to  the
    United Kingdom.

24. In short although Ms Brown went to a great  deal  of  trouble  to  draw
    attention  to  possible  deficiencies  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision, I am unpersuaded that there is any material error of law  and
    I dismiss the appellant's appeal.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 April 2019                   |

