
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00291/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd June, 2013                             |On 11th June 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                                IRAKLI ERADZE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Gaskin, Counsel, instructed by ROLI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 25th July, 1977 and is a citizen of  Georgia.
     On 11th May, 2012 the respondent made a deportation order against  him
    pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  following  the
    appellant's conviction on 15th November 2011 for possession of identity
    documents  with  intent.   The  appellant  appealed  the   respondent's
    decision and his appeal was  heard  at  Kingston  Crown  Court  on  6th
    August, 2012 by a panel of the First-tier  Tribunal  Immigration  Judge
    Carroll sitting with Mr D  B  Yates.  They  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the deportation order, but in doing so it  appears  that
    they failed to take into account a letter  written  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant by his solicitors following an interview conducted  with  him
    by the Home Office and a statement  which  the  appellant  subsequently
    made dealing with the answers he gave to the questions put  to  him  at
    his interview. Both documents were sent to the  Home  Office,  but  for
    some reason neither appear to have been placed before the panel of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   At a  hearing before me on 3rd June Mr Tarlow suggested that there  was
    more than sufficient information before the panel  to  enable  them  to
    make the decision that they did and that even if they had received  the
    documentation it would have made no difference to the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and was therefore not material.

3.   I concluded that the panel had unwittingly erred  in  law.   The  panel
    may or may not have been aware  of  the  appellant's  comments  on  the
    conduct of the interview and his replies given at that  interview,  but
    they do not appear to have referred to the  interview  and  it  appears
    that they did not have  the  statement.   I  drew  the  representatives
    attention to paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement
    which provides as follows:

         "7.  Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

             7.1  Where under Section 12(1) of the 2007 Act (proceedings on
                  appeal to the Upper Tribunal)  the  Upper  Tribunal  finds
                  that the making of a decision involved the  making  of  an
                  error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set  aside
                  the decision and if it does so must either remit the  case
                  to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section  12(2b)(i)  or
                  proceed  in  accordance   with   the   relevant   practice
                  directions  to   remake   the   decision   under   Section
                  12(2b)(ii).



             7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule





4.   I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me at Field House and  it  could  conversely  be  heard
    relatively speedily by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  view  of  the
    overriding objective informing the onward conduct of the appeal I  have
    decided that the appeal be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing afresh before a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Carroll with or without a  non-legal member other than Mr D  B Yates.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


