
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00304/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th January 2019                        |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of  the  Netherlands  born  on  25  August  1998.  His  appeal  against
    deportation was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  Howard  on  27
    June 2017 under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

2.   On 12 March 2018, I found that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  this
    decision and set it aside. The case was relisted  to  be  reheard.  The
    matter came before me on 1 October 2018 and was adjourned to enable the
    Appellant to obtain legal representation.

3.   In response to directions, the  Respondent  filed  and  served  witness
    statements from the PC JC dated 8 November 2018  and  PC  WF  dated  30
    September 2017. Ms Brocklesby-Weller also filed and served  a  skeleton
    argument and an up to date PNC printout.

4.   The Appellant did not  submit  any  further  evidence  in  response  to
    directions and, at the hearing before me, produced two pages  of  typed
    and written submissions which he confirmed would stand as his  evidence
    and as his skeleton argument.

5.   The Appellant gave evidence-in-chief  as  follows.  He  relied  on  his
    statement before the First-tier Tribunal, which he signed (and dated 14
    January 2019) before  me  in  court.  He  gave  the  following  further
    evidence. Since he was released from his  eight-week  sentence  he  had
    started a fresh page, which I took to mean that he had made a  decision
    to reform. He stated that he was arrested for criminal activities which
    took place before he  served  his  prison  sentence.  He  was  given  a
    suspended sentence for his last conviction and had  completed  most  of
    his probation and community service. He currently  had  a  one  bedroom
    flat and had not reoffended  for  the  last  two  years.  His  term  of
    imprisonment was a result of his failure  to  comply  with  a  criminal
    behaviour order in which he explained that he was prevented from having
    contact with his friends at school and he  foolishly  disregarded  that
    order.

6.   The Appellant stated that he had not committed a serious offence  since
    he became an adult. Robbery was his most serious  offence.  He  was  16
    years old and in the wrong place at the wrong time,  having  been  with
    the person who took someone's iPhone.  The conviction for possession of
    cannabis was the offence for which he was  imprisoned  for  failing  to
    comply with the sentences given on 9 October  2015.  Again  he  was  16
    years old at the time he committed that  offence.  There  were  several
    breaches of a community behaviour order which resulted in an eight-week
    sentence in March 2017.  The last offence (arranging to facilitate  the
    travel of another person with a view to exploitation) took place at the
    beginning of 2017 before his imprisonment. He  pleaded  guilty  at  the
    first opportunity and received a sentence of eight months' imprisonment
    suspended for twelve months on 15 June 2018. He had the lowest role  in
    that offence and had been paid to protect the victim by  someone  else.
    He needed the money to support his cannabis  addiction  which  was  now
    being addressed through probation.

7.   The Appellant has had a social worker for some time  and  he  sees  her
    every two weeks to do a pathway plan, which was helping him  to  get  a
    council flat. He is now 20 years old.  His  mother  is  suffering  from
    trauma in the back of her head and attended hospital. He had  seen  her
    only this morning. His father was at work. He worked as a  rubbish  man
    and the Appellant last saw him the other day. His brother was 12  years
    old and was born here. He sees him every day. His sister was  15  years
    old and both his brother and sister lived with his mum. His grandma and
    her kids were also in the UK and he saw her every two or  three  weeks.
    His whole family lived in the UK. He came to the UK when he was 5 years
    old. He had never been back and he did  not  speak  Dutch.  He  had  no
    family in Holland at all.

8.   The Appellant's father had been in employment as a  rubbish  man  since
    he came to the UK. His mum worked part-time but was not working at  the
    moment because of her illness. She was a teacher's  assistant  and  did
    that on and off. He did not know if his mum and dad had  got  permanent
    residence cards.

9.   At this point  I  asked  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  to  check  Home  Office
    records to see if either  of  the  Appellant's  parents  had  permanent
    residence  cards.  I  continued  to  take  further  evidence  from  the
    Appellant while she did so.

10.  The Appellant started school in Hounslow, but  the  school  burnt  down
    and he then went to Edmonton.  He attended primary  school  from  years
    three to year six. He then went to secondary school for two years until
    his mum thought it was better that he be schooled at  home  because  of
    the violence and trouble in the area. He spent three years  at  primary
    school and two years at secondary school and then he was home schooled.
    He attended at Best Tutors, a private school from January 2012. He  was
    not sure if he had health insurance and had not come across it. He took
    GCSE equivalents at the private school in year eleven in 2014.

11.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller confirmed that the Appellant's  parents  had  been
    granted permanent residence on Friday 11 January 2019. It  was  on  the
    basis of his father's employment status. She conceded that since he was
    under the age of 21  he  was  a  dependant  of  an  EEA  national  with
    permanent residence and, therefore, had obtained  permanent  residence.
    She accepted that the Appellant had lived in the UK for  at  least  ten
    years and he was entitled to the highest  form  of  protection,  namely
    imperative grounds. She conceded, referring to her  skeleton  argument,
    that the Appellant's current criminal  record  was  not  sufficient  to
    demonstrate imperative grounds for expulsion.



Relevant law

12.  Regulation 27 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 states:

    '27. (1) In this Regulation a relevant decision means an  EEA  decision
             taken on the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or
             public health.


         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under Regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who


             (a)  has resided in the UK for a continuous period of at least
                  ten years prior to the relevant decision; or


             (b)  is under the age of 18 unless the relevant decision is in
                  the best interests of the person concerned as provided for
                  in the Convention of the Rights of the  Child  adopted  by
                  the  General   Assembly   of   the   United   Nations   on
                  20th November 1989.


         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles:


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to one of
                  the fundamental interests of society, taking into  account
                  past conduct of the person and that the  threat  does  not
                  need to be imminent;


             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a person's previous  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
                  justify the decision;


             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction  provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  P  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in
             the UK, P's social and cultural integration into  the  UK  and
             the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


         [(7) relates to a decision taken on grounds of public health and is
             not relevant.]


         (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this Regulation are met must in particular have regard to  the
             considerations in Schedule 1, considerations of public policy,
             public security and the fundamental interests of society.




Discussion and Conclusions

13.  The Appellant was born in August 1988 in the Netherlands and claims  to
    have entered the UK  on  11  November  2004.   It  is  clear  from  the
    documentary evidence  produced  that  he  was  present  in  the  UK  by
    September 2005. He has been resident in the UK for at least ten years.

14.  The Respondent brought deportation proceedings  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's criminality. He had eight convictions for  eleven  offences
    as follows:

    (a)   22  September  2014:  attempted  robbery  and  robbery.   He  was
         sentenced to a youth rehabilitation order, compensation and  curfew
         requirement;

    (b)  9 October 2015: possession with intent to supply class B cannabis.
         He was sentenced to a supervision requirement, youth rehabilitation
         order, criminal behaviour order  for  three  years,  costs  and  an
         unpaid work requirement 50 hours,  curfew  requirement,  electronic
         tagging, an  exclusion  requirement  from  the  London  Borough  of
         Enfield;

    (c)  8  April  2016:  destroying  or  damaging  property  and  given  a
         conditional discharge;

    (d)  14 November 2016: breach of a criminal behaviour order and fined;

    (e)  9 February 2017: breach of  a  criminal  behaviour  order  on  two
         occasions  and  given  a  community  order  with  an  unpaid   work
         requirement;

    (f)  16 March 2017: breach of a criminal behaviour order  and  given  a
         further community order with an unpaid work requirement;

    (g)  24 March 2017: breach of a criminal behaviour order and imprisoned
         for eight weeks.  This is  the  index  offence  which  led  to  the
         deportation proceedings;

    (h)  15 June 2018: conspiring or arranging or facilitating  the  travel
         of another person with a view  to  exploitation.  He  was  given  a
         sentence of imprisonment  of  eight  months  suspended  for  twelve
         months.  There was an unpaid work requirement and a  rehabilitation
         activity.

15.  Given the grant of permanent residence to his  parents  on  11  January
    2019, the Appellant is entitled to the highest level of protection.  He
    has shown that he has permanent residence and that he  has  resided  in
    the UK for at least ten years.  His  level  of  criminal  activity  and
    imprisonment for eight weeks was not sufficient to show that he was not
    integrated in the UK and, therefore, I find that he is entitled to  the
    highest level of protection under the EEA Regulations 2016.

16.  I have taken into account all the circumstances of his case,  including
    the Appellant's oral evidence that: he has lived in the  UK  since  the
    age of five; he has attended state school for five years and thereafter
    went to a private school and has taken GCSEs; all his  family  live  in
    the UK; and he has no family in Holland and does  not  speak  Dutch;  I
    have considered his assertion that he has finally come  to  terms  with
    his offending behaviour and decided to make a fresh start. I hope  that
    he continues to co-operate with probation and with  the  assistance  of
    his social worker he will stay out of trouble  and  move  on  with  his
    life.

17.  Applying Regulation 27, I find that the Appellant is  entitled  to  the
    highest form of protection and looking at all  the  factors  listed  in
    Regulation 27(5) the Respondent has  failed  to  show  that  there  are
    imperative grounds of public policy which warrant  the  deportation  of
    the Appellant. Accordingly, I allow the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of decision

The Appellant's appeal against deportation is allowed under the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2016.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 7 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
