
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: DA/00025/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 February 2020               |On 16 March 2020                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JOSHUA [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, instructed by Lincoln Lawrence Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Joshua [A] is a Nigerian national who was born on 9 May  1999.   On  11
    September 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge G Clarke allowed  his  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him from the United
    Kingdom.  The Secretary of State was subsequently granted permission to
    appeal against that decision.  We shall refer to the  parties  as  they
    were before the FtT.


 2. We need not set out the appellant's immigration history in any  detail.
    It suffices to state that he came to the UK as a young child  in  2003;
    he was issued with an EEA Residence Card  in  2010;  and  that  he  was
    issued a Permanent Residence Card on 18 February 2014.  His entitlement
    to these documents arose a result of his father's French nationality.

 3. Nor is it necessary for the purposes of this decision for us to set out
    in full  the  appellant's  extensive  offending  history.   The  Police
    National Computer printout which was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    documents ten theft and kindred  offences;  six  offences  relating  to
    police, courts or prisons; six drug offences; and one offence  relating
    to firearms, shotguns or offensive weapons.  The earliest  offence  was
    committed on 7 March 2013.  The most recent offences were committed  on
    22 November 2017, when the appellant was found to be in  possession  of
    Crack Cocaine and Heroin with intent to supply.  For those offences, he
    was sentenced by Inner London Crown Court to  a  total  of  28  months'
    imprisonment in a Young  Offenders  Institution.   It  was  during  the
    appellant's sentence for these offences that the  respondent  initiated
    deportation  action  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016.
    Ultimately, the respondent decided to make a  deportation  order  under
    those Regulations on 27 November 2018 and it was against that  decision
    that the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appeal came before Judge Clarke ("the judge") on 26 July 2019.  His
    reserved decision runs to fifteen pages  of  single-spaced  type.   For
    reasons which will shortly become apparent, we need  not  rehearse  the
    structure or the contents of it in detail.  The judge reminded  himself
    that the Regulations contain three levels of protection against removal
    or deportation: [64]-[67].  He also reminded himself that  it  was  for
    the respondent to justify her decision  to  deport:  [68].   The  judge
    considered that the appellant was able to avail himself of  the  middle
    level of protection against deportation, such that the  respondent  was
    required to establish  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security justifying that course: [69]-[70].   The  judge  set  out  the
    relevant provisions of the regulations before he turned, at  [73]-[76],
    to consider in some detail the appellant's offending history.  At [77],
    he noted the appellant's claim to  be  completely  rehabilitated  as  a
    result of his time in custody and the 'wake up call' this had provided.

 5. At [78]-[87], the judge considered the evidence adduced by the  parties
    which bore on the question of the appellant's rehabilitation.  At [88],
    he noted that there was no up to date OASys assessment before him.   At
    [89], he said this:

         I made directions for Ms Corina Oliver, the  Appellant's  Probation
         Officer, to file an updated assessment on the Appellant's  risk  of
         offending and risk of harm.   This  was  completed  by  one  of  Ms
         Oliver's colleague, Ms Jennifer Connell, and  sent  through  a  few
         days after the hearing.  I appreciate the time spent by Ms  Connell
         and Ms Oliver preparing this report.  It is apposite to set it  out
         in full:

 6. The judge then set out in full the Probation Officer's assessment.   He
    went on to state that he attached  'great  weight'  to  it:  [90].   He
    concluded that it was 'cogent and compelling evidence, in my view, that
    the   Appellant   is   making   strident   efforts   to   achieve   his
    rehabilitation.'  In the remaining  paragraphs  of  his  decision,  the
    judge made findings about  the  extent  of  the  threat  posed  by  the
    appellant  and  the  proportionality  of  his   removal.    The   final
    substantive paragraph is in the following terms:


         [95] On the specific circumstances of this case, I find that  there
         are no serious grounds of public policy requiring  the  appellant's
         deportation to Nigeria.  I rely on  the  fact  that  the  appellant
         accepts responsibility for his crimes and  his  custodial  sentence
         has made him determined that he does not wish to continue  along  a
         route of offending.  Since his release on 31st January 2019, he had
         made strident efforts towards his rehabilitation.  I attach  weight
         to the fact that while in prison he kept in touch with Mr  [A]  who
         saw something in the appellant's motivation to change and  promoted
         him to return to the organisation.  Mr [A] is a strong professional
         role model for the appellant, as is  recognised  by  the  Probation
         Service.  The appellant has continued  to  engage  with  Probation,
         with Mr [A] and hold down his job.  The appellant is not a  present
         threat to one of the fundamental interests of society.   Given  the
         evidence before me of rehabilitation, I find that  the  appellant's
         deportation would be disproportionate.

 7. Permission was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
    granted, on renewal, by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker.   The  respondent
    advanced three grounds of appeal against the judge's decision.  It  was
    submitted that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for his
    findings as to the risk posed by the appellant; that he had  materially
    misdirected himself in law by  conflating  the  separate  questions  of
    risk, rehabilitation and proportionality; and that he had in any  event
    made inadequately reasoned findings on proportionality.

 8. We heard submissions from Ms Cunha, who took us deftly through a number
    of domestic  and  European  authorities.   During  the  course  of  her
    submissions, we asked to see a copy of the letter  from  the  Probation
    Officer, Ms Connell, to which the judge had attached  great  weight  in
    allowing the appeal.  Ms Cunha was unable to find  the  letter  in  her
    file.  She helpfully offered to return to the Presenting Officers' Unit
    to conduct a more thorough search of the records.  We  asked  Mr  Ahmed
    whether he had been provided with a copy by those instructing him.   He
    had not.  We put the matter back in the list in order to give Ms  Cunha
    time to locate the letter.

 9. On resuming after the short adjournment, Ms Cunha stated that  she  had
    been unable to locate the letter.  Mr Ahmed stated that his instructing
    solicitors did not have a copy.   These  submissions  chimed  with  the
    provisional view we had formed when reconsidering the contents  of  the
    Tribunal's file in light of the fact that  neither  representative  had
    access to a copy of the letter from the Probation Service.

10. It is apparent from the Tribunal's file that the judge was at pains  to
    make appropriate directions to address what  he  considered  to  be  an
    evidential lacuna.  On the day of the hearing before the FtT,  he  made
    directions for the appellant's solicitors to file and serve any further
    evidence from the Probation Service by 4pm on 31 July  2019.   He  also
    directed that both parties were at liberty to make written  submissions
    about any such evidence by 4pm on 2  August  2019.   He  concluded  his
    directions by stating that he would proceed to determine the appeal  if
    nothing  further  was  received  in  compliance  with   the   preceding
    directions.  At [60] of his decision, he stated that he had  given  the
    representatives 'the option to submit further submissions after receipt
    of this report but nothing has been received'.

11. It is apparent from the Tribunal's file  that  the  judge's  directions
    were sent to the appellant's representatives (solicitors  and  counsel)
    and to the respondent.   After  that,  there  is  no  further  relevant
    material on the Tribunal's file.  There is no correspondence  from  the
    appellant's solicitors, enclosing the letter from Ms Connell.  There is
    no indication whatsoever that the letter was filed (by either party) or
    that it was served by either side on the other.  It appears to  us,  as
    it did to both representatives, that the letter was  sent  directly  to
    the Tribunal by the Probation Service, without either party  having  an
    opportunity to comment upon it.  No copy of  it  was  retained  in  the
    Tribunal's file, seemingly because it was received by email.

12. We suggested to Mr Ahmed that  this  seemed  to  us  to  be  a  serious
    procedural  failing  and  that  we  were  willing,   in   the   unusual
    circumstances of this case, to consider this point despite the  absence
    of a specific ground of appeal by the respondent.   Mr  Ahmed  did  not
    oppose that course.  Nor, on reflection, did he  feel  able  to  submit
    that the judge's decision was sound.  He  was  constrained  to  accept,
    with commendable frankness, that the decision could not  stand  in  the
    face of such a serious procedural error.

13. We agree.  It was perfectly understandable, in  light  of  the  limited
    evidence before him, for the judge to seek the views of  the  Probation
    Officer  on  the  appellant's  claim   of   rehabilitation.    It   was
    unobjectionable, in our judgment, for those views  to  have  been  sent
    directly to the Tribunal by the Probation Service.  It  was  absolutely
    necessary, however, upon receipt of that valuable evidence, to  provide
    both parties with an opportunity to make submissions upon  it,  whether
    orally or in writing.  The judge plainly recognised that, as  is  clear
    from the directions he made on the day of the hearing, but it is  clear
    that neither side received a copy of the letter and that the respondent
    was never given an opportunity  to  consider  it.   That  error,  which
    occurred despite the judge's care, vitiates his assessment as a  whole,
    and we must set aside his  decision.   We  order  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo before a  judge
    other than Judge G Clarke.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  erroneous  in  law  and  cannot
stand.  The decision of the FtT is accordingly set aside and we  order  that
the appeal be remitted to the FtT for rehearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                13 March 2020

