
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00196/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd December 2020                        |On 21st January 2021          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MC
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bachu, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and as
this appeal concerns the best interests of the appellant's minor children
who have been the subject of separate proceedings before the Family Court,
it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or
Court directs otherwise, MC is granted anonymity.  No report of these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member of her
family.  This direction applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is MC.
      However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I adopt
      the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to MC as the
      appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   2. The respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd
      promulgated on 18th November 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal
      under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the
      2016 Regulations") against the respondent's decision to make a
      deportation order. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal
      Judge Grubb on 7th February 2020.


Background


   3. The appellant is a national of the Czech Republic.  She last entered
      the United Kingdom in 2016, having previously lived in the United
      Kingdom between 2010 and 2013. It is common ground between the parties
      that the appellant has not acquired a permanent right to reside in the
      UK. The appellant's criminal history is set out in the respondent's
      decision in the following way:


         "5.  Between 13 June 2017 and 11 February 2019, you have amassed 9
         convictions for 19 offences namely for 1 offence against the
         person, 10 theft and kindred offences and 6 offences relating to
         police, courts and prisons.


         6.   On 11 February 2019 at Walsall and Aldridge Magistrates Court,
         you were convicted of 4 counts of theft - shoplifting, 1 count of
         failing to comply with the requirements of a community order, for
         which you were sentenced to 1 month, 26 days imprisonment."


   4. The respondent noted in her decision that on 25th August 2017, the
      appellant was previously considered for deportation due to her
      criminal convictions, but deportation was not pursued at that time.
      The appellant was served with a warning letter on 4th September 2017
      and despite that warning, went on to commit further offences.  The
      respondent considered whether the appellant's deportation is justified
      on grounds of public policy or public security. She referred to
      Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations and concluded that the appellant's
      behaviour is a threat to the fundamental interests of society to
      justify deportation on grounds of public policy.  In reaching the
      decision to deport the appellant, the respondent also considered the
      principles set out in Regulation 27(5), and in particular, whether the
      decision to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom complied with
      the principle of proportionality as required by Regulation 27(5)(a) of
      the 2016 Regulations.


   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lloyd and was allowed for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 18th November 2019.


The appeal before me


   6. The respondent claims Judge Lloyd failed to direct himself correctly
      as to the law, failed to have regard to material matters and failed to
      provide adequate reasons for his decision. The respondent claims that
      in reaching his decision at paragraph [12], that the appellant's
      pattern of offending was all over a relatively short period, related
      to the appellant's issues with alcohol and that there was no
      escalation in the seriousness of her offending, Judge Lloyd erred in
      failing to make reference to, or to have regard to the matters set out
      in Paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations 2016.


   7. The respondent claims the appellant did not dispute the immigration
      history referred to by the respondent or the record of her offending.
      The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom in May 2016 and had
      committed 17 offences between 11th  December 2016 and 10th February
      2019, The numerous convictions over a period of 2 years and 3 months
      spanning the majority of her time in the UK, points to a greater
      likelihood that the appellant's continued presence in the United
      Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
      affecting the fundamental interests of society.


   8. The respondent also claims that in considering the risk of
      reoffending, Judge Lloyd failed to have proper regard to the principle
      set out in Regulation 27(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations.  At paragraphs
      [17] to [26] of the respondent's decision, the respondent noted, in
      particular, that the appellant had continued to offend without being
      deterred by previous convictions or sentences, including a custodial
      sentence imposed in August 2017. The respondent had noted in her
      decision that in August 2017, although deportation was not pursued
      against the appellant, she was served with a warning letter on 4th
      September 2017, but she nevertheless went on to commit further
      offences.  The respondent submits that when considering whether the
      conduct of the appellant represents a genuine, present and
      sufficiently serious threat, Judge Lloyd failed to have regard to the
      principle set out in Regulation 27(5)(c), that the threat does not
      need to be imminent, but reached his decision based on the absence of
      an immediate threat at the time of the hearing.


   9. The respondent also claims that in reaching his decision, Judge Lloyd
      failed to have regard to the fundamental interests of society in the
      United Kingdom as set out in paragraphs 7(f), (g), (h) and (j) of
      Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations, which include inter alia,
      combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly in
      relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
      unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27).


  10. The respondent claims that Judge Lloyd considered whether the
      respondent's decision complied with the principle of proportionality,
      but failed to address Regulation 27(6) of the EEA Regulations 2016.
      Finally, the respondent claims Judge Lloyd failed to have regard to
      paragraph 4, of Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.  The respondent
      claims Judge Lloyd failed to have regard to the appellant's length of
      residence in the United Kingdom, her social and cultural integration,
      and the extent of her links with the Czech Republic.  Furthermore,
      Judge Lloyd failed to consider the extent to which any links were
      formed at or around the same time as the commission of a criminal
      offence or when the appellant was in custody.


  11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 7th
      February 2019.


  12. Mr Bates relied upon the grounds of appeal. He submits the appellant's
      offending that spanned the majority of her time in the UK, is relevant
      to the risk of further offending. The assessment of the risk of
      reoffending required the judge to have regard to the appellant's past
      conduct and, as the 2016 Regulations make it clear that the risk need
      not be imminent, to consider the risk going forward.


  13. Mr Bates submits that at paragraph [9] of his decision, Judge Lloyd
      referred to the letter from the appellant's Offender Manager that is
      to be found at page 91 of the appellant's bundle. The letter confirms
      that the appellant is currently assessed as presenting a high risk of
      reoffending and a low risk of serious harm to the public. The judge
      refers to the opinion expressed by the Offender Manager in that letter
      that the threat of deportation has considerably reduced the risk of
      reoffending.  It would appear Judge Lloyd accepted what was said by
      the Offender Manager but neither the Offender Manager nor Judge Lloyd
      say what the risk level is. The offender manager noted that the
      appellant was "currently assessed as presenting a high risk of
      reoffending " and believes that the threat of deportation has
      considerably reduced her risk of reoffending, but does not say whether
      the risk of reoffending is now a 'medium risk' or a 'low risk'.  Mr
      Bates submits Judge Lloyd erred in failing to make a finding as to the
      level of the risk of reoffending. It cannot, Mr Bates submits, be
      assumed that because the threat of deportation has considerably
      reduced the risk of reoffending, the risk of reoffending is now a low
      risk. In any event, although the threat of deportation may have
      considerably reduced the risk of reoffending, it was incumbent upon
      the judge to consider what might happen when there is no threat of
      deportation.  The 2016 Regulations make it clear that the threat does
      not need to be imminent, and Judge Lloyd failed to consider what the
      risk of reoffending would be going forward, in context.  He submits
      the appellant had had numerous opportunities to amend her ways, but
      simply failed to do so even having received a warning previously.


  14. Mr Bates submits Judge Lloyd also failed to have regard to other
      relevant factors, including a previous lengthy period of abstinence.
      The appellant's evidence was that she started to have problems with
      alcohol during 2017. Following a short period of imprisonment in 2017,
      she claims she worked hard with her probation officer to address her
      drinking. On her own case, she acknowledges that following a
      relatively lengthy period of abstinence, in February 2019 she had a
      relapse and following an argument, started drinking again, leading to
      further offending.


  15. As to the assessment of proportionality, Mr Bates refers to the Child
      Arrangement Order made on 28th March 2019.  The Conference and Outline
      Plan produced in respect of the children confirm that the local
      authority was concerned about the appellant's alcohol consumption
      whilst looking after her children and how that was affecting their
      emotional well-being. The order made by the Family Court on 28th March
      2019 contains 'Warning Notices' that warn the appellant that it is a
      criminal offence to take the children out of the UK without the
      consent of everybody with parental responsibility unless the court has
      given permission. The warning continues; "However, if an order has
      been made that a child is to live with a person, that person may take
      that child out of the UK for up to a month at a time".  There is, Mr
      Bates submits, nothing preventing the children living in the Czech
      Republic with the appellant and her mother providing the appellant's
      mother consents.  Mr Bates submits that at paragraph [15] of his
      decision, Judge Lloyd appears to proceed upon the erroneous premise
      that an offence may be committed if the children were to be removed
      from the UK without leave of the court.


  16. Mr Bates submits Judge Lloyd did not make a comprehensive assessment
      of proportionality and the reasons given by the judge are inadequate.
      At paragraph [16], the judge declined to make findings in respect of
      the conditions that the appellant would find herself in if removed.
      In fact, he submits, the appellant's length of residence in the UK,
      social and cultural integration in the United Kingdom and the extent
      of her links with the Czech Republic are relevant under Regulation
      27(6) to a decision on the grounds of public policy and public
      security, and also the assessment of proportionality. The judge should
      therefore have addressed those matters.  Mr Bates submits there is no
      balancing exercise undertaken by the judge when he considered whether
      the decision complies with the principle of proportionality. The
      assessment is entirely one-sided, with a focus upon the findings made
      in favour of the appellant but without any regard to matters that
      weigh against the appellant and relevant to the public interest.


  17. In rely, Ms Bachu relied upon the Rule 24 reply dated 18th March 2020.
       She submits the grounds of appeal amount to no more than a
      disagreement with the Judge's assessment of the evidence. The judge
      had the benefit of hearing from the appellant and several members of
      her family, and carefully considered all the evidence before him in
      reaching his decision.


  18. Ms Bachu submits the respondent has not challenged the findings made
      by Judge Lloyd that the escalation of sentencing and the deportation
      proceedings, with the associated risk that she might end up separated
      from her children, have had a profound effect on the appellant's
      behaviour. She submits reaching that in reaching his decision, Judge
      Lloyd was aware that the basic level of protection applied in this
      appeal, and he had the appellant's history of offending at the
      forefront of his mind when assessing the risk of reoffending.  Ms
      Bachu submits Judge Lloyd considered all the evidence before the
      Tribunal, including the evidence from the Offender Manager and the
      expert, Dr Galappathie.  The evidence of the experts was reinforced by
      the oral evidence of the appellant that was accepted by Judge Lloyd.
      Ms Bachu  submits that in any event, it was open to Judge Lloyd,
      having carefully considered the order made by the Family Court, the
      current arrangements for the care of the children and in particular,
      the significant daily contact enjoyed by the appellant with her
      children, to conclude that the decision does not comply with the
      principle of proportionality.


  19. Before me, Ms Bachu submits that paragraphs [9], [10] and [11] of the
      decision, read together, demonstrate that Judge Lloyd had careful
      regard to the principles set out in Regulation 27(5) of the 2016
      Regulations.  Judge Lloyd refers to the evidence before the Tribunal
      of 'significant changes' to her life from which the appellant has
      developed a strong motivation to remain abstinent from alcohol, and
      with the ongoing support of family, she has maintained abstinence from
      alcohol and avoided a return to offending behaviour. The oral evidence
      of the appellant reinforced that picture. Judge Lloyd noted there was
      no evidence of any further offending, or alcohol related behaviour
      since the appellant's release.


  20. Ms Bachu submits that it was not just the prospect of deportation that
      had caused the appellant to make significant changes, but the
      consequences and impact that deportation would have upon her
      relationship with her children that had had a profound effect on the
      appellant and brought home to her the effect of her offending
      behaviour.  Ms Bachu submits the risk of reoffending must be
      considered in the round and Judge Lloyd noted in his decision that the
      Offender Manager had confirmed that the appellant had engaged well
      with her key worker on a programme which addressed her alcohol issues.




  21. Ms Bachu submits Judge Lloyd accepted, at paragraph [15], that the
      children are the subject of an order made by the Family Court and it
      is clearly in the children's best interests to remain in the UK.  It
      was open to Judge Lloyd to conclude that the separation of the
      children from their mother would, in all the circumstances, be
      entirely disproportionate.


  22. As for Regulation 27(6) and paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 of the 2016
      Regulations, Ms Bachu submits the appellant obviously has long-
      standing links with her family and children.  Although the appellant's
      links to the UK were established during a short period, the appellant
      had explained her offending behaviour and there was evidence of the
      change in the appellant's circumstances.  Ms Bachu submits that
      although Paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations states that
      'little weight' is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
      national within the United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links
      were formed at or around the same time as the commission of a criminal
      offence, that is not to say 'no weight' should be attached to the
      integration.


Discussion


  23. It is convenient to set out, at the outset, the relevant Regulations
      that form the backdrop to the decision.  Regulation 27 of the 2016
      Regulations, insofar as it is relevant states:


         1) In This regulation, a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
            taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
            health.

         ...

         5) The public policy and public security requirements of the United
         Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by these
         Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
         proportionality;

             (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c) the personal conduct of the person must represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking into account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need
             to be imminent;

             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify
             the decision;

             (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision;

             (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
             the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
         resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

  24. It is also convenient to set out Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations
      insofar as it is relevant to this appeal.


         Considerations of public policy and public security


         1.  The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or public security values: member States enjoy considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by the EU Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to define their own
         standards of public policy and public security, for purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.


         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom


         2.  An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
         nationality or language does not amount to integration in the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a person may be regarded as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.


         3.  Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.


         4.  Little weight is to be attached to the integration of an EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at or around
         the same time as-


             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;


             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental interests of
         society;


             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was
         in custody.


         5.  The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of not demonstrating a threat (for example, through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.


         ...


         The fundamental interests of society


         7.  For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-


             ...


             (f)excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused,
             public offence) and maintaining public confidence in the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;


             (g)tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
             immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but
             where there is wider societal harm (such as offences related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
             of the European Union);


             (h)combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly
             in relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may
             otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation
             27);


             ...


  25. It is common ground between the parties that the appellant has not
      acquired permanent residence and is only entitled to the basic level
      of protection set out in Regulation 23(5) and Regulation 27(1) of the
      2016 Regulations.  Nevertheless, as set out in Regulation 27(5)(c),
      the appellant cannot be deported unless her personal conduct
      represents "a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
      affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, taking into
      account her past conduct.  The threat does not need to be imminent."
      Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 confirms that the EU Treaties do not impose
      a uniform scale of public policy or public security values and member
      States enjoy considerable discretion, acting within the parameters set
      by the EU Treaties to define their own standards of public policy and
      public security, for purposes tailored to their individual contexts,
      from time to time.  The application of paragraph 1 to the United
      Kingdom is informed by what follows at paragraphs 2 to 6 of Schedule
      1.


  26. The failure to refer to Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations 2016 is not
      in itself fatal to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal provided
      that it is clear that Judge Lloyd applied the correct test.  A party
      appearing before a Tribunal is entitled to know, either expressly
      stated by it or inferentially stated, what it is to which the Tribunal
      is addressing its mind and the basis of fact on which the conclusion
      has been reached.


  27. A finding as to whether the conduct of the appellant represents a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat is a prerequisite for
      the adoption of an expulsion measure and it is only upon such a threat
      being established, that the issue of proportionality arises.  Here, at
      paragraphs [9] and [10] of his decision, Judge Lloyd referred to the
      letter from the appellant's Offender Manager and the two psychiatric
      reports that were before the Tribunal.  At paragraphs [11] to [13],
      Judge Lloyd said:


         "11. The oral evidence before me only reinforced this picture.
         There was no evidence of any further offending, or alcohol-related
         behaviour since release, and I accept what Ms Bachu puts to me,
         that the escalation of sentencing and deportation proceedings with
         the associated risk that she might end up separated from her
         children, have had a profound effect on her behaviour. I was also
         told about her immigration bail conditions which included residence
         and regular reporting, all of which, in the absence of any evidence
         to the contrary, she appears to have complied with.


         12.  I also accepted Ms Bachu's submission that the pattern of
         offending was all over a relatively short period, was related to
         the appellant's issues with alcohol, and that there was no
         escalation in seriousness. These were, relatively speaking "low
         level" offences.


         13.  On those findings, I concluded that the threshold of a present
         and serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society
         is not, at the time of the hearing, made out, and on that basis
         alone I would allow the appeal."


  28. In reaching his decision, Judge Lloyd appears to have taken into
      account a number of factors, including the absence of any reoffending,
      the appellant's engagement with her key worker on a programme which
      addressed alcohol issues, abstinence from alcohol use, compliance with
      bail conditions, the threat of deportation, and the risk of separation
      from her children, all of which he considered to have had a profound
      effect on her behaviour.    In my judgement, in reaching his decision
      the judge had regard to a number of factors that weigh in favour of
      the appellant and the judge was undoubtedly entitled to have those
      factors in mind.


  29. However, Judge Lloyd was required to have regard to the principles set
      out in Regulation 27(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations.  He concluded that
      the threshold of a present and serious threat to one of the
      fundamental interests of society is not, at the time of the hearing,
      made out. He plainly had regard to the past conduct of the appellant,
      but in my judgement, failed to consider the principle that the threat
      does not need to be imminent.


  30. I accept the submission made by Mr Bates that in reaching his
      decision, Judge Lloyd referred to the opinion expressed by the
      Offender Manager that the threat of deportation has considerably
      reduced the appellant's risk of reoffending, but Judge Lloyd does not
      reach a clear finding as to the level of the risk, and fails to have
      regard to what might happen in the absence of the threat of
      deportation.


  31. I have carefully considered what was said by Judge Lloyd at paragraphs
      [9] and [10] of his decision and although he refers to the evidence of
      the experts, I accept that he does not make a finding as to the level
      of the risk of reoffending.  I cannot accept, as Ms Bachu invites me
      to, that taking those paragraphs together, Judge Lloyd clearly
      proceeds on the premise that the appellant presents a low risk of
      reoffending.  The Offender Manager acknowledged that the appellant is
      "currently assessed as presenting a high risk of reoffending and a low
      risk of serious harm to the public", and although he believes that the
      threat of deportation has considerably reduced the risk of
      reoffending, he did not express any view as to whether the risk of
      reoffending had been reduced to a "low" or "medium" risk.  Dr
      Galappathie is a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, and stated at
      paragraph [110] of her report:


         "In my opinion it is notable that she has not committed further
         offences following release from Yarl's Wood IRC and that she has
         remained abstinence from alcohol during this time. In my opinion it
         is likely that her prison sentence and experience of having a
         deportation order placed against her and being detained at the IRC
         has effectively made her take stock of her situation and develop
         the motivation required to remain abstinent from alcohol with the
         ongoing support from her family. In my opinion, it is not possible
         for me to know whether her account of committing past offences of
         theft due to lack of care due to being intoxicated is accurate or
         not, however in my opinion it is very clear that her past offences
         are directly linked to alcohol misuse, in that when she has drunk
         alcohol to excess, she has become chaotic in her lifestyle and
         vulnerable to impulsive low-level offending behaviour such as
         theft. Now that she has achieved and maintained abstinence from
         alcohol, she is no longer vulnerable to such offending behaviour
         and has no underlying dissocial or pro-offending attitudes."


  32. At paragraph [114] of the report, Dr Galappathie expresses the opinion
      that the appellant is not at risk of reoffending. That assessment is
      said to be based upon a clinical interview with the appellant, a
      mental state examination and review of her case papers.  Insofar as Dr
      Galappathie appears to express the opinion that there is no risk of
      reoffending at all, that is plainly at odds with the evidence of the
      Offender Manager who noted the appellant is currently assessed as
      presenting as a high risk of reoffending, although the threat of
      deportation has considerably reduced the risk of reoffending.  Both Dr
      Galappathie and the Offender Manager refer to the threat of
      deportation as being a factor relevant to the risk of reoffending, but
      neither express any opinion as to the risk if the appellant were not
      under the threat of deportation.


  33. As Mr Bates submits, the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in
      May 2016 and had committed 17 offences between 11th December 2016 and
      10th February 2019.  She had therefore been in the United Kingdom for
      approximately seven months before she began offending.  She was then
      convicted of 17 offences over the following 2 years and 3 months,
      spanning the majority of her time in the UK.  She had received a short
      sentence of imprisonment in August 2017 and a warning letter on 4th
      September 2017, but that was to no effect.   The appellant's evidence
      in her witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal was that she
      started to have problems with alcohol during 2017. Following a short
      period of imprisonment in 2017, she claims she worked hard with her
      probation officer to address her drinking. On her own case, she
      acknowledges that following a relatively lengthy period of abstinence,
      in February 2019 she had a relapse and following an argument, started
      drinking again, leading to further offending.


  34. Although the appellant had engaged well during supervision sessions
      following her release from prison and had abstained from alcohol use,
      this is not a case where there had been a prolonged period of
      industrious good behaviour showing that the appellant's offending can
      be considered in isolation when considering the fundamental interests
      of society, one of which is to combat the effects of persistent
      offending (particularly in relation to offences, which if taken in
      isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of
      regulation 27); Paragraph 7(h) of Schedule 1.


  35. There is no reference at all by Judge to the 'fundamental interests of
      society' expressed in Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.  In the end,
      I cannot be satisfied that Judge Lloyd would have reached the same
      conclusion, if he had properly made a finding as to the level of the
      risk of reoffending, and properly directed himself that the threat
      does not need to be imminent.  Similarly, I cannot be satisfied that
      he would have reached the same conclusion if the matters set out in
      Schedule 1 had been taken into account, and Judge Lloyd had factored
      in, that one of the fundamental interests of society is combating the
      effects of persistent offending, particularly in relation to offences,
      which have taken in isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the
      requirements of Regulation 27.


  36. I should also add that Regulation 27(6) required Judge Lloyd to take
      account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family and
      economic situation of the appellant, the appellant's length of
      residence in the United Kingdom, her social and cultural integration
      into the United Kingdom and the extent of the appellant's links with
      her country of origin.   It appears from what is said by Judge Lloyd
      at paragraph [16] of his decision that he declined to make detailed
      findings as to the conditions that the appellant would find herself
      in, if removed to the Czech Republic because of his finding set out in
      paragraph [15] that there would be a clear and disproportionate
      interference with family life in removing the appellant from the UK.


  37. In my judgement, the conclusion reached by Judge Lloyd at paragraph
      [13] of his decision that the threshold for finding that the conduct
      of the appellant must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
      serious threat to one of the fundamental interests of society is not
      made out, is vitiated by an error of law and must be set aside.


  38. Although it is only upon such a threat being established that the
      issue of proportionality arises, in any event, at paragraphs [14] and
      [15] of his decision, Judge Lloyd considered whether the decision to
      restrict the rights otherwise conferred by the 2016 Regulations in
      order to protect the fundamental interests of society, complied with
      the principle of proportionality as required by Regulation 27(5)(a) of
      the 2016 Regulations.  He said:


         "14. ... I would then need to consider the proportionality of the
         decision. At the hearing, Mr Cordon focused his cross-examination
         of the appellant and her family members on whether they would
         continue to remain in contact with her, and visit her in the CR.
         Whilst there seem to be some doubt on this from the appellant, the
         other family members were adamant that they would continue to
         support the appellant and I accept that. It was on this basis that
         Mr Cordon built his argument that the decision was proportionate.


         15.  I have before me (with leave from HHDJ Hughes) documents
         relating to child proceedings in the Wolverhampton Family Court. On
         28/03/2019, the court ordered that the appellant's children should
         reside with their grandmother (the appellant's mother). In light of
         that order, an offence may be committed if the children were to be
         removed from the UK without the leave of the court, however, that
         order does not prevent the appellant having any contact with her
         children. In oral evidence I heard that the appellant has all-day
         contact with her children every day. Whilst she does not stay with
         them overnight at their grandmother's home due to the residence
         requirements of her bail conditions, she is with them during all
         their waking hours. She takes a full part in their upbringing,
         taking them to school and attending to their needs. I accepted all
         of that evidence and find that she continues to have a genuine and
         ongoing parental relationship with them. I also have letters from
         the children and the psychological report from Susan Pagella [AB
         51] which is supportive of the strong relationship between her and
         her children, and the potential for psychological damage to the
         children if their mother was to be removed from the UK. As the
         children cannot currently be removed from the UK to go with their
         mother if deported, I find there is a clear and disproportionate
         interference with family life in removing the appellant from the UK
         in the current circumstances."


  39. I have therefore considered whether the error of law was material to
      the outcome of the appeal.  The focus as to whether the decision
      complied with the principle of proportionality was upon the
      appellant's relationship with her two young children and the
      arrangements that are in place for their care.


  40. The appellant had obtained the leave of the Family Court to disclose
      the Child Arrangement Order made on 28th March 2019.  Mr Bates submits
      that at paragraph [15] of his decision, Judge Lloyd appears to proceed
      upon the erroneous premise that an offence may be committed if the
      children were to be removed from the UK without leave of the court.
      There is, Mr Bates submits, nothing preventing the children living in
      the Czech Republic with the appellant and her mother, providing the
      appellant's mother consents.  Ms Bachu accepts that it may in
      principle, be possible for the children to live in the Czech Republic
      with the appellant and her mother (their maternal grandmother), but on
      any view, that cannot be in the best interests of the children and it
      would mean that the appellant's mother would have to forego the close
      relationships that she has with other members of her family, all of
      whom are settled in the UK


  41. The Child Arrangement Order made under s8 Children Act 1989 regulates
      the arrangements as to where the children are to live, and orders that
      the children are to live with their maternal grandmother.  The
      maternal grandmother has therefore acquired parental responsibility
      for the children by operation of s12(2) Children Act 1989, while the
      order remains in place.  s13 Children Act 1989 prevents the removal of
      the children from the United Kingdom without the written consent of
      every person who has parental responsibility for the children or the
      leave of the court.   I accept the submission made by Mr Bates that
      Judge Lloyd erroneously proceeds upon the premise that the children
      cannot currently be removed from the UK to go with their mother, if
      she is deported.  The appellant will require the written consent of
      every person who has parental responsibility for the child, which
      here, includes the written consent of the appellant's mother.  The
      focus of the evidence appears to have been upon whether the appellant
      would remain in contact with members of her family, and whether they
      would visit her in the Czech Republic.  At paragraph [14] his
      decision, Judge Lloyd preferred the evidence from other family members
      who were adamant that they would continue to support the appellant.
      Judge Lloyd did not consider whether the consent of the appellant's
      mother to removal of the children from the United Kingdom would be
      forthcoming, and the impact on the appellant's mother and her
      relationships with other members of her family settled in the UK.


  42. In my judgement, the decision of Judge Lloyd as to whether the
      decision complies with the principle of proportionality fails to take
      into account relevant factors and Judge Lloyd failed to carry out the
      broad evaluative exercise required, taking into account matters that
      weigh in favour of the appellant, balanced against the relevant public
      interest and the fundamental interests of society which include
      combating the effects of persistent offending, particularly in
      relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
      unlikely to meet the requirements of Regulation 27 of the 2016
      Regulations.


  43. It follows that in my judgement, the decision of Judge Lloyd is
      infected by material errors of law and the appropriate course is for
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd to be set aside.  As
      to disposal, in my judgment the appropriate course is for the matter
      to be remitted to the FtT for hearing de novo with no findings
      preserved.  I have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal
      back to the First-tier Tribunal, having considered paragraph 7.2 of
      the Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In
      my view, in determining the appeal, the nature and extent of any
      judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  44. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  45. The appeal is allowed, and the decision of FtT Judge Lloyd promulgated
      on 18th November 2019 is set aside.


  46. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.






      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   29th December 2020




