

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00360/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 4 July 2019                             |On 11 September 2019          |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

            Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              GADEIKIS VYGANTAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr B Criggie, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Lithuania, was convicted at Dundee  Sheriff
    Court on 30 June 2017 of offences of assault and  attempted  abduction,
    committed on 3 October 2015.  He was sentenced to two imprisonment  for
    two years, including a one-year supervision order.

 2. On 15 May 2018 the SSHD decided to make a deportation order  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.   The  appellant  had  a  permanent
    right of residence.  The key consideration  was  whether  the  personal
    conduct  of  the  appellant  represented  "a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, taking into account past conduct of the person concerned of
    the person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be  imminent"  -
    regulation 27(5)(c).

 3. FtT  Judge  Blair  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 December 2018.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the UT found mainly on the assessment  by  the
    criminal justice social worker and supervising officer,  prior  to  the
    appellant's release, that he presented  a  low  likelihood  of  further
    offending.  It is also pointed out that he had not re-offended while on
    bail for almost two years, or in the 5 months from release to the  date
    of the FtT hearing, and that the judge erred in thinking  that  he  was
    subject to a MAPPA level 1 arrangement (multi agency public  protection
    arrangements to manage  sexual  and  violent  offenders)  when  he  was
    subject only to the supervised release order for the second year of his
    sentence (which is standard).

 5. The judge granting permission drew attention to Oyston v  Parole  Board
    [2000] EWCA Crim 3552.  The Lord Chief Justice said this:

      Convicted prisoners who persistently deny commission of the offence or
      offences of which they have been convicted present  the  Parole  Board
      with  potentially  very  difficult  decisions.  Such  prisoners   will
      probably not express contrition or remorse or sympathy for any victim.
      They will probably not engage in programmes designed  to  address  the
      causes of their offending behaviour. Since they do  not  admit  having
      offended they will only undertake not to do in the future what they do
      not accept having done in the past. Where there  is  no  admission  of
      guilt, it may be feared that a prisoner will lack  any  motivation  to
      obey the law in future. Even in such cases, however, the task  of  the
      Parole Board is the same as in any other case: to assess the risk that
      the particular prisoner if released on parole, will offend  again.  In
      making this assessment the Parole Board must assume the correctness of
      any conviction. It can give no credence to the prisoner's denial. Such
      denial will always be a factor and may be a very significant factor in
      the Board's assessment of risk, but it will only  be  one  factor  and
      must be considered in the light of  all  other  relevant  factors.  In
      almost any case the Board would be quite wrong to treat the prisoner's
      denial as irrelevant, but also  quite  wrong  to  treat  a  prisoner's
      denial as necessarily conclusive against the grant of parole.

 6. That was not in the same context, and was of course  an  English  case,
    but Mr Govan accepted that denial of guilt did not  automatically  lead
    to a finding of ongoing risk.  He said it did go into the  balance,  as
    showing lack of awareness, or of willingness to take responsibility.

 7. Mr Govan  accepted  that  the  FtT  erred  in  thinking  that  a  MAPPA
    arrangement applied.

 8. Mr Govan submitted that the FtT made no  material  error,  such  as  to
    require its decision to be set aside.

 9. We can  see  why  the  FtT  judge  was  concerned  by  the  appellant's
    insistence on his innocence, as was the sentencing  Sheriff.   However,
    the judge gave significance to the imposition of a  supervision  order,
    when that is only a standard requirement  of  release  at  the  halfway
    point of a sentence, and he wrongly thought that  MAPPA  applied.   The
    FtT was entitled to take a different view from Mr Omond,  the  criminal
    justice social worker  and  supervising  officer,  but  only  for  good
    reasons.  We find that the judge gave no adequate reasons  for  finding
    the assessment by Mr Omond to be illogical and  ill-founded.   The  FtT
    essentially took denial  of  guilt  not  merely  as  relevant,  but  as
    conclusive.  We therefore set aside its decision.

10. The most recent information from  Mr  Omond,  dated  31  October  2018,
    applies a systematic approach, taking account of the appellant's denial
    of guilt, and finding that he remains "at  low  likelihood  of  further
    offending and low risk of harm".

11. The evidence does not show that the appellant poses a genuine,  present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.

12. The appeal, as originally brought by  the  appellant  to  the  FtT,  is
    allowed.

13. The FtT made an anonymity direction, but for no apparent reason, so  we
    discharge it, and this determination is not anonymised.

      [pic]

      9 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




