
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/00126/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 November 2017                        |On 20 February 2018            |
|Extempore                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Mr M A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Dirie, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 22 June 2017 whereby it allowed  the
    respondent to this appeal, Mr MAM's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to deport him.  The ground of appeal advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State is effectively  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    denied a fair opportunity to present her case at the hearing before the
    First-tier  Tribunal  in  that  the  judge  effectively  proceeded   to
    determine the case without having heard  evidence  and  without  having
    heard submissions.

 2. The facts of the case, very briefly because it is  unnecessary  to  set
    out too much detail today, the respondent, Mr M A  M,  there  being  an
    anonymity direction, is a citizen of Sierra Leone and he is married  to
    Mrs C V M, who holds joint Dutch and  British  nationality  and  he  is
    therefore a direct family member of an EEA national.   He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State
    on 27 February 2016 to make  a  deportation  order  against  him  under
    Section 5 of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  facts  underlying  the
    decision to  deport  MAM  was  the  respondent's  history  of  criminal
    offending, in particular in relation to  drugs,  and  in  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State for the reasons she there set out  she
    was of the view that grounds to deport MAM under the  Regulations  were
    satisfied.

 3. What happened before the First-tier  Tribunal  is  the  subject  of  an
    agreed witness statement from the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Ms
    Cherreem Lindsay.  Ms Dirie, who appears for the respondent  before  us
    today and who also appeared at the hearing at the Upper  Tribunal,  has
    seen this witness statement  and  confirmed  to  us  that  she  was  in
    agreement with it and that it was accurate and it is necessary  for  me
    to read out the witness statement.  So Ms Lindsay, who is a  Presenting
    Officer within the Home Office, says this:

         "I have been asked to provide information to the Upper Tribunal  in
         respect of the  appeal  hearing  of  Mr  [MAM]  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at Taylor House on 1 June 2017.  I  was  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer who presented  this  appeal  before  Immigration
         Judge Cohen.  Judge Cohen came into the court and  the  parties  to
         the appeal were at the back of court.  The appellant, his wife  and
         mother-in-law   were   present,   along   with   the    appellant's
         representative.   The  parties  mentioned  above  were  not  called
         forward by the judge.  The judge asked me  whether  I  intended  to
         rely upon the Home Office refusal letter (this being  the  decision
         under appeal).  I confirmed that I did  so  intend.   None  of  the
         witnesses adopted their witness statement.  No  oral  evidence  was
         taken from any person in the appeal.  I  was  not  invited  by  the
         judge to  give  any  oral  submissions,  as  would  be  the  normal
         procedure, and I did not give  any  submissions.   The  appellant's
         representative, Ms Dirie, did not give any submissions either.  The
         next thing that happened was that the judge stated that the  appeal
         was allowed.  There was one other appeal on the list that day,  the
         appeal of Mr C.  Mr C's appeal followed much the same pattern.   Mr
         C's representative was  Ms  Asanovic  of  Lamb  Building  Chambers,
         London.  In the second appeal an interpreter was required  but  was
         engaged in another room.  The interpreter did not come  into  Judge
         Cohen's  courtroom  at  any  point.   My  appeal  hearing   minute,
         completed on 2 June 2017, is attached herewith and the Tribunal  is
         respectfully asked to consider it.  I confirm that the contents  of
         both my appeal hearing minutes in the appeals of Mr MAM  and  Mr  C
         respectively were and are an accurate reflection of  what  occurred
         in the hearings and were and are true to the best of  my  knowledge
         and belief.  In the second appeal no oral evidence was  taken  from
         any person.  The judge did ask Ms Asanovic to leave  the  courtroom
         to clarify a point relating to the Immigration Rules, but  again  I
         was not invited to give any submissions and did not give  any.   In
         both appeals I wanted to ask questions of the witnesses and  wanted
         to give  submissions.   For  example,  I  recall  that  there  were
         discrepancies in the written evidence in Mr [MAM]'s appeal which  I
         wanted to cross-examine him on.  By agreeing that I wanted to  rely
         on the refusal letter in Mr [MAM]'s appeal I did not intend to give
         the impression that I would not make any submissions.   With  great
         respect to the learned judge, I feel it  was  neither  correct  nor
         reasonable to take 'relying on the  refusal'  to  mean  that  there
         would be no questions or submission from the Home Office.   I  have
         carefully read Judge Cohen's Record of Proceedings in the  case  of
         Mr [MAM] and would make the following observations.  The judge  did
         discuss what he described as the 'high threshold' required  in  the
         case at the outset of the hearing but this was the  extent  of  any
         discussion of the issues.   The  discussion  was  directed  to  the
         appellant's representative rather than to me.  To the  extent  that
         the judge's Record of Proceedings disagrees with what is set out in
         this statement it is  my  respectful  belief  that  the  Record  of
         Proceedings is wrong",


    and then her minutes that she refers to is in the following terms:


         "Full hearing before Judge M Cohen at Taylor House on 1 June  2017.
         The appellant was legally represented by  Counsel  Ms  B  Asanovic.
         The appellant was in attendance along with  his  wife  Mrs  B.   No
         examination-in-chief or cross-examination was conducted.   An  Urdu
         interpreter was booked for this hearing but when the judge enquired
         it appears the interpreter was in another court.  The  judge  first
         enquired with Ms Asanovic whether  276ADE  in  relation  to  twenty
         years is at date of application or hearing  when  all  the  parties
         from hearing  list  were  present  before  him.   Counsel  was  not
         certain.  Judge then  enquired  with  PO  and  PO  stated  date  of
         application.  Judge asked Ms Asanovic to go away and  check.   When
         Counsel  returned  the  judge  asked  about  EX.1  pertaining   the
         appellant's wife's British child H  C.   Counsel  stated  that  the
         appellant's  wife  and  her  other  son   H   have   been   granted
         discretionary leave in the UK because of her parental  relationship
         with the child.  Counsel went on today  [sic]  that  the  appellant
         does not meet the Rules and that it would be Article 8 outside  the
         Rules.  The judge simply stated without any oral evidence from  the
         appellant he is allowing the appeal."

 4. The record of the judge to which reference has  been  made  is  in  the
    following terms.  This is the judge's observations, 28 September:

         "The issues were agreed to be narrow.  In the light of my  thoughts
         on the case, it was agreed with the parties that we  would  proceed
         on the basis that the witness statements would be adopted into  the
         record, I would hear brief submissions and Ms  Lindsay  was  merely
         relying upon the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  My note  on  the  ROP
         was intended to indicate that it has been agreed that  the  witness
         statements were adopted without the necessity of the appellant  and
         his wife giving evidence.  From the grounds of  appeal  it  appears
         they may have been a misapprehension in respect of  the  manner  in
         which we were proceeding."

 5. In granting permission to appeal the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    said this:

         "It is submitted that in paragraphs 13 to 15 of  the  Decision  and
         Reasons that the judge heard written and  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant, his sponsor and his sponsor's mother before paragraph 16
         which refers to the Presenting Officer relying  in  submissions  on
         the  refusal  letter  only.   It  is  further  submitted  that  the
         Presenting Officer's Record  of  Proceedings  shows  that  no  oral
         evidence was taken including evidence-in-chief and  as  such  there
         could be no cross-examination.  The evidence was not tested.  It is
         arguable that there  is  a  procedural  irregularity  and  conflict
         between the Decision  and  Reasons  and  the  Presenting  Officer's
         Record of Proceedings and what weight could be  placed  on  witness
         statements and oral evidence to allow the appeal."

 6. Turning to the Decision and Reasons, it is notable that at paragraph 13
    the judge said this:

         "13. I heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant  in  English.   He
             adopted his witness statements as  part  of  his  evidence-in-
             chief.  He relied on  the  documentary  evidence  and  letters
             submitted in support of this appeal.


         14.  I then heard oral evidence from the sponsor who gave  evidence
             before me in English.  She adopted the witness  statements  as
             part of her  evidence-in-chief.   She  relied  on  documentary
             evidence submitted in support of the appeal.


         15.  Finally, I heard oral evidence from the sponsor's  mother  who
             adopted her statements in support of the appeal.


         16.  I then heard submissions from both parties.  Ms Lindsay merely
             relied upon the Reasons for Refusal Letter."

Analysis

 7. It is apparent to us that something went  seriously  wrong  before  the
    judge as to how this hearing was to be conducted.   We  are  unable  to
    reconcile what the judge said in his reasons for his decision with  the
    agreed evidence between both sides as to what happened at the  hearing.
    We acknowledge that proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal  have  a
    degree of flexibility about them in the way in which  evidence  can  be
    presented but nonetheless there does have to be,  it  seems  to  us,  a
    degree of formality and that where written evidence is  to  be  adopted
    and relied upon then there has to be a formal process by which that  is
    gone through so that it is clear that it is the witness statement which
    is the oral evidence and an opportunity has to be given  for  whichever
    party it is to say "I do not wish to cross-examine because I accept the
    truth of the witness statement" or for that party to  say  "I  wish  to
    cross-examine", and in all cases parties  have  to  be  given  suitable
    opportunities at the relevant times to make submissions on  the  merits
    of their case and the demerits as they see them of the opposing party's
    case.  In other words, there has to be a formal process.

 8. It seems to us on the basis of the agreed evidence, which  is  what  we
    have to proceed on, that this hearing miscarried in the sense that, for
    reasons we  are  unable  to  define,  the  judge  simply  proceeded  to
    determine the case on the basis of the  papers  even  though  the  Home
    Office representative  wanted  to  cross-examine  and  wanted  to  make
    submissions.  It is unclear to us why the Presenting  Officer  did  not
    make clear  before  the  First-tier  Judge  that  she  wanted  to  make
    submissions and that she wanted to  cross-examine.   The  role  of  any
    advocate before a court is to represent their party's position  and  if
    they see that a judge may be going wrong or has gone wrong  their  duty
    there and then is to  correct  matters  rather  than  waiting  for  the
    hearing to conclude and then mount an appeal to this Tribunal or to  an
    Appellate Court with all the resource implications that that  has  when
    the matter could be dealt with there  and  then  and  we  do  not  know
    because Ms Lindsay in her witness statement does not  explain  why  she
    did not say to the judge "I am sorry judge,  there  is  obviously  some
    misunderstanding.  I do want to cross-examine.  I accept  the  evidence
    is to be adopted but I do wish to cross-examine", and why she  did  not
    say "I do wish to make  submissions,  not  just  rely  on  the  refusal
    letter".

 9. It is with very considerable regret that we have come to the conclusion
    that we have to remit this matter for a new hearing before a  different
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   It  seems  to  us   that   the   judge's
    determination  cannot  stand.   He  made  his  determination  declaring
    himself to have heard submissions which he did not hear, accepting  the
    agreed evidence that is before us and he  said  he  made  his  decision
    having heard oral evidence which he did not have,  even  allowing  oral
    evidence, even giving oral evidence  the  meaning  of  somebody  simply
    adopting the witness statement, that simply did not happen.

10. For those reasons it seems to us  that  there  was  a  fatal  error  in
    procedure.  There was a fatal error in how the hearing  ought  to  have
    been conducted such that we must  remit  the  matter  for  a  rehearing
    before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. We considered whether we ought to remake the decision ourselves and  it
    seems to us this is not the sort of case in which we can do that.   The
    relevant guidance indicates that where there  has  been  a  fundamental
    failure in fairness in that the parties did not have the opportunity to
    present their case then it is not  appropriate  for  this  Tribunal  to
    remake a decision for itself although this Tribunal does try to do that
    where it can but this is not a  case,  for  the  reasons  that  I  have
    explained, where we can do that.

12. We therefore allow the appeal and we quash the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  allowing  the  respondent's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport him  and  the  matter  will  be
    reheard before a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues.

14. The appeal must not be before FtTJ Cohen

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 16 February 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

