

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      DA/00838/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 5 August  2013                         |On 6 August 2013         |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                     Mr Larry Uwaila Osayowen Lorracher
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr O Oshurinade, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:            Mr C Avery,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer


Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         This appeal comes before me following the grant  of permission
      to the Secretary of  State,  whom  I  continue  to  refer  to  as  the
      respondent in this determination. No anonymity order  was  granted  to
      the appellant by the First-tier Tribunal and none was requested of the
      Upper Tribunal.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Germany where he was  born  on  27
      February 1993. His parents who also have  German  citizenship  are  of
      Nigerian origin.  He came here in April 2002 and obtained a five  year
      residence permit as the dependant of his mother however an application
      for permanent residence was refused on  29  August  2007  because  his
      mother had not provided evidence that  she  had  been  exercising  her
      treaty rights in the UK. On 6 November 2007 a registration certificate
      was issued.

   3.       On 4 April 2012 the appellant was convicted  at  Woolwich  Crown
      Court of five counts of robbery and two counts of  attempted  robbery.
      The offences were committed during a period of one week  and  a  knife
      was used each  time.  He  was  sentenced  to  two  years  in  a  young
      offender's institution. There was no appeal against the conviction  or
      sentence which he completed on 19 November 2012. He was then  detained
      under immigration powers, was granted bail by the First-tier  Tribunal
      on 31 December 2012 but was re-detained in  February  2013  due  to  a
      breach of his conditions  with  regard  to  accommodation.  He  has  a
      previous conviction for sexual assault on a 13 year old child when  he
      was 11.

   4.       On 8 October 2012 the Secretary  of  State  decided  to  make  a
      deportation order. She was not satisfied that the appellant had  shown
      residence for a continuous period of five or ten years  in  accordance
      with the Regulations and considered that the appellant may be deported
      on grounds of public policy or  public  security.   Having  considered
      Regulation 21(5) and the NOMS1 report, the Secretary  of  State  noted
      that  the  appellant  posed  a  high  risk  of  harm  to  the   public
      particularly lone females and considered that it was not reasonable to
      leave the public vulnerable  to  the  effects  of  his  potential  re-
      offending. She considered that  the  factors  noted  by  his  offender
      manager - bad associates, residential address,  poor  problem  solving
      and consequential thinking - continued to be an area  of  concern  and
      increased his potential for  future  harm.  She  considered  that  the
      appellant had  not  sought  to  address  his  offending  behaviour  by
      attending programmes like  victim  awareness  and  concluded  that  he
      represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the
      public to justify his deportation.

   5.       The Secretary of State also considered Article 8, noted that  he
      had parents and three siblings in the UK but had failed to provide any
      evidence of dependency on them. She noted that he had spent the  first
      ten years of his life in Germany where he would be able to study if he
      wished to or find employment. It was also considered that  his  family
      could relocate or visit him there.

   6.       The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese
      and a non legal member at Kingston Crown Court on 2 May 2013. No  oral
      evidence was called and after hearing  submissions,  the  judge  found
      that the appellant did not have any social or cultural ties in Germany
      because his family was in the UK. It also relied on the remarks of the
      sentencing judge to  the  effect  that  the  appellant  would  in  all
      likelihood stay out of trouble  in  the  future.  It  found  that  the
      appellant had been of previous good character  and  that  the  reports
      complied during his time in prison showed he was committed to  change.
      Accordingly, the Tribunal allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   7.       The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was  granted
      by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 20 June 2013.

Error of law Hearing

   8.          At the hearing on 5 August I heard submissions from  Mr Avery
      and Mr Oshurinade. Mr Avery submitted that the decision had been taken
      under the EEA Regulations as the appellant was a German  national  but
      that the appeal had been allowed under the Immigration  Rules  without
      any finding having been made under the Regulations. He argued that was
      a fundamental flaw in  the  determination.  Secondly,  the  presenting
      officer had not conceded that the  appellant  had  no  ties  with  his
      country of origin and that links to the UK and  the  position  of  his
      family had not been properly reasoned. The entire determination needed
      to be set aside and the matter remitted for rehearing.

   9.       In response, Mr Oshurinade submitted there had been no error  of
      law. The judge applied paragraph 399 and found that the appellant  met
      the requirements. Whilst there should have been a  finding  under  the
      Regulations, its absence was not material if  the  appellant  met  the
      requirements of the rules which  applied  to  everyone.  He  had  been
      living here over 10 years and  a  concession  had  been  made  by  the
      presenting officer at the last hearing. His parents (who appear to  be
      separated) and siblings were also in the UK.

  10.       Mr Avery replied. He stated that whilst  paragraph  399  may  be
      considered in terms of Article 8, it did not  directly  apply  to  the
      appellant who was an EEA national. The decision was  accordingly  made
      under the Regulations and there were no findings in that respect.  The
      determination was deficient. The claim that he had  been  living  here
      for ten years in accordance with the Regulations was not made  out  as
      there was reference ion the evidence to the appellant having been back
      to Nigeria after his 2005 conviction. He  submitted  no  part  of  the
      determination could be salvaged and the issues had not been addressed.



  11.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

  12.        Despite Mr Oshurinade's submissions, I agree with Mr Avery that
      this determination is wholly deficient. It fails entirely to deal with
      the issue of deportation  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  Tribunal
      allowed the appeal under paragraph 399 of the rules and failed to make
      any findings at  all  under  Regulation  21.  That  flaw  renders  the
      determination unsustainable.

  13.       It was submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  lack  of
      findings under the Regulations was immaterial once the Tribunal  found
      that  paragraph  399  applied.  Paragraph  399  has  to  be  read   in
      conjunction with paragraph 398. They state:

      398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
      the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
      and
      (a) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
      public good because they have been convicted of an offence  for  which
      they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  4
      years;
      (b) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
      public good because they have been convicted of an offence  for  which
      they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  less  than  4
      years but at least 12 months; or
      (c) the deportation of the person from the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
      public good because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
      offending has caused serious harm or they are  a  persistent  offender
      who shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
      in assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph  399  or  399A
      applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
      circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   be
      outweighed by other factors.


      399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies  if
-
      (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
      a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case
           (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
      UK; and
           (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for  the
      child in the UK; or
      (b) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the  UK,
      or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
           (i) the person has lived in the UK with valid leave continuously
           for at least the 15 years immediately preceding the date of  the
           immigration decision (discounting any period  of  imprisonment);
           and
           (ii) there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that
           partner continuing outside the UK.

      399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies  if
-
      (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20  years
      immediately  preceding  the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no ties (including
      social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to
      go if required to leave the UK; or
      (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least  half  of
      his life living continuously in the UK immediately preceding the  date
      of the immigration decision (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)
      and he has no ties (including social, cultural or
      family) with the country to which he would have to go if  required  to
leave the UK.


      399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave may be granted
      for a period not exceeding  30  months.  Such  leave  shall  be  given
      subject  to  such  conditions  as  the  Secretary   of   State   deems
      appropriate.

  14.       There has been no decision to deport the appellant under section
      3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971,  that  is  to  say,  on  grounds
      conducive to the public good. Paragraph 398 makes it plain that it  is
      only where there are such grounds and where one of the other scenarios
      in sub sections (a)-(c) applies, that paragraph 399 comes  into  play.
      Quite how the judge came to  allow  the  appeal  under  paragraph  399
      grounds is wholly unclear and Mr Oshurinade is wrong to maintain  that
      paragraph 399 applies to "everyone".  Further, it is plain that in any
      event the appellant does  not  meet  either  of  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 399 in that he has no child in the UK and no partner. It may
      be that the Tribunal meant to refer to 399A but that is not  what  the
      determination records at paragraph 9. Even 399A, however, requires the
      decision to have been made under the 1971 Act.

  15.       I also note that despite Mr Oshurinade's misplaced  reliance  on
      paragraph 399 at the hearing, there is no reference to  it  whatsoever
      in the skeleton argument which appears to accord more with Mr  Avery's
      submission of what  the  issues  for  determination  were.  The  legal
      background  is  set  out  and  primary  reliance  is  placed  on   the
      Regulations followed by  paragraph  276ADE(v)  and  (vi)  and  finally
      Article 8.

  16.       In conclusion then, the judge failed to appreciate that this was
      a deportation order made under the EEA Regulations and  that  findings
      had to be made in that context. He also failed to  take  into  account
      the NOMS 1 report  when  making  his  assessment  on  the  appellant's
      conduct, offending and risk to the  public.   When  finding  that  the
      appellant had previously been of good character,  he  failed  to  have
      regard to the fact that the appellant's convictions related  to  seven
      offences carried out over a one week  period  and  that  there  was  a
      previous conviction for sexual assault in 2005.  Full findings of fact
      will be required on the nature of the appellant's ties to the  UK  and
      Germany (given that he  was  at  school  there  until  he  left),  the
      relationships he has here with his relatives, on whether his residence
      here and that of his mother on whom he was a  dependant  has  been  in
      accordance with the Regulations and of course on the risk he poses  to
      the public and whether his deportation is justified on the grounds  of
      public policy.

Decision

  17.       The First-tier  Tribunal  made  errors  of  law.  I  re-make the
      decision and allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and  remit  it
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision  to  be  made  on  all
      issues.

            Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            5 August 2013


