


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00487/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 28 January 2020                     |On 31 January 2020                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                              arnoldas miglinas
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, instructed by TMC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Lithuania,  born  on  22  February  2000.
Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal allowing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
deport him from the United Kingdom, it was found that the Tribunal had  made
errors of law in its decision and the decision was set aside, to the  extent
set out below. Directions were made for the decision to be  re-made  by  the
Upper Tribunal.

Background

The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in November  2010
with his family, at the age of 10 years. On 15 June 2017  he  was  convicted
at Suffolk Juvenile Court of possession of  class  B  drugs,  cannabis,  and
failing to surrender to custody  and  he  was  sentenced  to  a  three-month
referral order and �15 victim surcharge. On 14 July 2017  he  was  convicted
at Ipswich Crown Court of robbery, possession with intent to supply class  A
crack  cocaine,  possession  with  intent  to  supply  class  A  heroin  and
possession of an offensive weapon in a public place. He was sentenced  on  5
September 2017 to an 18-month detention and training order. On  12  December
2017 he was served with a liability for deportation notice and on  19  April
2018 the respondent signed a deportation order against  him.  The  appellant
was initially served with a decision to make a deportation  order  certified
under  regulation  33,  but  following  the  submission   of   documentation
demonstrating five years permanent  residence  in  the  UK,  the  respondent
withdrew the certified decision and on 12  July  2018  served  a  new,  non-
certified, decision to make a deportation order.

In that decision, the respondent accepted that the evidence produced by  the
appellant was sufficient to demonstrate that he had acquired  the  right  to
permanent residence under  the  EEA  Regulations.  However,  the  respondent
considered that his deportation was justified on serious grounds  of  public
policy. The respondent noted that the appellant had been  convicted  on  two
occasions for six offences between 15 June 2017 and  5  September  2017  and
that he continued to pose a risk of  harm  to  the  public.  The  respondent
considered that the appellant posed  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
serious threat to the interests of public policy and that  the  decision  to
deport him was proportionate and in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations
2016. The respondent considered further  that  the  appellant's  deportation
would not breach his Article 8 rights under the ECHR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 4 June 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mayall.
The judge considered an OASys report and the evidence of the  appellant  and
his parents. He found the appellant's mother and father  to  be  honest  and
credible witnesses and accepted their evidence that he had  arrived  in  the
UK with them in 2010, that he had carried out his offences  when  he  was  a
child, that he had been making efforts to find employment since being  given
permission to work, that he no longer associated with  those  with  whom  he
had previously been criminally involved and that he spent most of  his  time
at home with his family. The judge  treated  the  appellant's  own  evidence
with caution, however, because it became  apparent  that  he  had  not  been
truthful to his parents about his drug  use  and  had  been  using  cannabis
since his release, albeit on a relatively small scale  when  offered  it  by
friends. The judge noted that the  appellant's  brother  had  been  deported
from the UK for drugs offences and considered that he would not be  able  to
provide the appellant with support in Lithuania. The judge  considered  that
the prospect of rehabilitation for the appellant was higher in the  UK  than
in Lithuania as he had his family here. On the basis of the continuing  risk
posed by the appellant, the judge was satisfied that  "serious"  grounds  of
public  policy  had  been  made  out.  However,  he  considered   that   the
respondent's   decision   did   not   comply   with   the   principles    of
proportionality.  He  accordingly  allowed  the   appeal   under   the   EEA
Regulations.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that
the deportation  decision  was  disproportionate,  that  he  had  failed  to
include material matters in  his  proportionality  assessment  such  as  the
appellant's parents' lack of knowledge of his drugs use, that he had  failed
to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant's  brother  in
Lithuania was not able to provide him with  any  support  and  that  he  had
failed to undertake an effective proportionality assessment.

Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 25  September
2019.

Following an error of law  hearing  on  27  November  2019,  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision  was  set  aside  in  relation  to  the  proportionality
assessment, as follows:

    "10. The judge's conclusions on proportionality are to be found at [55]
    of his  decision,  whereby  he  simply  states  that  the  respondent's
    decision did not comply with the principle of proportionality.  It  was
    Ms Allen's submission that the judge had clearly taken account  of  all
    relevant factors and that  his  conclusion  at  [55]  had  to  be  read
    together with  [35]  to  [52]  where  he  assessed  the  evidence.  She
    submitted that the judge had taken  account  of  the  appellant's  age,
    family, economic situation, integration in the UK and his links to  his
    country of origin. However, we do not agree. The judge may have  listed
    various factors in those paragraphs but there  is  no  indication  that
    there was any proper  consideration  of,  and  engagement  with,  those
    factors and no  indication  of  any  balancing  exercise  conducted  or
    consideration of the public interest factors in schedule  1(7)  of  the
    EEA Regulations.

    11. As the respondent's grounds assert, the judge gave  weight  to  the
    appellant's parents' evidence about  him  no  longer  associating  with
    those with whom he had had been  criminally  involved,  but  failed  to
    explain how  he  could  accept  their  assertions  when  the  appellant
    admitted to being untruthful to them about  his  drug  use.  The  judge
    considered that the appellant would struggle in Lithuania but  provided
    no proper reasons for concluding that his parents could not assist  him
    as they had assisted his brother, or for concluding that  he  would  be
    unable to find employment and that he would have language difficulties.



    12. There was, accordingly, no proper  reasoning  in  relation  to  the
    factors to which the judge gave weight and no balancing  against  those
    factors of the matters relevant to the public  interest,  including  in
    particular the finding that serious grounds of public policy  had  been
    made out. For all these reasons we consider that the  judge's  decision
    has to  be  set  aside  so  that  a  full  and  proper  proportionality
    assessment can be made on the basis of all relevant factors.

    13. Ms Allen requested that the matter be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but we do not consider that to be appropriate. There has  been
    no challenge to the judge's finding  that  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy have been made out and the  re-making  of  the  decision  simply
    requires a proper proportionality assessment under regulation 27(5) and
    (6) which can be undertaken in the Upper Tribunal. We accept,  however,
    that the matter should proceed on a later date in light of the  further
    evidence produced by Ms Fijiwala in her  Rule  15(2A)  application,  in
    order to provide the appellant with an opportunity to  respond  to  the
    matters and evidence therein."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me for a resumed hearing on 28 January 2020,  to
re-make the proportionality  assessment.  Mr  Singh  relied  upon  the  most
recent PNC report for the appellant, which had been produced  at  the  error
of law hearing with  an  application  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  and  which   showed   a   recent
conviction, on 15 October 2019, for possession of a Class B drug,  cannabis,
and obstructing a constable.

I heard from the appellant and his parents. The appellant  claimed  to  have
had a cannabis grinder on him when he was stopped by the police for  failing
to have his bicycle lights on, but claimed to have stopped taking drugs.  He
was now working and had been employed for over seven  months,  at  the  same
place where  his  father,  uncles  and  brother  were  employed.  He  had  a
girlfriend. He was not in contact with his brother in Lithuania and did  not
know his circumstances there, although his  parents  were  in  contact  with
him. He last visited Lithuania for two weeks in 2014 with his mother,  at  a
time when his brother was  still  in  the  UK,  and  they  stayed  with  his
mother's friend. The evidence of  the  appellant's  parents  was  that  they
would speak to their son in Lithuania about once or twice a month,  that  he
had no permanent work or accommodation in Lithuania,  that  the  appellant's
father had not visited Lithuania for seven  to  eight  years  and  that  his
mother had last visited two to three years  ago  and  had  stayed  with  her
husband's sister who had since moved to the UK and lived in Ipswich.

Both parties made submissions.  Mr  Singh  submitted  that  deportation  was
justified as the appellant was an adult in good health  whose  claim  to  be
remorseful could not be believed. The  fact  that  he  was  recently  caught
carrying paraphernalia used for taking cannabis showed  that  he  was  still
taking drugs. His parents did not have  sufficient  control  over  him.  His
parents could support him if he returned to Lithuania, as they did  for  his
brother and he would be able to find odd jobs there and earn  money  as  his
brother did. Ms Allen submitted that the appellant was a product of our  own
system, who had always lived with his family aside from his time  in  prison
and who had acquired permanent residence, and thus been integrated into  our
society, before being convicted. He was a  secondary  player  in  the  index
offence and there was no indication of  violence,  threats  of  violence  or
causing alarm or distress to the public. His conduct  did  not  represent  a
genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat,  he  had  a  stable  and
supportive family, he had the ability to make positive choices  and  he  was
getting his life back on track. All of that would go if he had to return  to
Lithuania. The respondent had not discharged the burden of proof.




Relevant legal framework

The relevant legal framework, in Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations  2016,
states as follows:

    "Decisions taken on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  and
public health


    27-(1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.


    (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.


    (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person with a
    right of permanent residence under  regulation  15  except  on  serious
    grounds of public policy and public security.


    (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative  grounds
    of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
         (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of  at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
         (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is  in  the
         best interests of the person concerned,  as  provided  for  in  the
         Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the  General
         Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989(17).


    (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the  United
    Kingdom  include  restricting  rights  otherwise  conferred  by   these
    Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of  society,
    and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or
    public security it must also be taken in accordance with the  following
    principles-


         (a)the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
         (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal  conduct
         of the person concerned;
         (c)the personal conduct of the person  must  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society, taking into account past  conduct
         of the person and that the threat does not need to be imminent;
         (d)matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or  which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify  the
         decision;
         (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision;
         (f)the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even  in  the
         absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the grounds are
         specific to the person.

    (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
    and public security in relation to a person ("P") who  is  resident  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must   take   account   of
    considerations such as the age, state of health,  family  and  economic
    situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  P's
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent
    of P's links with P's country of origin."

Schedule 1(7) of the EEA Regulations 2016 states as follows:

    "The fundamental interests of society
    7.  For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests of
    society in the United Kingdom include-
    (a)preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the  immigration  laws,
    and maintaining the integrity  and  effectiveness  of  the  immigration
    control system (including under these Regulations) and  of  the  Common
    Travel Area;
    (b)maintaining public order;
    (c)preventing social harm;
    (d)preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;
    (e)protecting public services;
    (f)excluding or removing an EEA national or family  member  of  an  EEA
    national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that  person
    is likely to  cause,  or  has  in  fact  caused,  public  offence)  and
    maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  ability   of   the   relevant
    authorities to take such action;
    (g)tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an immediate
    or direct victim may be difficult to identify but where there is  wider
    societal harm (such as offences related to the misuse of drugs or crime
    with a cross-border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);
    (h)combating the  effects  of  persistent  offending  (particularly  in
    relation to offences, which if taken in  isolation,  may  otherwise  be
    unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);
    (i)protecting the rights and  freedoms  of  others,  particularly  from
    exploitation and trafficking;
    (j)protecting the public;
    (k)acting in the best interests of a child (including  where  doing  so
    entails refusing a child admission to the United Kingdom, or  otherwise
    taking an EEA decision against a child);
    (l)countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared values."

Consideration and findings

As confirmed in my decision of 2 December 2019, there has been no  challenge
to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that serious  grounds  of  public
policy have been made out and accordingly that finding stands. The  decision
is to be re-made on the basis of the considerations in Regulation 27(5)  and
(6). I note that there was no specific finding by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
as to whether  the  appellant's  personal  conduct  represented  a  genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
interests of society, although the Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal
at [5] suggested that that  was  implied  by  the  fact  that  the  "serious
grounds" had been made out.  That  was  not  specifically  addressed  in  my
decision, but in any event I am to re-make the  decision  on  the  situation
and circumstances at  the  present  time,  starting  from  the  unchallenged
findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  [52]  and  [53]  of  his
decision.

An important factor which affected the risk assessment in the  OASys  report
was the appellant's lack  of  ability  to  work  at  that  time,  given  the
emphasis in the  report  on  the  link  between  the  appellant's  financial
circumstances and his offending. That is made clear at R10.3  of  the  OASys
report and at R10.4 where the author refers to the circumstances  likely  to
increase the level of risk. At R10.3, page 38 of the report,  it  is  stated
that: "The risk to the public (currently low) is likely to  be  greatest  if
Arnoldas continues to be in a situation whereby he  cannot  support  himself
financially through pro-social means". At page 21  the  report  states  that
"the majority of the problems  Arnoldas'  has  faced  during  this  time  on
Supervision were linked to lack of employment..." The  evidence  before  the
First-tier Tribunal, as referred to at [43] of  the  judge's  decision,  was
that the appellant had recently been given permission to work and  was  keen
to find work. Since that time the appellant has, according to  the  evidence
before me which I accept, found employment at the same place as his  father,
uncles and brother, and has been working since June 2019. There  are  salary
slips to confirm that employment and the appellant's  father  confirmed  the
appellant's evidence.

Accordingly, whilst the OASys assessment concluded that the appellant  posed
a medium risk of re-offending and a medium risk to the public, that  has  to
be qualified by the fact that one  of  the  risk  factors,  namely  lack  of
financial income, has thus far been eliminated  or  at  least  significantly
reduced. Other risk factors identified in the OASys  report  are  engagement
with probation and association with pro-criminal  peers.  The  OASys  report
makes  it  clear  that  the  appellant  engaged  well  with   staff   during
supervision and was willing to study and learn.  The  Independent  Reviewing
Officer's Report for the appellant, at Annex F of  the  respondent's  appeal
bundle, speaks of the appellant's good behaviour, although the  report  pre-
dates the OASys report by some two years. Although there is  some  reference
to the appellant being aggressive  with  his  mother  at  times,  the  OASys
report confirms that that appeared to have subsided. As for the  appellant's
association with pro-criminal peers, the fact that he is  now  working  five
days a week is of relevance. I note that the appellant was  not  alone  when
caught by the police in October 2019, although he  claims  that  his  friend
who was with him at the  time  was  not  one  of  those  with  whom  he  had
previously associated.

Nevertheless, given the risk assessment in the OASys report, the finding  of
the First-tier Tribunal that "serious grounds of  public  policy"  had  been
made out and the fact that  the  appellant  has  since  acquired  a  further
conviction for possession of cannabis, it seems  to  me  that  it  would  be
premature to  conclude  that  his  personal  conduct  did  not  represent  a
genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
fundamental interests of society. However, that threat is mitigated  by  the
above considerations and in particular the appellant's new  responsibilities
of employment, and that is  clearly  of  relevance  to  the  proportionality
assessment in Regulation 27(5)(a) of the EEA Regulations,  to  which  I  now
turn.

Having heard from the appellant and his parents myself, I find that I  reach
the same decision as that  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in
relation to proportionality. I can see why he reached the decision  that  he
did, albeit making the errors I have already  identified  in  reaching  that
decision.

In so concluding I emphasise that there is a strong public interest in  this
case in favour of the appellant's deportation, given the risk  he  poses  to
society, as discussed above. The fundamental interests of  society,  as  set
out at Schedule 1(7) of the EEA Regulations 2016, have to be protected.  The
impact of involvement in drugs cannot be  underplayed  and  the  appellant's
own history has shown that possession of class B drugs only too often  leads
to involvement with more dangerous drugs and the  offending  behaviour  with
which that is associated. The fact the appellant continued to use  cannabis,
and  acquired  a  further  conviction  in  that  regard,  after  deportation
proceedings being commenced against him and after  initially  succeeding  in
his deportation appeal in the First-tier  Tribunal,  is  a  factor  weighing
strongly against him.

However, there are also very strong  factors  weighing  in  the  appellant's
favour. It is apparent  from  the  evidence  overall  that  the  appellant's
parents offer a supportive family unit and that  there  is  a  close  family
bond, especially between the appellant and his mother, as the  OASys  report
describes at R10.3. I have no doubt as to the sincerity of  the  appellant's
parents and it was evident that the appellant's behaviour  has  caused  them
much stress. It is also apparent that  the  appellant's  parents  have  been
unable  to  influence  him  sufficiently  to  prevent  his  engagement  with
offending behaviour and his association with an unsuitable  peer  group  and
that he has not always been honest with them.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant
retains the support of his family and appears, at this stage, to  appreciate
the situation that he is in  and  the  consequences  he  is  facing.  He  is
clearly at a significant turning point in his life. He  is  about  to  leave
his teenage years and has found employment and is in a position to turn  his
life around. The financial motivation for his offending has  now  diminished
with his new job. He has positively engaged  with  supervision,  as  I  have
mentioned above.

I agree with Ms Allen that if he is  deported  to  Lithuania  all  of  those
positive factors are likely  to  disappear  or  at  least  to  significantly
diminish and his prospects of rehabilitation in  that  country  are  plainly
limited. Although he has a brother there, his brother does not offer  him  a
stable life as he  has  no  permanent  job,  income  or  accommodation.  The
appellant's parents' evidence in that regard  was  entirely  consistent  and
credible and I accept that his brother moves around from  friend  to  friend
and does bits of work here and there,  but  with  nothing  substantial.  The
appellant speaks the language fluently and may be able to  find  some  work,
but he has no particular skills and no  qualifications  to  secure  anything
substantial. He is a 19 year old boy who has  never  lived  apart  from  his
parents and siblings, other than when detained, who  has  no  experience  of
living in Lithuania beyond possible childhood memories prior to the  age  of
10 years and who has returned there only once in 2014, whose  entire  family
live in the UK and  who  has  no  family  other  than  his  one  brother  in
Lithuania, who has been educated in the UK and  who,  as  Ms  Allen  rightly
submitted, is essentially a product of our system and society.

As for the appellant's offending, it is relevant to  note  the  Crown  Court
Judge's sentencing remarks, from page 2, namely that the appellant  at  that
time was very lightly convicted, that there was no offence  of  violence  or
threats of violence  to  the  person  and  no  sign  of  any  indication  to
frighten, threaten or alarm members of the public. He was a secondary  party
to the index offence, albeit a significant mover in it and was  a  minor  at
the time. I also take account of the matters  raised  by  Ms  Allen  arising
from the OASys report, namely that the appellant's offending was  linked  to
a financial motive (as I have discussed above), that he was  not  considered
to be a prolific offender and that the purpose of his sentence was said,  at
page 3 of the report, to be punishment as opposed to public protection.

For all of these reasons, and despite the  fact  that  "serious  grounds  of
public policy" have been made out as a result of the appellant's  offending,
and despite the level of future risk, I find  that  the  balance  ultimately
lies in the appellant's favour in the particular circumstances of this  case
and that the respondent's decision to deport him does not  comply  with  the
principle of proportionality. I would make it clear that  the  appellant  is
being offered a  chance  at  this  point,  in  the  light  of  his  previous
impressionable age and considering his family circumstances, and that if  he
re-offends it is unlikely that a future decision would be in his favour.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law and the decision  has  accordingly  been  set  aside  to  the
extent stated. I re-make the decision by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
again.





Signed:  [pic]                               Dated: 28 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
