

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00715/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      GR
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  a  panel
   of the First-tier Tribunal comprising Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   McIntosh and Mr Peter Bompas. The panel allowed an appeal under Article 8
   by GR (hereinafter referred  to  as  "the  claimant").   The  appeal  was
   brought against a decision of 17 September 2012 by the Secretary of State
   to deport the claimant.

2) An issue arose before us  as  to  whether  the  decision  to  deport  the
   claimant was made under section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007  or  under
   section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The First-tier Tribunal proceeded
   on the basis that the decision was made under section 32 of the 2007  Act
   but at the hearing before  us  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  decision
   appealed against of 17 September 2012 was made under  section  5  of  the
   1971 Act.  Mr Wilford had prepared  for  us  an  argument  based  on  the
   proposition that the 2007 Act could not be used to instigate  deportation
   proceedings against a person in respect of a conviction  in  2004,  which
   was when the claimant  was  convicted  of  the  offences  for  which  the
   Secretary of State proposed to deport  her.   However,  as  the  decision
   appealed against was not made on the basis of the 2007 Act,  it  was  not
   necessary for us to consider  this  argument.   For  reasons  which  will
   become apparent, we do not consider that the error made by  the  Tribunal
   as to the  statutory  basis  under  which  the  Secretary  of  State  was
   proceeding was material to the outcome of the appeal.

Factual background

3) The claimant is a South African national who arrived in the  UK  in  1998
   with leave as a working holiday maker.  She was subsequently given  leave
   until 2001 as a student.  A further application for  leave  was  refused.
   It seems the claimant then left the UK and re-entered in June 2003  as  a
   visitor.  She was then granted leave to remain as a student until 2004.

4) In March 2004 the claimant was convicted at Southwark Crown Court  on  15
   counts of furnishing false information relating  to  accounts.   She  was
   sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment on each count, each  period  running
   concurrently.

5) In 2005 the claimant applied for leave to remain  as  the  partner  of  a
   British  citizen.   In  2007  she  was  informed  of  her  liability   to
   deportation.  Meanwhile the claimant had formed a new  relationship  with
   DH, an Irish citizen, and the couple had a son, EH, born on  4  September
   2007.  In  October  2009  the  claimant  was  asked  to  provide  further
   information about her family life  in  the  UK.   In  February  2010  the
   claimant submitted further representations on her family life.

6) In January 2011 the claimant was convicted in the Magistrates'  Court  of
   an offence of destroying or  damaging  property  and  of  an  offence  of
   battery.  She was sentenced to a supervision requirement and a  community
   order and required to pay costs and compensation.  On 15  September  2011
   she was again notified of her liability to deportation.  In  response  in
   November 2011 she submitted that she was a party to  family  proceedings.
   She was asked to provide further  evidence  of  this.   The  decision  to
   deport the claimant was then made on 17 September 2012.

7) The family proceedings arose out  of  the  breakdown  of  the  claimant's
   relationship with DH.  The claimant resided with her son from  his  birth
   in 2007 until the conclusion of the  family  proceedings  in  2012,  when
   residence in relation to EH was awarded to the  father,  DH.   The  court
   granted a  non-molestation  order  against  the  claimant  but  permitted
   supervised contact and indirect contact between the claimant and her son.




Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

8) In the present, the First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  claimant  could
   not benefit from either paragraph 399 or 399A of the  Immigration  Rules.
   So far as the child, EH, was concerned, he was now in  the  care  of  his
   father so the claimant was unable to show that there was no other  family
   member who was able to care for the child in the UK.

9)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  then  went  on  to  consider  the  claimant's
   circumstances under Article 8, taking account the best  interests  of  EH
   under section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The Tribunal found that  the  claimant
   had established family and private life in the UK.  The decision  was  an
   interference with her family life because she would not be in a  position
   to continue the supervised contact with her son.  This  was  not  a  case
   where the claimant had been recently  convicted  of  a  serious  criminal
   offence and this weighed against the public interest in her removal.  The
   Tribunal found that the claimant had used her time in custody  to  obtain
   further skills and she had followed the terms of her release on  licence.
   Although the claimant had further convictions there were none  for  which
   she had received a  sentence  of  at  least  12  months.   Following  the
   claimant's separation from DH in 2008, she had had sole care of  her  son
   with his father having contact.  The final  order  of  the  Family  Court
   awarded residence to DH with  supervised  contact  and  indirect  contact
   awarded to the claimant.  The Tribunal found that the claimant  continued
   to maintain contact with her son and was seeking to increase the level of
   this contact.  The evidence showed that the claimant continued to have  a
   genuine connection with her son, which the Family  Court  encouraged  and
   supported.  It was in the interests of the child to  enjoy  contact  with
   his mother.  This might progress to unsupervised  contact  as  he  became
   older.  The  Tribunal  found  that  it  was  not  proportionate  for  the
   Secretary of State to rely upon  a  conviction  in  2004  to  deport  the
   claimant in 2013 interfering thereby with her established family life and
   the mother-son relationship.  If contact were to cease this would have  a
   negative impact on the claimant's son.  The  Tribunal  therefore  allowed
   the appeal.

Application for permission to appeal

10) Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  granted
   by the Upper Tribunal.  The  first  ground  of  the  application  by  the
   Secretary of State for permission to appeal was  that  the  Tribunal  had
   erred in law by applying a two stage test in considering the  application
   of Article 8.  The Immigration Rules, in particular paragraphs  398,  399
   and 399A, set out a comprehensive approach to the application of  Article
   8 and the Tribunal erred in regarding  these  provisions  as  a  starting
   point before moving on to a free-standing Article 8 assessment.   It  was
   submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that following the decision
   of the Upper Tribunal in MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT 00393 the scope for the
   Tribunal to reach its own view of the public interest and the  weight  to
   be attached to it was more  limited  than  previously.   The  Immigration
   Rules now set out a clear expression  of  the  public  interest  and  the
   weight attached to it, as  formulated  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
   endorsed by Parliament.  In allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  the
   Tribunal did not give adequate consideration to the public interest.   In
   terms of SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 an Article 8 claim by a foreign
   criminal seeking to resist deportation under section 32 of the  2007  Act
   in reliance on the interests of a child with British  citizenship  needed
   to be very strong to prevail against the public interest in  removal  and
   the great weight to be  attached  to  the  policy  of  deporting  foreign
   criminals.

11) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of these  grounds,  having
   regard to the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)
   [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

Submissions

12) Before us Mr Saunders, for the  Secretary  of  State,  relied  upon  the
   grounds of the application.  He pointed out that in  terms  of  paragraph
   398(c) of the Immigration Rules, where a claimant does  not  fall  within
   paragraph  399  or  paragraph  399A  it  will  only  be  in   exceptional
   circumstances that the public interest in deportation will be  outweighed
   by other factors.  The First-tier Tribunal did not properly consider  the
   extent to which the Immigration Rules impacted upon the claimant's  case.
   As was pointed out by the Court of Appeal,  the  Rules  were  a  complete
   code.  The First-tier Tribunal observed that the claimant could not  rely
   on paragraph 398(c), following the award of residence to  the  claimant's
   former  partner.   Mr  Saunders  further  submitted  that  there  was  no
   subsisting relationship at present between the claimant  and  her  child.
   The claimant had no leave to remain in the long term.  These factors  had
   to be set against the interests of the child.  The  public  interest  was
   not fully considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

13) For the claimant, Mr Wilford relied in part upon  a  skeleton  argument.
   Regrettably this was lodged at a late state, almost immediately prior  to
   the hearing, giving Mr Saunders little time to  study  it.   Mr  Saunders
   was, however, willing to proceed.

14) Mr Wilford referred to the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF
   (Nigeria) and submitted that the effect of this decision was  on  matters
   of form rather than of substance.  The court said that where the relevant
   Immigration Rules were not met then "very compelling" circumstances  were
   required to succeed under Article 8.  The Tribunal had  to  look  to  the
   consequences of deportation for the child, taking into account  the  fact
   that the claimant cared for the child until 2012 and still  has  contact.
   This was supervised contact once  a  month  and  fortnightly  contact  by
   Skype.  The First-tier Tribunal quoted from  the  sentencing  remarks  at
   paragraph 3 of the determination.  The Tribunal  were  required  to  take
   into account the seriousness of the offence and, following N (Kenya),  to
   look at the likelihood of further offending.  In this case  the  claimant
   was to be deported on the basis of a conviction in 2004 but the  decision
   to deport her was not made until 2012.  The Tribunal clearly  had  regard
   to the public interest.  The reasons given were adequate in terms of  the
   case of Shizad (Sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85.   The
   reasons for the  Tribunal's  central  conclusions  did  not  need  to  be
   extensive and anyone reading them would be in no doubt as to what factors
   were taken into account.  It was argued for the Secretary of  State  that
   the public interest ought to be given greater weight because of the Rules
   introduced in July 2012 but  there  was  no  authority  to  support  this
   submission.  The Upper Tribunal in MF (Nigeria) referred the new rules as
   enhancing awareness of the public interest but did  not  state  that  the
   public interest  should  be  given  greater  weight.   The  Tribunal  had
   considered all the relevant factors and did not make any  material  error
   of law.

15) In response, Mr Saunders said he did not dispute  the  position  as  set
   out in Shizad and it was not necessary for a judge to set out  everything
   taken into consideration.  If the First-tier  Tribunal  had  acknowledged
   the seriousness of the claimant's offences the Tribunal might  have  done
   enough to justify its conclusions but it did not do this.

Discussion

16) We note that the First-tier Tribunal considered this  appeal  in  August
   2013 and therefore did not have the benefit of the views of the Court  of
   Appeal in MF (Nigeria), handed down on 8 October 2013.  In  its  judgment
   the court commented on whether  there  was  a  two  stage  test  for  the
   application of Article 8, as applied by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  where
   the appeal is first considered  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  then
   considered separately on a free-standing basis under Article 8.  On  this
   point the Court stated the following:

    "46.   There has been debate as to whether there is a one stage or  two
    stage test.  If the claimant succeeds on  an  application  of  the  new
    rules at the first hurdle, ie he shows that para 399 or  399A  applies,
    then it can be said that he has succeeded on a one stage test.  But  if
    he  does  not,  it  is  necessary  to  consider   whether   there   are
    circumstances  which  are  sufficiently   compelling   (and   therefore
    exceptional) to outweigh the public interest in deportation.   That  is
    an exercise  which  is  separate  from  the  consideration  of  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies.  It is the second part of  a  two  stage
    approach which, for the reasons we have given, is required by  the  new
    rules.  The Upper Tribunal concluded (paragraph 41) that it is required
    because the new rules do not fully  reflect  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    But either way, it is necessary to carry out a two stage process."


17)  Insofar  as  the  use  of  the  word  "exceptional"  is  concerned,  in
   considering whether there are exceptional circumstances  outweighing  the
   public interest where paragraphs 399 or 399A  do  not  apply,  the  Court
   pointed out that the  word  "exceptional"  is  often  used  to  denote  a
   departure from a general rule.  The court then  continued,  at  paragraph
   43:

    "The general rule in the present context is that,  in  the  case  of  a
    foreign prisoner to whom paragraphs 399 and 399A  do  not  apply,  very
    compelling reasons will be required to outweigh the public interest  in
    deportation.    These   compelling   reasons   are   the   "exceptional
    circumstances".


18) The decision of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  was  considered  by
   the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Kabia  (MF:  paragraph   398   -   "exceptional
   circumstances" [2013] UKUT 00569.  The Tribunal pointed out that the  new
   rules relating to Article 8 claims advanced by foreign criminals  seeking
   to  resist  deportation  are  a  complete  code  and   the   "exceptional
   circumstances" to be considered in the  balancing  exercise  involve  the
   application of a proportionality  test  as  required  by  the  Strasbourg
   jurisprudence.  Where the new rules speak of "exceptional  circumstances"
   it  was  made  clear  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  that
   exceptionality is a  likely  characteristic  of  a  claim  that  properly
   succeeds  rather  than  a  legal  test  to  be  met.   In  this   context
   "exceptional" means circumstances in which deportation  would  result  in
   unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual or their family  such
   that a deportation would not be proportionate.

19) In the appeal before us the First-tier Tribunal did not  use  the  terms
   "very  compelling  reasons"  or   "unjustifiably   harsh   consequences".
   Nevertheless, the Tribunal properly applied a  two  stage  test.   Having
   accepted that the claimant would not succeed under paragraph 399 or 399A,
   the Tribunal went on to consider whether deportation  would  nevertheless
   be disproportionate having regarding to the public interest as well as to
   the best interests of the claimant's child.

20) We should point out that in hearing the  evidence  in  this  appeal  the
   Tribunal noted that the child suffers from a medical condition for  which
   he receives treatment.  We have observed from the medical  evidence  that
   this is a serious condition of a continuing nature.  The child  has  been
   diagnosed as suffering from epilepsy.  This is  a  matter  to  which  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not refer expressly in their reasons but had they
   done so it would have served only to strengthen those reasons.

21) It has been argued for the Secretary of State that the Tribunal did  not
   give sufficient regard to the public interest.  One of  the  observations
   made on behalf of the claimant by Mr Wilford at the hearing before us was
   that if the claimant were to be deported, the  likelihood  was  that  she
   would have no direct contact with her son, now aged  6,  for  a  10  year
   period, by which time he would be 16.  Again, it is not a matter to which
   the Tribunal referred expressly in its reasoning but it appears  to  have
   been a factor of which the Tribunal was aware.  The Tribunal  noted  that
   during the course of the proceedings in the  Family  Court  the  claimant
   applied to take her son to South Africa.   The  court,  however,  awarded
   residence to the child's father with contact by the  claimant  restricted
   in the manner we have noted.  There seems, accordingly,  little  prospect
   of the child being able to visit the claimant in South Africa while he is
   a minor, particularly having regard to the potentially serious nature  of
   his medical condition, for which he  requires  continuing  treatment  and
   supervision.

22) We mention these matters as factors to  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should have had regard and may have done so implicitly.   The  First-tier
   Tribunal did have specific regard to a number of other matters,  such  as
   the length of time since the conviction on which the decision  to  deport
   was based.  At the time the claimant was convicted, she had  no  children
   and it was some three years until her son was born.  After the child  was
   born she and her partner cared for him together  until  2008,  when  they
   split up.  The claimant then had care of her son  until  2012,  when  the
   Family Court awarded residence to the father.  So far  as  the  child  is
   concerned, his mother has been his principal carer for most of his  life.
   The Tribunal rightly considered that this was a significant matter to  be
   weighed against the public interest in deportation and  that  the  public
   interest itself was diminished by the lapse of  time  since  the  offence
   giving rise to liability to deportation.

23) The Tribunal noted the claimant  had  committed  further  offences,  for
   none of which she received an immediate  custodial  sentence.   While  no
   offending behaviour is to be excused, we would recognise that  the  level
   of acrimony which is likely to arise from  a  long-running  dispute  over
   residence and contact in relation to a small child may contribute to  the
   sort of behaviour which has resulted in a  non-molestation  order  having
   been made against the claimant.

24) In broad terms the position of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
   public interest in deportation was greatly weakened by the lapse of  time
   since the conviction in 2004 on which the deportation decision was  based
   and that the relationship between the claimant and her son, born in 2007,
   was important not only from the claimant's point of view but also  looked
   at from the best interests of the child.    The Tribunal was entitled  to
   find that there were circumstances outweighing  the  public  interest  in
   deportation.   These  circumstances  might  properly  be   described   as
   exceptional, in accordance  with  paragraph  398(c)  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.  Although the Tribunal did not have the benefit of the terminology
   used either by the Court of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  or  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Kabia, the impact of deportation so far as the  claimant  and
   her child are concerned, and the prospect that they would have no  direct
   contact for 10 years, could readily be described as unjustifiably  harsh.
   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  refer   expressly   to   exceptional
   circumstances but  its  reasoning  clearly  falls  within  this  concept,
   whether described in terms of very compelling  reasons  or  unjustifiably
   harsh consequences.  On this basis, we consider  that  the  Tribunal  was
   entitled to reach the decision which it did and  made  no  error  of  law
   affecting the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions

25) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law

26) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)  of  the
   Asylum & Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

28) We continue that order (pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


