
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00253/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined On The Papers at Field House       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 August 2013                             |On 18 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              Anand Kumar Jain

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 8th  May  1965.   On  12th
    April 2012 a deportation order was made by virtue of Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The appellant seeks to appeal against  that  decision  contending  that
    his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  in  breach  of  his
    fundamental human rights.

3.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Paul  and  Mrs  Holt
    (non-legal member) for hearing on 30 July 2012.

4.   The appellant had first arrived in the United Kingdom on  9  June  1999
    with entry clearance as a work permit holder.  On 24 February  2004  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain for himself, his  wife  and  two
    children.  That was granted.

5.   On 3 April 2006 application was made by the Indian authorities for  his
    extradition to India.

6.   On 22 April 2008 the appellant was convicted at Southwark  Crown  Court
    for conspiracy to defraud and sentenced to eight years and six  months'
    imprisonment and disqualified from being a  company  director  for  ten
    years.  His application for leave  to  appeal  against  conviction  and
    sentence was refused by the Court of Appeal on 21 May 2012.

7.   It  was  this  offence  which  brought  into  operation  the  automatic
    provisions of deportation.

8.   In the course  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant relied heavily upon his family and private life in the United
    Kingdom and members of the family gave evidence in the  course  of  the
    hearing.  The Tribunal concluded that it was  not  disproportionate  to
    remove the appellant from the jurisdiction.

9.   Grounds of appeal were submitted  essentially  taking  issue  with  the
    approach of the panel to Article 8 of the ECHR.       Leave  to  appeal
    was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 9 November 2012

10.  Thus the matter came before me on 18 March 2013.

11.  Two matters of significant concern were highlighted  at  that  hearing.
    The first matter of concern was to understand clearly what the Tribunal
    was seeking to say as the relationship between the Immigration Rules as
    now amended and the application of the principles under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.  The panel did not seem to adopt the two stage process as set
    out in the decision of MF (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT
    00393 (IAC).  It is far from clear as  to  whether  the  exceptionality
    test to be applied under the Immigration Rules was applied by the panel
    to its consideration of Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   Also  a  matter  of
    concern was whether the best  interests  of  the  appellant's  son  and
    daughter had been fully and properly considered in  the  analysis  that
    was conducted.

12.  There was a third although perhaps less  central  matter  which  arose,
    namely the criminal proceedings in India and the fact  that  a  warrant
    for  his  arrest  had  been  issued.   That  was  perhaps  a   relevant
    consideration in the exercise of proportionality.

13.  It was not suggested by either party that the appellant  would  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules but it was argued that he might succeed  in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

14.  In the circumstances, therefore, I indicated that the decision  of  the
    panel in respect of the Immigration Rules should  stand  but  that  the
    decision in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR should be  set  aside.   I
    gave directions for a rehearing on that aspect.

15.  One feature to be raised was whether or not that  rehearing  should  be
    by way of an oral hearing or whether the decision could  be  made  upon
    the papers.

16.  In the event it was agreed that I should  decide the issue  of  Article
    8 ECHR on the papers, in the  light  of  the  evidence  that  had  been
    presented before the Tribunal and  allowing  the  opportunity  for  any
    additional evidence to be presented. That opportunity now  having  been
    given I proceed to determine the relevant issues in the appeal upon the
    papers.

17.  I bear in mind the very detailed bundle of documentation that has  been
    presented before the panel on the previous occasions which  extends  to
    167 folios.  I also note the chronology together with  a  very  helpful
    skeleton argument submitted by Mr Paul Richmond of Counsel dated 10 May
    2013.  In addition to the  witness  statements  that  were  before  the
    Tribunal I note a further witness statement of Simon  Barker  producing
    an exhibit, namely the judgment of Senior District Judge Howard  Riddle
    dated 20 January 2012 in the extradition proceedings. There are also  a
    number medical letters relating to Miss Tanu Jain.

18.  A helpful starting point may well be to set out  briefly  the  evidence
    which was presented before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is to be  noted
    that at that the appellant, his wife and two children gave evidence.  I
    bear in mind the nature  of  that  evidence  taken  together  with  the
    written statements which they had prepared.

19.  The appellant married his wife in 1990  and  they  have  two  children,
    Tanu, a girl, born on 13 July 1991 and a son,  Tanmay  born  on  5  May
    1995.  They came to the United Kingdom in June 1999 at a time when  his
    children were aged 8 and 4 respectively.  His  wife  and  children  are
    British citizens.

20.  During his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  was  always
    employed. He worked for a company which went into liquidation  and  was
    the subject of investigation by the Serious Fraud  Office.  The  family
    purchased a property in North London which was sold when he  went  into
    custody and the family currently live in rented property. The  children
    had been brought up essentially as English children. Tanu has  recently
    graduated with a first-class  degree  in  business  administration  and
    Tanmay attends a prominent public school.

21.  The appellant was the eldest of three brothers,  being  brought  up  in
    India.  His father worked as a company secretary although now  retired.
    The appellant enjoyed a successful career in business in India prior to
    coming to London.  The appellant's wife spoke of  the  difficulties  in
    the family coping in the absence of the appellant while he  served  his
    prison sentence and stressed how difficult it would be for her and  the
    children to move to India.  She was  working  and  had  established  an
    independent life in England which would be more difficult  for  her  in
    India.  Tanu explained that she had ambitions to  do  an  MBA  and  had
    career ambitions in finance or education.  Tanmay explained that he was
    hoping to  go  on  and  do  medicine.   Both  children  emphasised  the
    difficulties that they had encountered in the absence of  their  father
    and the supportive role that he played since coming home.

22.  The grounds  of  appeal  cite  Sanade  and  Others  (British  children)
    Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 0048 (IAC) and Rios  Zambrano  (European
    citizenship) [2011] EUECJ Case C-34/09 OJ. It was said that it would be
    unreasonable and/or unlawful to expect  the  children  to  relocate  to
    India or indeed to expect the appellant's wife to do likewise.

23.  It seems to me, looking as the case as a whole that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable or proper to decide this case on the basis that  they  could
    reasonably be expected to return to India with the appellant.

24.  This is clearly a case where there would be a significant  interference
    with private and family life if  the  appellant  were  removed.  It  is
    necessary to determine the nature  and  quality  of  that  private  and
    family, life balancing it with the  public  interest  in  removing  the
    appellant from  the  jurisdiction.   In  essence  it  is  necessary  to
    consider the principles as set out in the case of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  Essentially in this case it is clearly obvious that removal  would
    be an interference having such consequences of gravity  as  potentially
    to engage the operation of Article 8.  The real issue in this  case  is
    whether such interference is necessary and whether such interference is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be  achieved.

25.  In assessing that family  and  private  life  it  is  perhaps  of  some
    considerable importance to note the nature of the  offending  behaviour
    which led to the making of  the  deportation  order  itself.   In  that
    connection I consider  the  sentencing  remarks  of  His  Honour  Judge
    Wadsworth QC of 5 June 2008.  The appellant was  sentenced  as  one  of
    three convicted of a conspiracy to defraud banks, both  in  the  United
    States and in the UK.  That conspiracy ran  from  the  opening  of  the
    business in London in 1996 throughout the liquidation of  companies  in
    May 2002, a period of some six years.  Over that  period  there  was  a
    collusion between offices in New York and London to obtain  money  from
    banks by an entirely fraudulent system of metal  trading.   Over  those
    years there were created companies whose prime purpose was  to  deceive
    banks.  There were well over 200 of such companies which the  appellant
    together with others masterminded along with his  brother  in  America.
    Banks were induced by falsehoods to advance billions  of  dollars  with
    effectively no security because most of the trades did not exist in any
    real  sense  and  insurance  policies  were  vitiated  by  fraud.   The
    appellant and others set up a very impressive front in the  UK  and  in
    New York which fooled the banks resulting in a loss to the banks of the
    order of $538,000.

26.  In that regard it was noted that throughout  the  trial  the  appellant
    and the other two defendants denied any responsibility  for  the  loss,
    putting the Crown to the burden of proving its case.  The  Judge  noted
    that right up to the moment of  verdict  the  appellant  had  shown  no
    shadow of regret or remorse or repentance for the  crime  committed  or
    for the damage which was done. Indeed the appellant sought to  minimise
    his involvement and his responsibility.

27.  The appellant relied of course upon his  good  character  but,  as  the
    judge made reference in the sentencing remarks, that good character had
    been used in order to mislead banks and perpetrate fraud.   There  were
    years of calculated dishonesty and the damage to his family was done by
    him and not by his conviction.

28.  There was clear abuse of trust  which  in  itself  was  an  aggravating
    feature together with the time and cost which had been expended on  the
    investigation.

29.  In support of the contention as to private life I have  been  asked  to
    consider the good immigration history of the appellant.  Although  that
    may be so it is obviously to be seen within the context  that  he  used
    his position since arriving in the United Kingdom for the  purposes  of
    perpetrating fraud.

30.  In assessing the nature and quality of the private and family  life  it
    is of course important to note that from  13  December  2007  until  16
    March 2012 the appellant was in custody, with all the limitations  that
    that brings both to the enjoyment of  private  life  and  also  to  the
    maintenance and development of family life.

31.  During that period the appellant's family were  able  to  cope  without
    him. It is perhaps a tribute to all family members that they were  able
    to continue to develop their  private  and  family  life  in  difficult
    circumstances.  His  wife  started  working  as  a  full-time  teaching
    assistant at Goldbeaters Primary School since 2008, supporting  herself
    and the two children while the appellant was in prison,  such  included
    paying for private rented accommodation.

32.  Both children proceeded well in their  full-time  education.  Tanu  has
    completed a third year of a degree course  in  business  administration
    obtaining a first-class honours degree.  Tanmay is in a second year  of
    A level studies  at  Haberdashers  Asks  Boys  School  having  obtained
    excellent grades in eleven subjects at GCSE level in May 2011.  In  all
    likelihood he will be going to university which may or may  not  entail
    living away from  home during term time.

33.  All family members have shown themselves resilient and  resourceful  in
    the difficult circumstances of their  separation  from  the  appellant.
    little has been presented to  show that they would not be able to be as
    resilient were he to be removed from the jurisdiction.   It  is  to  be
    noted that Tanu, although still living at home, is now an adult and  no
    doubt it would be reasonably likely that she would soon be  making  her
    own way in the world.

34.  In respect of Tanu, I bear in mind the case of Kugathas and can  detect
    from the papers no dependency over and above  the  normal  relationship
    between father and daughter.

35.  In that connection I note her witness statement of 18 July  2012.   She
    speaks of the fact that since he has been home the appellant  has  been
    of great help to her sharing some of the burden of  family  life.   She
    said  that  her  mother  needs  the  support  of  the  appellant   both
    financially and because she is not in good health.  Tanu visited  India
    for a month in 2011.

36.  Much of the statement is directed  to  showing  why  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her and her mother to return to India. As  I  have
    indicated, that is not reasonably to be expected in  the  circumstances
    of this case.

37.  I note also a statement from Tanmay dated 18 July 2012 which speaks  of
    the active role that he plays at school and how he  has  completed  his
    bronze and silver Duke of Edinburgh Award. He had a paper round.

38.  Once again the statement was more focused upon  why  it  would  not  be
    possible for Tanmay to return to India, which is not the issue in  this
    case.  It indicates that it is his intention to study medicine at a top
    UK university.  It speaks of the activities that  he  enjoys  with  the
    appellant now that the appellant has been released from prison. The two
    have recently been on a holiday in India.

39.  I note also a statement from the appellant's wife dated 19  July  2012.
    She speaks of having to sell the matrimonial home at the time when  the
    appellant went into prison.  She speaks of the fact of  the  time  when
    the appellant was in prison was a difficult one for the family and  she
    is fearful that she would not able to cope alone were he to be  removed
    from the jurisdiction.  She indicated that she has health  issues  such
    as panic attacks, anxiety and sciatica and would find it  difficult  to
    cope on her own.

40.  Once again her statement is very much geared towards the issue  of  her
    removal from the United Kingdom, which is  not  being  suggested.   She
    went on to indicate that while her husband was in prison both  children
    suffered mentally and were quite withdrawn and would not  go  out.   It
    took an effort to motivate them.

41.  I would simply add that that description of events would  not  seem  to
    be reflective of what the children themselves had to say.

42.  Finally, in relation to private and family life, I have regard  to  the
    more recent evidence that has been submitted concerning the  health  of
    Tanu which speaks of her suffering severe chronic migraines since 2009.
     Medication has been proposed and the history of  those  headaches  was
    set out in the report from the London Free Hospital NHS arising from an
    examination by Dr Athwal, consultant neurologist, on 3 January 2013.

43.  The report sets out that as a teenager  there  were  intermittent  mild
    headaches occurring about once a week, sometimes triggered  by  fatigue
    or watching TV. These headaches became more severe around  2009  and  a
    neurological examination was unremarkable. There were  earlier  medical
    reports in connection with that condition.  The first in time being  18
    August 2010 from the Barnet and Chase Farm Hospital, the next one being
    24 February 2011 from the  same  hospital.   There  the  headaches  had
    improved.  The cause of such headaches is not stated but it  is  to  be
    recognised in common sense that stress and anxiety are likely to be the
    triggers for such matters.

44.  To be balanced against the family and private  life  of  the  appellant
    and his family members is the nature of the offending.   He  is  to  be
    judged not by the nature of  the  offence  itself  and  the  length  of
    sentence awarded for what is an extremely serious offence. I  have  had
    regard to the pre sentence report that was before the  Criminal  court,
    particularly to the fact that the appellant continued to deny knowledge
    of  the  transactions  and  throughout  has  sought  to  minimise   his
    involvement. His actions are  said  to  have  displayed  deception  and
    manipulation. In the light of the lack of  the  acceptance  as  to  his
    responsibility any rehabilitation work would have very limited  impact.



45.  The appellant has been assessed as posing a low risk  of  harm  to  the
    general public and a low risk of  reconviction.    The  report  stated,
    however, that the risks of reconviction could be significantly  reduced
    if he were to engage in rehabilitation work to  address  his  offending
    behaviour.

46.  I have regard also to the OASys Report of 18 July 2012 prepared  whilst
    the appellant was still in prison.

47.  It is significant from that report  that  the  appellant  continues  to
    deny knowledge of the  fraudulent  transactions  and  to  minimise  his
    involvement.

48.  It is to be noted that in prison the appellant had a positive  attitude
    to employment and had been making good  use  of  his  time  to  develop
    skills.

49.  The author of the  report  identified  certain  behavioural  issues  as
    being relevant to the offending behaviour and to the risk of  offending
    and harm. The risk posed in communities has been assessed as low.

50.  The skeleton argument invites me to consider that the criminal  offence
    was committed in 2002 and the appellant has not committed any  offences
    thereafter.  The nature of the offence of course was a conspiracy  over
    a period of time.  It is difficult to assess risk given the refusal  of
    the appellant to accept that he has done anything wrong.   Nevertheless
    there is no reason to go behind the professional assessment as  to  low
    risk.

51.  However, the issue of risk is not the sole factor to be considered.   I
    bear in mind in particular what is said by the Court of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ
    550.

52.  The judgment stresses the  importance  of  giving  due  weight  to  the
    policy  of  deporting  foreign  criminals,  particularly   as   it   is
    represented by primary legislation and is  reflective  of  the  balance
    which Parliament would consider appropriate to be  made.   The  present
    nature of the public  interest  is  vividly  informed  by  Parliament's
    express  declaration  that  the  public  interest  is  injured  if  the
    criminal's deportation is not effected.

53.  Lord Justice Laws perhaps summarised the decision in  paragraph  55  of
    the judgment in this way:

         "None of  these  I  apprehend,  is  inconsistent  with  established
         principle, and the approach I have outlined is  well  supported  by
         the  authorities  considering  the   decision   maker's   mind   in
         discretion. The leading supreme cases, ZH and H(H) demonstrate that
         the interests of a child affected by the  removal  decision  are  a
         matter of substantial importance, and that the court  must  proceed
         on a proper understanding of  the  facts   which  illuminate  these
         interests (though the latter point there would not be with  respect
         that the principle in Tinizaray should be regarded as  establishing
         anything in the nature of general principle). At the same time H(H)
         shows the impact of  a  powerful  public  interest  (in  that  case
         extradition) on what needs to be  demonstrated  for  an  Article  8
         claim to prevail over it.   Proportionality,  the  absence  of  any
         'exceptionality' rule, and the naming of 'a primary  consideration'
         are all, when properly understood, consonant with the force  to  be
         attached in cases of the present kind to the  two  drivers  of  the
         decision maker's margin of discretion: the policy's source and  the
         policy's nature, and in particular to the greater weight which  the
         2007 Act attributes to the deportation of foreign criminals."

54.  At paragraph 58 Mr Justice Laws concluded:

         "I would not wish for  a  moment  to  sideline  the  importance  of
         Section 55 of the 2009 Act, or the guidance issued under it ('Every
         child matters - change for children') or the statements of a higher
         authority to the effect that the child's  best  interests  must  be
         properly gone into.  But in the circumstances of this case it is my
         judgment wholly unrealistic to suppose that any  further  evidence,
         let alone enquiries (whether of the child himself or  anyone  else)
         undertaken on the initiative of the FTT, or the UT, might offer the
         least  possibility  of  establishing  a  case   under   Article   8
         sufficiently strong to prevail over the extremely  pressing  public
         interest in the appellant's deportation."

55.  As was recognised in the case of MF, there is the two-fold process  for
    the judicial consideration of Article 8.  The first being the new Rules
    themselves which for offences over four years  of  length  imports  the
    concept of exceptionality.  It is common ground that the appellant will
    not meet the Rules.

56.  Thereafter judicial decision makers need to consider Article  8  being,
    however, duly informed as to where the public interest is considered by
    Parliament to lie.

57.  As was recognised in the case of Huang, that  for  those  who  fail  to
    succeed under the Rules it will be a small minority who  would  succeed
    under Article 8.

58.  Indeed, it is to be recognised that many of those convicted of  serious
    crimes will have their own family and children. Were such to  serve  to
    prevent removal simply in those terms there would be little purpose  in
    legislation relating to deportation.

59.  It seems to me that, in  applying  the  principles  derived  from  many
    authorities prior to SS , the  crime  of  which  the  appellant  stands
    convicted is  a  particularly  serious  one  such  as  to  entitle  the
    authorities to express disapproval and to deter others from  committing
    the same.  Although the element of risk is one factor to be considered,
    it is not the sole factor to be considered.  In many ways the  families
    of those who were convicted of serious crime would have similar  family
    difficulties to those faced by the appellant and his family, namely  to
    cope whilst in custody and to rebuild family life upon release.

60.  I do not find, in the situation and circumstances of the appellant  and
    his family, that there is such an  interdependency  or  emotional  need
    that it would be disproportionate to  remove  the  appellant  from  the
    jurisdiction.  I do not find that the health  needs  of  his  wife  and
    daughter are such to require his  continuing  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I bear in mind of course the best interests of  his  son  and
    the importance of making that a primary consideration,  but  note  that
    generally speaking he has been able to cope well in father's absence. I
    reject the evidence of his mother that he  has  been  de  motivated  or
    withdrawn. His progress at school and the  wide  range  of  challenging
    pursuits and interests present a picture of someone who  has  responded
    creatively in the absence of his father and there is little to  suggest
    that he will be unable to follow his sister into  further  achievements
    with or without the support of the appellant. Some  continuing  contact
    can be made with the appellant through internet, Skype and visits.

61.  There is one additional feature in this case prayed in aid  in  support
    of the contention that it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant and that is the extradition proceedings which  he  faced  and
    which were discharged by order of Senior District Judge Riddell  on  20
    January 2012.  It was said that to effect deportation of the  appellant
    would, in the circumstances, circumvent those proceedings.  That is  to
    misunderstand the nature of those proceedings.  It was for  the  Indian
    government to show a prima facie case against the appellant upon  those
    offences upon which extradition could  apply. It  was  the  finding  of
    Judge Riddell that the evidential burden had not been met.

62.  The judge was satisfied that the  paperwork  was  in  order;  that  the
    person appearing before  him  was  the  person  whose  extradition  was
    requested and that the  offence  was  one  which  could  constitute  an
    extradition offence.  The judge, however, was not satisfied as  to  the
    quality of the documentation, particularly that of  an  unauthenticated
    document.

63.  The test was that set out in the Criminal Procedure Rules  whether  the
    prosecution evidence was sufficient for any reasonable  court  properly
    to convict.  That was not found to be the situation.

64.  The decision of the High Court in  Madras,  30  August  2007  was  also
    considered as it  related  to  co-defendants  in  the  same  case.  The
    appellant was only severed from that case because he was in custody  in
    London at the time.  It was noted that the High Court in Madras quashed
    certain of the proceedings such that certain offences no longer capable
    of being brought.  Only the Section  132  charges  remain  against  the
    defendant in India and they were not extradition offences.   The  Judge
    was at pains to indicate that he made the assumption of good  faith  on
    behalf of the Indian authorities.

65.  It is significant that the  Judge  was  not  seeking  to  make  adverse
    comments against the due proceedings in India but  rather  whether  the
    evidence placed before him was such as to comply with  the  extradition
    requirements.  There is nothing to indicate that were the appellant  to
    return to India that he would not receive  a  fair  hearing  upon  such
    offences are as properly to be lodged against him. His  deportation  is
    quite distinct from his extradition.

66.  It is argued that were he to be arrested upon the warrant in  India  he
    may be in custody which would further restrict his  ability  to  be  in
    contact with  his  family.   That  may  well  be  the  case,  but  that
    difficulty would have arisen because of his conduct in India.   In  the
    absence of any suggestion of ill-will or abuse of process by the Indian
    authorities I see little reason why the administration of justice in  a
    sovereign state should not be undertaken in a lawful and proper manner.

67.  I have looked at all  material  including  the  nature  and  extent  of
    private and family life and the nature  and  extent  of  the  offending
    behaviour, realising as I do that there will of  course  be  difficulty
    and  strains  placed  upon  the  family  if  separation  comes  to   be
    implemented.  This family is not a stranger to such separation,  though
    clearly there may be a difference of quality between custody in the  UK
    and custody in India, should that event arise.

68.  Overall, however, I find that  it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to
    remove the appellant from  the  jurisdiction.   The  interests  of  the
    public in his removal in this case far outweigh the  interests  of  his
    family in having him remain.

69.  The appeal against deportation is  dismissed.   His  appeal  under  the
    relevant Immigration Rule is dismissed.  His appeal in respect of human
    rights is also dismissed.




iHIs

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

