
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00895/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 August 2013                               |On 25 September 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                               Alaui Mosharaf
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Alaui Mosharaf, was born on 1 October 1976 and is a male
    citizen of Iraq. A decision was taken on 16 October 2012 to deport  the
    appellant under the provisions of Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  The appellant appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  De  Haney  and  Dr  J  O  De  Barros)  which,  in   a
    determination promulgated on 25 February 2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 November 2002.  He
    claimed asylum but his claim  was  rejected  and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed.  His appeal rights became exhausted on 1 October 2003.   The
    appellant did not leave the United Kingdom but remained and  in  August
    2004 was convicted driving with excess alcohol, driving whilst  insured
    and resisting or obstructing a constable and driving without a licence.
     The appellant was subsequently  convicted  of  a  number  of  offences
    (mainly theft/shoplifting) until, on 18 May  2011,  the  appellant  was
    convicted at Manchester City Crown Court of having an  article  with  a
    blade which was sharply pointed in a public  place.   He  was  sent  to
    prison for that offence for  thirteen  months.   In  August  2006,  the
    appellant made an application for his case to be reconsidered  "in  the
    light of Rashid (A) (H) and (AH) judgments" and  asked  to  be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain. On 19 January 2007, he was given indefinite
    leave to remain.  We note that, having completed his criminal detention
    in or around September 2011, the appellant has remained in  immigration
    detention.  He was brought to the Upper Tribunal hearing from HM Prison
    Risley, Cheshire.

 3. The grounds of appeal consist of 22 paragraphs which  are  not  divided
    into numbered grounds of appeal but which challenge the adequacy of the
    reasoning of the Tribunal's determination and  the  Tribunal's  alleged
    failure to take proper account of  the  evidence  (in  particular,  the
    psychiatric evidence). We shall address the grounds of  appeal  in  the
    order in which they are set out in the application.

 4. The grounds submit that the Tribunal had  underestimated  the  problems
    which would face the appellant on return to Iraq in accessing  adequate
    healthcare.  Both parties accepted the appellant  has  mental  problems
    which are detailed in a  psychiatric  report  of  Dr  Ros  Tavernor,  a
    consultant forensic psychiatrist, which is dated 17 December 2012.  The
    report notes the appellant's persistent heroin abuse and "self-reported
    symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)".  Dr Tavernor  noted
    that the appellant suffered from "cultural and  social  isolation"  and
    "adjustment disorder".  The appellant  is  stressed  and  agitated  and
    suffered from a chronic risk of self-harm.

 5. Against that factual background, the Tribunal found that:

         "We also accept that whilst the healthcare available in Iraq is not
         anything like what it would be in the United Kingdom,  and  nor  is
         the support; there is nevertheless some healthcare  and  medication
         which the appellant should be able to access on his  return.   This
         is the particular case given the fact that the  appellant  at  some
         stages in his narrative appears to suggest he  has  been  diagnosed
         with post traumatic stress disorder in Iraq following the explosion
         in 1998."

 6. The grounds criticise the Tribunal for giving  no  details  as  to  the
    healthcare or medication might be available to the appellant  in  Iraq.
    The Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal  had  produced  a
    "compact essential drugs list" which the grounds state was  claimed  by
    her to be a "full list of medications  and  treatments  in  Iraq".   Mr
    Nicholson asserted that none of the drugs currently prescribed  to  the
    appellant were found on the list.  He also submitted there were only 70-
    100 psychiatrists in Iraq for a total population of 30,000,000 people.

 7. The fact that the drugs currently prescribed to this appellant  do  not
    appear on the list produced by the Presenting Officer does not, in  our
    opinion, necessarily mean that suitable treatment (albeit difficult  to
    obtain and possibly at a cost) would not be available to this appellant
    in  Iraq.   There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  alternative  drug
    medication which may be available in Iraq could not properly be used to
    provide adequate treatment for this appellant's condition.  Conversely,
    there was no evidence to show that the  appellant's  medical  condition
    can only be treated by the drugs which he is currently receiving. It is
    true that the Tribunal has  dealt  only  briefly  over  the  healthcare
    available in Iraq but even so it has identified a  fact  of  particular
    importance, namely that medication and treatment for conditions such as
    the appellant's are available.  The Tribunal rightly  did  not  descend
    into a detailed comparison of the quality of  healthcare  available  in
    the United Kingdom and in Iraq but reminded itself of  the  "very  high
    threshold" in such appeals indicated by  the  jurisprudence  [47].   We
    find that the Tribunal has  dealt  with  the  provision  of  healthcare
    services in Iraq in an adequate  manner.  No  error  of  law  has  been
    established.

 8. The grounds go on to acknowledge that the appellant's fear of returning
    to Iraq "may indeed not  be  objectively  founded"  [9].   However,  Mr
    Nicholson submitted that the Tribunal had failed  to  consider  whether
    the appellant had a subjective fear of returning such as  to  create  a
    risk of suicide should he be forced to return.  The grounds  go  on  to
    assert that, "the risk of self-harm attested by the psychiatric  expert
    emanated  from  both  detention  and  the  threat  (an  actuality)   of
    deportation".  The psychiatric report  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    claimed that he was being "treated like a caged animal" and that he had
    "smashed his cell and cut his arms".  Mr Nicholson submitted  that  the
    panel had further erred by failing to make a finding as to whether  the
    appellant was suffering from PTSD.

 9. This ground takes us to the heart of the appellant's challenge  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination.  We note that  the  Tribunal  only
    reached its findings after a careful analysis of the psychiatric report
    [47].  It is true that the Tribunal has not made a formal finding as to
    whether the appellant is suffering from PTSD but it did  note  at  [48]
    that the incident in Iraq which the appellant claimed had  led  to  his
    suffering PTSD [the explosion of  a  fuel  tanker  in  1998]  had  been
    described in very different ways by the appellant at various stages  in
    his asylum claim.  It is clear from the determination that the Tribunal
    took a very poor opinion of the appellant's credibility describing  him
    as a "poor historian".  In our  view,  Dr  Tavernor  does  not  make  a
    unequivocal  diagnosis  of  PTSD  although  he  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had been treated for the symptoms of PTSD and noted also that
    a previous doctor (Dr  Mann)  had  "indicated  that  [the  appellant's]
    previous medical records would be helpful in clarifying whether he  has
    presented with features of PTSD over time".  In the light of  the  fact
    that the psychiatrist has declined to give a firm diagnosis of PTSD, we
    do not find it surprising that the Tribunal  has  declined  to  make  a
    finding also.  Further, we find that the Tribunal's failure to  make  a
    finding on that issue simply does not affect the outcome of this appeal
    in any way; it is accepted  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  mental
    problems and the real question with which  the  Tribunal  has  properly
    grappled is whether the appellant would seek to harm himself or attempt
    suicide as a consequence of any deportation decision or process.  Given
    that that was the question to be considered, the exact diagnosis of the
    appellant's condition was immaterial.

10. Mr Nicholson submitted that the Tribunal had too readily  accepted  the
    "harsh but clever"  submission  of  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    medical evidence of Dr Tavernor indicated that the  appellant's  stress
    and anxiety was a consequence of his continued detention rather than  a
    fear of deportation.  At [49], the Tribunal wrote:

         "What  we  find  from  the  psychiatrist's  report  is   that   the
         appellant's self-harm and suicidal tendencies are  related  to  his
         frustrations at being detained particularly after having served his
         criminal sentence.  Given the fact that he had found that he  would
         not face persecution were he to be returned to Iraq, we accept Miss
         Johnstone's submissions that upon release and return to Iraq  these
         incidences of self-harm and suicidal tendencies should be decreased
         rather than increased."

11. Having ourselves considered the psychiatric report carefully,  we  find
    that the medical evidence is  capable  of  supporting  that  conclusion
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal.  Much of Dr Tavernor's  report  was
    in the form of answers to a number of questions posed  to  him  by  the
    appellant's solicitors.  At question 7 ("Do you consider Mr Mosharaf to
    be at risk of self-harm/suicide  after  deportation  to  Iraq.   Please
    comment  on  the  level  of  risk  (i)  with  treatment  (ii)   without
    treatment") Dr Tavernor wrote this:

         "In my opinion the risk of self-harm is chronic.  Factors which may
         increase the  risk  include  deterioration  in  his  mental  health
         including worsening of his post traumatic stress disorder  symptoms
         and increased agitation, increased  stress  levels,  non-compliance
         with or lack  of  availability  of  psychiatric  treatments,  being
         socially isolated and utilising drugs and/or alcohol  as  a  coping
         strategy to deal with his difficulties.  He appears to be  socially
         isolated in the UK and also informed both myself and Dr  Mann  that
         he has no family in Iraq.  He also informed me that he  is  fearful
         for his safety if he is returned to  Iraq.   He  also  has  chronic
         physical ill health including  chronic  pain  from  his  elbow  and
         shoulder, [he is] a socially isolated, middle aged single  man  and
         these demographic  factors  are  associated  with  increased  risk.
         Treatment such as antipsychotic medications with  mood  stabilising
         properties and antidepressant medication to address  PTSD  symptoms
         to an extent ameliorate the risk.  Other treatments which may be of
         benefit  include  psychological  interventions  to  challenges  and
         paranoid thoughts and psychosocial interventions aimed at  reducing
         his isolation and providing support to  reduce  the  likelihood  of
         returning to substance or  alcohol  abuse  would  also  potentially
         reduce the risk of self-harm."

12. That passage represents the  psychiatrist's  response  to  the  central
    issue in this appeal; in line with the Court of Appeal  decision  in  J
    [2005] EWCA Civ 529, there appears to be no dispute that  the  risk  of
    this  appellant  harming  himself  or  committing  suicide  whilst   in
    detention or in transit to Iraq may be effectively minimised below  the
    Article 3 ECHR threshold.   What  is  significant  about  the  doctor's
    answer to the question is the  emphasis  upon  the  appellant's  social
    isolation in the United Kingdom, his agitation  and  stress  caused  by
    continued detention, "demographic factors" including his single status,
    his age and chronic  physical  pain  and  his  tendency  to  return  to
    substance and alcohol abuse.  Whilst the  appellant  told  Dr  Tavernor
    that he feared for his safety upon return to Iraq, the way that fear is
    described in the report does not, in our  opinion,  indicate  that  the
    appellant, in the absence of any objective reason for fearing return to
    Iraq,  possesses  any  powerful  or  disturbing  subjective   fear   of
    returning.  The emphasis in the medical evidence is very much upon  the
    distress cause to the appellant by his continued detention; earlier  in
    the report the doctor had linked the current risk of  self-harm/suicide
    to the thoughts which the appellant had "in his mind and voices telling
    him he was never going  to  leave  prison".   In  the  light  of  these
    observations, we find that the Tribunal  was  justified  in  concluding
    that the  medical  evidence  indicated  that  the  termination  of  the
    appellant's detention in the United Kingdom (by  his  deportation)  was
    likely to reduce, rather than increase,  the  risk  of  self-harm.   Mr
    Nicholson submitted that the Tribunal had failed to give details as  to
    the exact extent of that decrease in  risk  but  we  find  that  it  is
    entirely clear from the  medical  evidence  that  the  risk  which  the
    appellant would face when he is removed  from  detention  and  deported
    would not approach the threshold which would engage Article 3 ECHR.

13. In conclusion, we find that (a) it was open to the Tribunal to conclude
    that the evidence supported a finding that the appellant would  not  be
    at Article 3 ECHR risk either in the United Kingdom or  in  Iraq  as  a
    consequence of his deportation from this country and;  (b)  appropriate
    medical treatment would be available to him in Iraq.  The Tribunal  did
    not make a firm finding that the appellant has friends  and  family  in
    Iraq to whom he might turn but  it  is  clear,  in  the  light  of  the
    Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  poor   credibility,   the
    appellant has not proved that he does not have such individuals who may
    assist him.

14. At the outset of the hearing, we raised the matter of Article  8  ECHR.
    The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal make a brief reference
    to Article 8 and Mr Nicholson submitted that both Articles 3 and 8 were
    engaged in this appeal.  At [47] the Tribunal wrote that:

         "After having carefully analysed the psychiatric report we  do  not
         accept that the appellant reaches the very high threshold  set  out
         in D v UK or N v UK and we do not accept that the Article  8  claim
         that he may commit suicide to be of real risk following Bensaid."

    We are not entirely sure what that sentence means but we find that  the
    Tribunal's analysis is sufficiently clear to dispose of the appellant's
    appeals under both Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.  Mr Nicholson did not  submit
    to us that, if the appellant failed  under  Article  3,  he  might  yet
    succeed under Article 8.





DECISION

15. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 24 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

