
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00679/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                               |On 17 August 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Hulse, Counsel instructed by Virgo Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the hearing of the appeal by  "HM"  against  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department's decision, dated 26 March 2014, refusing
    to revoke a previous deportation order.  The relevant chronology is  as
    follows.

 2. HM, who is now 37 years of age, was born in Uganda on 22 October  1979.
    On 29 November 1991, he, together with his brother "SM", who  was  born
    on 19 May 1977, and is now aged 40, arrived in the United Kingdom.   HM
    was 12 years of age at that time.  The Secretary of State  refused  his
    application for asylum, but granted exceptional leave to  remain  as  a
    dependant of his mother, until 29 November 1992.  On 28 September  1996
    HM was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 3. On 17 February 1998 HM was convicted of murder.  He was 17 years of age
    at the date of the offence, and 18 at the date of his conviction.   The
    brief circumstances of the offence are that he was a member of a  group
    who, together with his brother SM, went to the  victim's  house.   Some
    members of the group were armed with weapons, including knives, and the
    victim was stabbed to death.  On 13 March  1998  HM  was  sentenced  to
    detention at Her Majesty's pleasure, with a minimum term of  ten  years
    which was subsequently reduced to nine on appeal.

 4. In 2005 HM commenced a relationship with "JR" who already  had  a  son,
    "K", who was born on 13 March 2004 and is now aged 12.  At  that  time,
    HM was in open conditions  within  the  prison  establishment.   On  25
    February 2006, the Secretary of State served a  deportation  notice  on
    HM, and on 6 March 2006 he was released from prison.

 5. On [ ] 2006 HM's daughter "S" was born, and is  now  aged  10.   On  10
    February 2008, HM was detained and served with  a  deportation  notice,
    but on 18 April 2008 he was released on bail.  On 7 July 2008, HM's and
    his brother SM's appeal against  the  deportation  notice  was  allowed
    under Article 8 ECHR grounds  by  Immigration  Judge  Nichols.   On  14
    August 2008, judicial review of the Immigration Judge's decision by the
    Secretary of  State  was  granted,  and,  on  5  January  2009,  Senior
    Immigration Judge Lane refused  HM's  appeal  against  the  deportation
    notice.  Thereafter, there was a series of applications for  permission
    to appeal by HM, which were refused by  the  Court  of  Appeal,  on  18
    February 2009 and 20 April 2009.  On 23 April 2009,  the  Secretary  of
    State made a deportation order against HM, and on 11 May  2009  HM  was
    detained. However, although HM's oral renewal of  his  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  was  refused  on  11  June
    2009, HM was released on bail on 17 July 2009.

 6. On [ ] 2010 HM's son "T" was born, and is now 7 years of  age.   On  15
    May 2012, HM applied to revoke the deportation order on Article 8  ECHR
    grounds.  On 9 November  2012,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    application to revoke the deportation order.  On  28  March  2013,  the
    High Court refused HM's application for permission to judicially review
    the decision of the Secretary of State, and, on 10  May  2013,  HM  was
    detained, but then released on bail on 10  June  2013.  On  23  January
    2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  served  a  notice  of  liability  for
    deportation upon HM.  On 17 February 2014, HM submitted a  response  to
    the notice  of  liability  for  deportation.  On  26  March  2014,  the
    Secretary of State refused HM's application to revoke  the  deportation
    order.

 7. On 1 July 2014, the First-tier Tribunal allowed HM's appeal against the
    deportation order, on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  In  the  course  of  the
    judgment, the FTT found that HM had  rebutted  the  presumption,  under
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that he
    constituted a danger to the community, but found that he was neither  a
    refugee, nor entitled to asylum.

 8. On 17 July 2014, the Secretary of State's application for permission to
    appeal against the decision of the FTT was granted. On 2 October  2014,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden and Lord Boyd allowed the  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State, on the basis that the FTT had unduly  focused  upon
    delay by the Secretary of State, and adjourned  the  rehearing  of  the
    determination of HM's Article 8 ECHR  challenge.   The  rehearing  took
    place on 10 February 2017.  Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden  allowed  HM's
    appeal against the deportation order on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 9. On 11 April 2017, the Court of Appeal allowed the Secretary of  State's
    appeal against the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden.  The basis
    upon which they did so was, inter alia, that he had overly  focused  on
    the effect of the deportation order on the children, which was a matter
    already taken into account under the exception in  Section  117C(5)  of
    the 2002 Act, and had insufficiently focused upon  whether  there  were
    very compelling circumstances, over and above those  described  in  the
    exceptions in Section 117C(4) and (5).  Therefore, the matter now comes
    before us to determine.

10. The respondent submits that, under Section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007, the Secretary of State must make a deportation order  in  respect
    of a foreign criminal, unless one  of  the  exceptions  in  Section  33
    applies.  There is no doubt that HM is a foreign criminal,  as  defined
    by Section 32(1) of the 2007 Act, and one of the exceptions is that the
    removal of the foreign criminal would be a  breach  of  his  Convention
    rights.   Insofar  as  the  Secretary  of  State  is   concerned,   the
    Immigration Rules relating to deportation are to be found in  Part  13,
    and paragraphs 398 to 399A apply, where an individual asserts that  his
    deportation  would  be  contrary  to  Article  8  ECHR.   The   current
    situation, which is effective from 28 July 2014, under  paragraph  398,
    is as follows:-

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and

              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                      the public good and in the  public  interest  because
                      they have been convicted of an offence for which they
                      have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                      least 4 years ...

                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                      consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                      if it does not, the public  interest  in  deportation
                      will only be outweighed by other factors where  there
                      are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

11.  Paragraph  399A  relates  to  the  situation  where  a  person  has  a
    relationship either with a child under the age of  18  who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom and/or with a partner who is in the United  Kingdom  and
    is a British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom.  Paragraph  399A
    applies to a person who  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of their life.

12. However, we are particularly  concerned  with  the  provisions  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, which, as from 28 July 2014, introduced  Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act, which applies where a Tribunal is required to consider
    an appeal from a deportation decision by the Secretary of State,  which
    is alleged to be in breach of Article 8.  It is provides as follows:-

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  Tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -



              (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

              (b)      as a result would be unlawful under Section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             Tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

              (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

              (b)       in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in Section 117C.

         (3)  In sub-section (2), 'the public interest question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         117B......

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

              (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

              (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

              (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in sub-sections (1) to (6) are to be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  Tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

13. The construction of Part 5A of the 2002 Act has been considered by  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 where Lord Justice Sales stated:-

         "45. It is common ground that the starting point for  consideration
             of the proper construction of Part 5A of the 2002 Act is  that
             sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
             for a structured approach to  the  application  of  Article  8
             which produces in all cases a final result which is compatible
             with, and not in violation of, Article 8. In that regard, both
             sides affirmed the approach to interpretation of  Part  5A  to
             ensure compliance with Article 8 as explained by this court in
             NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2016] EWCA Civ 662, in particular at [26] and [31]."

14. Lord Justice Sales went on to state, at paragraph 50:-

         "50. Another type of consideration identified in Part 5A  to  which
             regard must be had under section 117A(2) is the  statement  in
             section 117C(6) that 'the public interest requires deportation
             unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
             those described in Exceptions 1 and 2' (my  emphasis).   There
             is a similar requirement in section  117C(3),  on  its  proper
             construction: see NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             at [23]-[27].  In these provisions,  Parliament  has  actually
             specified  what  the  outcome  should  be  of   a   structured
             consideration of Article 8 in relation to foreign criminals as
             set out in section 117C,  namely  that  under  the  conditions
             identified there the public interest requires deportation. The
             'very compelling circumstances' test in  section  117C(3)  and
             (6) provides  a  safety  valve,  with  an  appropriately  high
             threshold  of  application,  for   those   exceptional   cases
             involving foreign criminals in which the  private  and  family
             life  considerations  are  so  strong   that   it   would   be
             disproportionate and in violation of Article 8 to remove them.
              If, after working through the  decision-making  framework  in
             section 117C, a court or Tribunal concludes that it is a  case
             in which section 117C(3) or (6) says that the public  interest
             'requires' deportation,  it  is  not  open  to  the  court  or
             Tribunal to deny this and to hold  that  the  public  interest
             does not require deportation."

15. In the present case, the Court of Appeal,  in  NE-A  (Nigeria)  and  HM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    239, considered the cases of, inter alia, Hesham  Ali  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11.

16. In the course of his judgment, with which McFarlane  LJ  and  Flaux  LJ
    agreed, Sir Stephen Richards accepted that  the  analysis  in  Rhuppiah
    (supra) was  strictly  obiter.  However,  he  considered  that  it  was
    correct, and should be followed.  At paragraphs 14 and 15, he stated:-

         "14. ... I see no  reason  to  doubt  what  was  common  ground  in
             Rhuppiah and was drawn from NA (Pakistan), that sections 117A-
             117D, taken together, are intended to provide for a structured
             approach to the application of Article 8 which produces in all
             cases a final result which is compatible with Article  8.   In
             particular, if in working through the structured approach  one
             gets to  section  117C(6),  the  proper  application  of  that
             provision produces a final result compatible with Article 8 in
             all cases to which it applies.  The  provision  contains  more
             than a statement of policy to which regard must be  had  as  a
             relevant  consideration.  Parliament's  assessment  that  'the
             public interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2' is one to which the Tribunal is  bound  by
             law to give effect.

         15.  None of this is problematic  for  the  proper  application  of
             Article  8.   That   a   requirement   of   'very   compelling
             circumstances' in order to outweigh the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  at  least  four
             years' imprisonment is compatible with Article 8 was  accepted
             in MF (Nigeria) and in Hesham Ali (supra) itself.  Of  course,
             the provision to that effect in section 117C(6)  must  not  be
             applied as if it contained some  abstract  statutory  formula.
             The context is that of the balancing exercise under Article 8,
             and  the  'very   compelling   circumstances'   required   are
             circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the   strong   public
             interest  in  the  deportation  of   the   foreign   criminals
             concerned.  Provided that a Tribunal has that context in mind,
             however, a finding that 'very compelling circumstances' do not
             exist in a case to which section 117C(6) applies will  produce
             a final result, compatible with Article  8,  that  the  public
             interest requires deportation.   There  is  no  room  for  any
             additional element in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
             under Article 8."

17. It is apparent that a significant amount of material has been  provided
    by HM to the various Tribunals which  have  considered  his  Article  8
    rights.  In summary, the matters which have  been  particularly  relied
    upon at this hearing include his relationship with his  partner,  which
    has subsisted since 2005, and his relationship with his three children,
    one, a stepchild, with whom he has been in  a  relationship  since  his
    release from prison, and the other two children, since their respective
    births.

18. In addition, it is of  significance  that  HM  has  not  committed  any
    further offences since his release from prison.  He has striven to find
    employment, and has been successful in doing so; as we  understand  it,
    he is now a qualified gas engineer.  It has been determined that he  is
    not a danger to the community, and he assists with  mentoring  troubled
    teenagers.  Moreover, it is now approximately twenty  years  since  the
    date of the original offence, which was committed at a time when he was
    still relatively young, namely 17 years of age,  and  he  was  released
    from prison about ten years ago.

19. On behalf of HM, it is pointed out that both K and T have, and continue
    to face, particular difficulties. K has been diagnosed with  Asperger's
    Syndrome and ADHD, and,  more  recently,  T  has  been  diagnosed  with
    autistic spectrum disorder.

20. Evidence concerning these matters was placed before the  original  FTT,
    and is in our bundle, between D32 and E1. It  comprises  a  significant
    amount of material, including statements from those who know HM and his
    partner, which speak extremely highly of HM, and the way  in  which  he
    has striven to lead a conscientious and crime-free life, and  the  care
    which he devotes  to  his  family.   In  addition,  there  was  medical
    evidence which supported K's diagnoses of Asperger's Syndrome and ADHD.



21. This evidence, together  with  other  factors,  were  summarised,  very
    helpfully, by the Court of  Appeal  in  the  judgment  of  Sir  Stephen
    Richards at paragraphs 36 and 37, as follows:-

         "36. The contents of the first list were: (1) K was just  10  years
             old and had a diagnosis of Asperger's Syndrome  and  ADHD;  he
             regarded HM as his father; (2) HM had two children of his own,
             then aged 7 and 4; (3) all the children were British;  (4)  HM
             lived in a settled home  environment  with  the  children  and
             their mother with whom he had been  in  a  relationship  since
             2005; (5) HM and his partner worked and provided for the three
             children; (6) HM took his  parental  role  seriously  and  was
             supportive of his partner; (7) K paid particular attention  to
             HM and responded better to him than to K's  mother;  (8)  HM's
             partner and the children would not move to Uganda if  HM  were
             deported, because of K's educational and medical needs; (9) if
             HM were deported to Uganda there was a real  possibility  that
             his partner would not  be  able  to  continue  her  work,  and
             certainly not her current hours; (10) the partner did not know
             how she would cope with the stress of being a single parent to
             three  children  one  of  whom   had   extremely   challenging
             behaviour; and (11) there was evidence  that  changes  to  the
             family structure could have  a  seriously  detrimental  impact
             upon K's behaviour and well being.  Considering those  factors
             overall the FTT found that the best interests of the  children
             lay in HM remaining with them and the family  unit  continuing
             as it was.

         37.  The second list continued the numerical sequence: (12) HM  was
             released from prison in March 2006 but was not served  with  a
             notice of intention to deport until February  2008;  (13)  the
             Secretary of State took no steps to  deport  HM  between  July
             2009, when his initial appeal rights were exhausted,  and  May
             2012; (14) HM came to the UK as an 11 year old and was now 35;
             (15) he was 17 when he committed the crime for  which  he  was
             convicted; (16) he was found guilty of murder, a very  serious
             crime; (17) the risk of his re-offending was low; (18) he  had
             worked since his release from prison and had a good  reference
             from his employer; (19) he volunteered at  a  school  offering
             help and advice to 14-17 year olds and was part of a mentoring
             programme for troubled teenagers who had  been  expelled  from
             school or those who had had a troubled childhood; and (20)  he
             had no family ties with Uganda other than a brother there."

22. This morning Miss Hulse in helpful submissions  has  provided  us  with
    further evidence, including a bundle of  documents,  paginated  between
    pages 1 and 31, which provides up-to-date information  in  relation  to
    the effect that the medical conditions, concerning both K  and  T,  has
    upon both their lives, and that of the family.

23. In addition, in relation to T, there are two  further  documents  which
    have been provided to us, firstly,  dated  15  June  2017,  from  Karen
    McElligott, a therapist, and, secondly, dated 16 June  2017,  from  the
    educational  psychologist,  Juliette  Daniel.   The  first   of   these
    describes T as a delightful boy who has difficulties with his  posture,
    manual dexterity and sensory processing, all of which  impacts  on  his
    daily activities. It advises the type of programmes and equipment which
    have been provided to address these issues.  The second document,  from
    Juliette Daniel, notes that T had been diagnosed with autistic spectrum
    disorder in November 2016 by the Croydon Child  and  Adolescent  Mental
    Health Service, and in summary states that:-

         "[T] is a pupil whose overall cognitive  ability  lies  within  the
         average range.  His reading  and  spelling  skills  are  developing
         along appropriate lines.  His numeracy skills are below average and
         he is receiving small group intervention.  He has asd and a  visual
         timetable is in place to provide a  structure.   Staff  would  need
         continue to monitor his social interactions and  relationship  with
         his peers and provide support if needed, such as including him in a
         social skills group."

24. In addition to these documents, Miss Hulse places  particular  emphasis
    on the report, which formed the backdrop to  previous  decisions,  from
    the independent social worker, Peter Horrocks, dated  2  February  2015
    relating to all three of the children, who are cared for by HM and  his
    partner.  It is quite clear that each of the children would like HM  to
    stay in their lives in the United Kingdom.  That was voiced directly by
    both K and S, and inferred, quite appropriately, in the case of T.   Mr
    Horrocks gives his opinion upon the likely  effect  of  any  change  in
    their circumstances, in particular if HM was returned  to  Uganda.   He
    concluded that, so far as K was concerned,  with  the  difficulties  he
    faced from his disorders, it would have a  significant  impact  on  his
    functioning and emotional wellbeing, and that there was likely to be  a
    significant deterioration in K's behaviour.  Likewise,  in  respect  of
    the other children it would have had a detrimental effect.  Insofar  as
    HM's partner is concerned, she would struggle to meet  all  aspects  of
    her children's needs, if she remains in the United Kingdom  and  HM  is
    deported to Uganda, because she would, in effect, be a  single  parent.
    So far as the best interests of the children are concerned, Mr Horrocks
    stated:-

         "In my professional opinion it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children of this family if [HM] was to remain  in  the  UK  and  to
         continue playing his role as father of the family  and  partner  to
         [JR].  Currently the family functions to a high degree and they are
         able to manage the additional needs of [K], whereby he  remains  in
         mainstream  education  and  is  making  very  positive  educational
         progress.  This is in my  opinion  a  happy  family  unit  and  the
         children's needs are being met to a high degree, all three children
         of this family are achieving and progressing as a result."

25. He concluded that, if HM was returned to  Uganda,  this  would  have  a
    fundamental and detrimental impact on the family unit.   It  is  to  be
    noted that this opinion was provided at a time when T had not yet  been
    diagnosed as suffering with autistic spectrum disorder,  and,  as  Miss
    Hulse correctly points out, the detrimental  effect  is  likely  to  be
    enhanced, so far as he is concerned, because of the difficulties  which
    he faces as a result of that disorder.

26. The approach of this court to whether or not there are very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in exceptions  1  and  2,
    has been  considered  in  a  number  of  cases,  in  particular  in  NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    662 where, at paragraph 30, the Court of Appeal stated:-

         "30. In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8."

27. Furthermore, in MM (Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (Rev 1) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 the Court of  Appeal  stated  at
    paragraph 24:-

         "24.  This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case. Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   'unduly   harsh'
             provisions from their context. It would mean that the question
             of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard  to
             the force  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term  'unduly'  is
             mistaken for 'excessive' which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history."

28. In the present case, Miss Hulse submits that there are very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in exceptions  1  and  2,
    which would render  disproportionate  any  decision  to  return  HM  to
    Uganda. She focuses on the effect which the deportation would  have  on
    all three children, and in particular on K and T.  She submits that  K,
    whilst  being  intelligent,  has  difficulty  with  social  skills  and
    boundaries, and that T's condition carries its own  difficulties  which
    are likely to require a level of care, over and above that of  a  child
    who does not suffer from such a disorder.  She  contrasts  the  present
    situation, in which both parents in full-time employment, HM as  a  gas
    engineer and his partner as a  mental  health  nurse,  look  after  the
    children and themselves without recourse to public funds, with that, if
    HM is deported, in which it is unlikely  that  HM's  partner  would  be
    unable to continue her full-time employment, as she would be obliged to
    look after the three children on her own. Miss Hulse  relies  upon  the
    report of Peter Horrocks, and the more recent documents,  to  show  the
    detrimental effect that separation from their father figure would  have
    upon the children.  She  points  to  the  positive  effect  which  HM's
    presence has upon the children, which will be lost if he  is  deported.
    She submits that it would not be possible for the family to relocate to
    Uganda, because the  children  have  lived  all  their  lives  in  this
    country, as has HM's partner, and they would  lose  both  the  extended
    family  which  they  have  in  this  country,  and  their  employments.
    Moreover, she submits that it is likely that the mental health services
    provided in Uganda would be less effective than those provided  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She submits that, because of these factors, if  HM  is
    returned to Uganda, it is the present  intention  of  HM's  partner  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, and care for the  children  as  a  single
    mother.

29. On the other hand, Mr Jarvis, who appears on behalf of the Secretary of
    State, submits that, although there is the  additional  factor  of  the
    disorders  from  which  both  K  and  T  suffer,  the  effect  of  HM's
    deportation is no more than that in other  cases  where  children  form
    part of the family unit.  He submits that if HM's  partner  chooses  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, the  children  will  not  only  have  the
    continuing benefit of their  mother's  care,  but  she  will  have  the
    support of the extended family, and particularly in relation to  K  and
    T,  the  valuable  assistance  already  being  provided  by  the  local
    authority and the National Health Service.  He submits that,  in  those
    circumstances, the effect of returning HM to Uganda will not be  unduly
    harsh upon either HM's partner or the children.

30. We have given anxious scrutiny to the circumstances relating both to HM
    and to the family unit, and in particular to the difficulties which are
    faced by both K and T.

31. Turning firstly to consider  section  117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act,  and
    putting to one side the issue of the period of his lawful residence  in
    the United Kingdom, although we accept that HM  is  both  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, we do  not  consider  that
    there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Uganda. HM spent the first 12 years of his life in  Uganda,  and  would
    have been socially and culturally integrated into Uganda at that  time.
    He is clearly an individual of intelligence and aptitude, and is likely
    to be  able  to  reintegrate  into  the  culture  and  society  of  his
    childhood. Moreover, he has employment skills which he would be able to
    redeploy in Uganda, and, if returned, he would  be  reunited  with  his
    brother SM, who has previously been deported  to  Uganda,  due  to  his
    previous conviction for murder. HM has also not been lawfully  resident
    in the United Kingdom for most of his life, as he ceased to have status
    when the deportation order was made against him in April 2009.

32. Turning secondly to consider section  117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act,   we
    accept that HM not only has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    his  partner,  but  also  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with the three children, K, S and T.   We  have  carefully
    considered the issue as to whether the effect of his deportation on his
    partner and/or the children would be  "unduly  harsh".   We  of  course
    accept that, in accordance with the opinion of Mr Horrocks, it would be
    in the children's best  interests  for  HM  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. However, although this is not a  matter  without  considerable
    significance, it is not the sole,  nor  necessarily  the  determinative
    issue in this case.  In the vast majority of cases, the removal of  the
    father figure is likely to have a significantly detrimental effect upon
    the children, albeit we accept that in the present case this is  likely
    to be enhanced, due to the particular difficulties faced by both K  and
    T. However, when considering this issue, it is also necessary  to  take
    account of the extremely serious nature of HM's previous conviction for
    murder, albeit committed at time when he was 17 years of age,  and  his
    immigration history. In this regard, it  is  not  without  significance
    that HM and JS commenced their relationship at a time when HM was still
    subject to a custodial regime, and, prior to his release from  custody,
    he had already been served with a  notice  of  deportation.  Therefore,
    throughout their relationship, both HM and JS have been  aware  of  the
    precarious nature of HM's immigration  status,  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's determination to effect his removal to Uganda.

33. It is also of significance that if HM were to return to Uganda, and, as
    presently understood, his partner and  their  children  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, the children would continue to benefit from the devoted
    care which has been provided  to  them  by  their  mother  since  their
    births. It may be that JS would be unable to continue to undertake full-
    time, as opposed to part-time employment, and  therefore  be  at  least
    partly dependent upon state benefits. However, the value  of  the  care
    which she has provided to her children to  date,  and  would  no  doubt
    continue to provide, is not in doubt. Moreover, in so far as  K  and  T
    are concerned, it is clear that the local authority and National Health
    Service already provide significant assistance with their extra  needs.
    Not only is there every reason to believe that this will continue,  but
    there is no reason to doubt that if, due to HM's absence, further needs
    arise, these too will be  provided  by  the  local  authority  and  the
    National Health Service.

34. Taking all these factors into account, we  do  not  consider  that  the
    effect of HM's deportation upon  either  JS  or  the  children,  whilst
    undoubtedly detrimental, would be unduly harsh.

35. However, we have in any event, considered whether taking  all  relevant
    factors into account, there are very compelling circumstances, over and
    above those described in section 117C(4) and (5), such that the  effect
    of HM's  deportation  would  be  disproportionate,  and  amount  to  an
    unlawful interference with HM's right to respect for private and family
    life under Article 8(2) ECHR. In this regard, we note  that  since  his
    release from his sentence of custody, HM has refrained from any further
    criminal conduct. Moreover, he has trained for  and  obtained  valuable
    employment,  and  has  positively  contributed  to  advising   troubled
    teenagers. Although we do not underestimate any of  these  factors,  we
    would observe that remaining free of  crime  is  a  generally  expected
    societal norm, and, as we have already observed, HM  will  be  able  to
    adapt and transfer the valuable skills which he has learned to his  new
    circumstances in Uganda. In the event, we do not consider that,  either
    on their own or when considered together with the other factors already
    considered in relation to section  117C(4)  and  (5),  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2.

36. In these circumstances, and bearing in mind the public interest in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals, such as HM, we do not  consider  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State, refusing to revoke  a  previous
    deportation order, is disproportionate,  and  amounts  to  an  unlawful
    interference with HM's right to respect for his family and private life
    under Article 8(1) ECHR.





Notice of Decision

37. Therefore, for these reasons, we dismiss the appeal made by HM  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State dated 26 March 2014, refusing to
    revoke her previous deportation order.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 17/08/2017


Mr Justice Jeremy Baker







