


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00952/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Hendon Magistrates' Court          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 16 March 2015                            |On 17 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         jessy amour fabien longfort
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Longfort's  appeal
against the decision to deport him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
Regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  Longfort  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of France, born on 25 November  1991.  He  claims
to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 1997  with  his  mother.  He  first
came to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  here  in  2006.  He  has
received twelve convictions for seventeen offences since that time:

On 23 January 2007 he was given a  nine  month  referral  order  for  common
assault; on 4 July 2007 he received a three month action  plan  order,  four
week curfew order and a three month  parenting  order  for  taking  a  motor
vehicle without consent and handling stolen goods; on 28 September  2007  he
was sentenced for breaching the action plan order and the previous  sentence
was revoked and varied to a three month action plan; on 17 December 2008  he
received a 12 month conditional discharge for theft; on  24  April  2009  he
received a 12 month community rehabilitation  order,  a  60  hour  community
punishment order and a four week curfew order  for  robbery  and  breach  of
conditional  discharge;   on  3  September  2009  he  received  a  12  month
community rehabilitation order for possession  of  a  Class  A  drug  (crack
cocaine); on 23 September  2009  he  received  a  community  punishment  and
rehabilitation order for various offences including assaulting  a  constable
and failing to surrender to custody; on 19  February  2010  he  received  12
months detention at a Young Offenders Institute for burglary and theft;  and
on 5 May 2011 he received  an  18  month  detention  in  a  Young  Offenders
Institute for burglary and theft.

The index offence, leading to the current deportation  proceedings,  was  of
attempted robbery, when he attacked a 16 year old school girl and  attempted
to take her mobile telephone, for which he was  convicted  on  11  September
2012 and sentenced to 16 months detention in a  Young  Offenders  Institute.
However since that  time,  and  whilst  on  licence,  he  committed  further
offences. On 19 October 2013 he was convicted of possession  of  a  Class  B
drug (cannabis) and received a �110  fine  and  on  24  March  2014  he  was
convicted of burglary, after breaking  into  a  flat  and  stealing  various
items on 8  October  2013,  for  which  he  received  a  27  month  term  of
imprisonment.

The appellant's liability to deportation was considered  by  the  respondent
on 31 March 2010 in light of his conviction on 19 February 2010,  and  on  8
December 2011 in light of his conviction on 5 May 2011, but  no  action  was
taken against him on either occasion. He was issued with a warning  on  both
occasions.

Following his conviction on 11 September 2012 the appellant was  served,  on
27 November 2012, with a notice of liability to deportation. On 3  May  2013
the respondent made a decision to deport him under Regulation 21 of the  EEA
Regulations.

In the reasons for deportation letter, the respondent  considered  that  the
appellant had not acquired the right to  permanent  residence  and  that  he
posed a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  interests
of public policy. It was considered further that his deportation  would  not
breach his Article 8 rights under the ECHR.

In a supplementary letter dated 14 May 2013,  the  respondent  accepted,  on
the basis  of  documentary  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant  of  his
attendance at  school  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that  he  had  obtained  a
permanent right of residence by virtue of a five year period  of  continuous
residence. However, whilst it was  accepted  that  he  had  resided  in  the
United Kingdom for at least ten years, it was not accepted that he  met  the
necessary integration test so as to qualify him  for  the  higher  level  of
protection on imperative grounds of public security. On  the  basis  of  the
evidence produced, and in view of the fact that  he  had  been  assessed  as
posing a high risk of  re-offending,  the  respondent  considered  that  his
deportation was justified on serious grounds of public policy.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard on  20
August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart.  The  judge  accepted
that he had acquired not only a right of  permanent  residence  but  also  a
right to enhanced protection  and  that  deportation  could  accordingly  be
justified only on imperative grounds of public  security.   Relying  on  the
judgments in Tsakouridis (European citizenship) [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09  and
Essa   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the    Home    Department    (EEA:
rehabilitation/integration)  Netherlands  [2013]   UKUT   316   and   having
considered the  question  of  integration,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
threshold of imperative grounds of public security  had  not  been  met  and
that the appellant's deportation would therefore be in breach of  Regulation
21  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  She  allowed  the  appeal  under   the   EEA
Regulations.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  that  the  appellant  had
ignored two warning letters  and  that  he  remained  a  high  risk  of  re-
offending;  and  that  she  had  erred   in   her   consideration   of   his
rehabilitation prospects in France.

Permission to appeal was granted on 27 October 2014 on the grounds raised.

Appeal hearing and submissions

At the hearing before me, the appellant confirmed that he  did  not  have  a
legal representative and was happy to proceed.

Mr Tarlow made an application to amend the grounds to  include  a  challenge
to the judge's finding that the higher level of protection,  on  "imperative
grounds" applied, on the basis that there was a  lack  of  reasoning  and  a
failure to address the considerations in MG  (prison-Article  28(3)  (a)  of
Citizens Directive) [2014] UKUT 392.

I allowed the amendment, given that it seemed to me to  be  an  obvious  and
relevant point and that, in any event, the first  line  of  ground  one  was
indicative of such a challenge.

Mr Tarlow went on to submit that the  judge's  finding  at  [31],  that  the
appellant was not a persistent offender, was almost perverse  in  the  light
of his offending history. He  submitted  that,  in  the  light  of  MG,  the
appellant did not qualify for the highest level of protection  and,  if  the
Tribunal accepted that the judge had erred in  that  respect,  the  decision
had to be re-made since all her findings flowed from that assessment.

The appellant had no response to the question of  the  protection  threshold
in legal terms and accordingly I advised the parties that  in  my  view  the
Tribunal had erred in law  in  its  assessment  of  the  relevant  level  of
protection and had failed to take into consideration the relevant case  law.
Accordingly I set aside the judge's decision. I then considered how best  to
proceed with the re-making of the decision.

The appellant was keen for me to re-make  the  decision  straight  away.  He
advised me that his mother had told him the previous evening that she  would
be attending the Tribunal hearing.  However  she  was  not  present.  I  was
concerned that she may have believed the hearing  to  commence  at  2pm,  as
there had been an error in the administration of  the  court  list  and  the
list indicated a 2pm start, whereas in fact the  case  had  been  listed  to
commence at 10.30am, which was the time the appellant said he had  told  her
to attend. Accordingly I rose in order for efforts to  be  made  to  contact
her. When she failed to answer the calls made to her on the number  provided
by the appellant I advised the parties that I was minded to remit  the  case
to the First-tier Tribunal so that evidence  could  be  given  and  findings
made in regard to the question of integration.

However the appellant requested that the decision be re-made by  me  in  the
absence of his mother. I advised him that that may well  be  detrimental  to
his case since his mother's involvement in his  life  was  relevant  to  the
issue of integration, but he was adamant that he wished the  proceedings  to
continue and did not want an adjournment. In the  circumstances,  and  given
that there was no further evidence, other than a more recent  OASys  report,
some certificates and a statement from the appellant which  he  produced,  I
proceeded to hear submissions with a view to re-making the decision (in  any
event there was no appearance by the appellant's mother at 2pm).

Mr Tarlow submitted that the appellant was a recidivist and  that  the  more
recent OASys report  did  not  materially  assist  him  as  his  pattern  of
behaviour had continued and he still posed a risk of  harm  to  the  public.
There was no level of integration. He was not entitled to the highest  level
of protection. There were serious grounds of public  policy  justifying  his
deportation.

The appellant, in response, submitted that  prior  to  re-offending  he  had
been getting his life together and had  been  signing  on  for  nine  months
until the Home Office took his passport off  him,  so  preventing  him  from
finding work.  The respondent was wrong in considering  him  to  be  a  high
risk of re-offending, as the recent OASys report assessed him  as  a  medium
risk. He was now an even lower risk as he had undergone a  victim  awareness
course in prison and had not had any drugs and had  certificates  confirming
that. He had no prospects in France and would be homeless. He had learned  a
lot in prison and had matured and realised the  benefits  of  his  skill  in
art. He had won first prize in two competitions for art work in  prison,  he
was a peer mentor in  graphic  design  and  he  had  built  up  his  digital
portfolio. He had a reference from his graphic design class teacher  and  he
could use that to get into university. He was looking at a career  in  games
design. His mother had always come to court when she had  been  informed  of
the hearing and she had faxed a letter of support to  the  detention  centre
in Dover which had unfortunately not been sent  on  when  he  was  moved  to
Colnbrook. His younger brother had lived in the United Kingdom all his  life
from the age of six months and was going to go to university and  he  wanted
to be here for him. His mother was an NHS nurse and did not have  a  lot  of
money and would find it difficult to help him  if  he  had  to  relocate  to
France. He would not re-offend.

Consideration and findings.

Having found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
consider the findings in MG with respect  to  the  level  of  protection  to
which the appellant was entitled under the EEA Regulations, I  now  turn  to
that case and to the relevant article  of  the  Citizens  Directive,  namely
Article 28 of Directive 2004/38/EC, as reflected in  Regulation  21  of  the
EEA Regulations, which states as follows:
       "1.      Before taking an expulsion decision on grounds  of  public
      policy or public security, the host Member State shall take account of
      considerations such as how long the individual concerned  has  resided
      on its territory, his/her age, state of health,  family  and  economic
      situation, social and cultural integration into the host Member  State
      and the extent of his/her links with the country of origin.
      2.      The host Member State may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
      against Union  citizens  or  their  family  members,  irrespective  of
      nationality,  who  have  the  right  of  permanent  residence  on  its
      territory, except on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
      security.
      3.      An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
      except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
      security, as defined by Member States, if they:
      (a)      have resided in the host Member State for  the  previous  10
      years; or
      (b)      are a minor, except if the expulsion is  necessary  for  the
      best interests of the child, as provided for  in  the  United  Nations
      Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989."
Following the Upper Tribunal's request, in a decision of 24 August  2012  in
MG (EU deportation - Article 28(3)  -  imprisonment)  Portugal  [2012]  UKUT
268, for a preliminary ruling from the Court of  Justice  and  the  European
Union (CJEU) on Article 28(3)(a) of the Citizens Directive,  the  CJEU  gave
its ruling in Case C-400/12, finding as follows:

    "28. In the light of all of the foregoing, the answer  to  Questions  2
    and 3 is  that,  on  a  proper  construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of
    Directive 2004/38, the 10-year period of residence referred to in  that
    provision must, in principle, be continuous and must be  calculated  by
    counting back from the date of the decision ordering the  expulsion  of
    the person concerned."

and at [33] to [38]:
      "33. It follows that periods of  imprisonment  cannot  be  taken  into
      account for the purposes of granting the enhanced protection  provided
      for in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 and that, in  principle,
      such periods interrupt the continuity of the period of  residence  for
      the purposes of that provision.
      34      As regards the continuity of the period of residence, it  has
      been stated in paragraph 28 above that the 10-year period of residence
      necessary for the granting of enhanced protection as provided  for  in
      Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive 2004/38  must,  in  principle,   be
      continuous.
      35      As for the question of the extent to which the non-continuous
      nature of the period of residence during the 10  years  preceding  the
      decision to expel the person  concerned  prevents  him  from  enjoying
      enhanced protection, an  overall  assessment  must  be  made  of  that
      person's situation on each occasion  at  the  precise  time  when  the
      question of  expulsion  arises  (see,  to  that  effect,  Tsakouridis,
      paragraph 32).
      36      In  that  regard,  given  that,  in  principle,  periods  of
      imprisonment interrupt the continuity of the period of  residence  for
      the purposes of Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38,  such  periods
      may - together with the other factors going to make up the entirety of
      relevant considerations in  each  individual  case  -  be  taken  into
      account by the national authorities responsible for  applying  Article
      28(3) of that directive as part of the overall assessment required for
      determining whether the integrating links previously forged  with  the
      host Member State have been broken, and thus for  determining  whether
      the enhanced protection provided for in that provision will be granted
      (see, to that effect, Tsakouridis, paragraph 34).
      37      Lastly, as regards the implications  of  the  fact  that  the
      person concerned has resided in the host Member State  during  the  10
      years prior to imprisonment, it should be borne  in  mind  that,  even
      though - as has been stated in paragraphs 24 and 25 above  -  the  10-
      year period of residence necessary  for  the  grant  of  the  enhanced
      protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38  must
      be calculated by counting back from the date of the decision  ordering
      that person's expulsion, the fact that  the  calculation  carried  out
      under that  provision  is  different  from  the  calculation  for  the
      purposes of the grant of a right of permanent residence means that the
      fact that the person concerned resided in the host Member State during
      the 10 years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration as
      part of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph 36 above.
      38      In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Questions 1 and 4
      is that Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted  as
      meaning that a period of imprisonment is, in principle,  capable  both
      of interrupting the continuity of the  period  of  residence  for  the
      purposes of that provision and of affecting the decision regarding the
      grant of the enhanced protection provided for thereunder,  even  where
      the person concerned resided in the host Member State for the 10 years
      prior to imprisonment. However, the fact that that person  resided  in
      the host Member State for the 10 years prior to  imprisonment  may  be
      taken into consideration as part of the overall assessment required in
      order to determine whether the  integrating  links  previously  forged
      with the host Member State have been broken."
In MG (prison-Article 28(3) (a) of Citizens Directive) [2014] UKUT 392,  the
Upper Tribunal found some difficulty in interpreting the CJEU's ruling,  but
concluded as follows:

    "48..... If the Court in MG had meant to convey by the terms "cannot be
    taken  into  account"  that  periods  of   imprisonment   automatically
    disqualify a person from enhanced  protection  under  Article  28(3)(a)
    protection, it would not have seen fit to proceed in  paragraph  35  to
    accept as a possibility that the "non-continuous" nature of a period of
    residence  did  not  automatically  prevent  a  person  qualifying  for
    enhanced protection. Nor would  it  have  chosen  in  paragraph  38  to
    describe periods of imprisonment as  "in  principle,  capable  both  of
    interrupting the continuity of the period of residence for the purposes
    of that provision and of affecting the decision regarding the grant  of
    the enhanced protection provided for thereunder..." It would  have  had
    to say that, if they fall within the 10 year period counting back  from
    the date of decision, periods of imprisonment always prevent  a  person
    qualifying for enhanced protection.  In addition, what the  Court  goes
    on to say in paragraph 37 about the implications of  the  fact  that  a
    person has resided in the host Member State during the 10  years  prior
    to imprisonment is clearly intended to underline that even though  such
    a person has had a period of imprisonment during the requisite 10  year
    period (counting back from the date of decision ordering the expulsion:
    see para 27) it is still possible for  them  to  qualify  for  enhanced
    protection and in this regard their prior period of residence  "may  be
    taken into consideration as part of the overall assessment referred  to
    in paragraph 36 above". We also bear in mind, of course, as did Pill LJ
    in Secretary of State for the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1199 at [42] that in Tsakouridis the CJEU  Grand  Chamber  did  not
    consider the fact that Mr Tsakouridis had spent a substantial period of
    time in custody in Germany in the year prior to the decision  to  expel
    him (taken on 9 August 2008) as defeating his eligibility for  enhanced
    protection under Article 28(3)(a). Nevertheless (and this is  where  we
    consider Mr Palmer right and Miss Hirst wrong), the fact that the Court
    specifies that "in principle" periods  of  imprisonment  interrupt  the
    continuity of residence  for  the  purposes  of  meeting  the  10  year
    requirement can only mean that  so  far  as  establishing   integrative
    links is concerned such periods must have a negative impact."

I have highlighted what I consider to be the  most  relevant  parts  of  the
judgment, from which it  is  clear  that  periods  of  imprisonment  can  be
considered as interrupting the continuity of residence by having a  negative
impact, but do  not  necessarily  preclude  the  acquisition  of  ten  years
residence and that the overriding consideration is integration. It is  clear
that the ten years have to be counted back from the relevant decision.

In the appellant's case, he had resided in the United Kingdom for  a  period
of at least ten years prior to his first imprisonment and that is clearly  a
matter which may  be  taken  into  consideration  as  part  of  the  overall
assessment required in order to  determine  whether  his  integrating  links
previously forged with the United Kingdom have  been  broken.  The  relevant
question is whether his integrating links have been broken as  a  result  of
his periods of imprisonment and  accordingly  I  turn  to  the  question  of
integration.

Contrary to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal it seems to me that  the
appellant is a recidivist and persistent offender. Since the age  of  15  he
has been committing criminal offences on a continual basis,  with  at  least
one conviction  for  every  year  of  his  life  thereafter,  such  offences
becoming gradually more serious. He has received two warnings  of  liability
to deportation, which he chose to ignore and, more  significantly,  offended
again within six to seven months of being released from prison,  within  the
period of his  licence,  and  following  the  commencement  of  the  current
deportation proceedings. It is clear that the appellant has  thereby  chosen
to conduct his life outside the norms of society and with no respect to  the
public or to the laws of the country in which he has been residing.

It is of course a significant factor in the appellant's favour that  he  has
resided in the United Kingdom since the age of five years,  that  he  speaks
English as his first language, that he  has  been  educated  in  the  United
Kingdom and that his close family members, his mother  and  brother,  reside
here. However, it is relevant to note, as stated at page 13  of  the  recent
OASys report of 20 November 2014, that he was expelled from school prior  to
sitting his GCSEs due to disruptive behaviour  and  truanting.  He  has  not
worked in the United Kingdom and, as stated  in  the  same  section  of  the
OASys report, he was recalled to prison during the period of his licence  as
a result of  his  re-offending  when  engaging  with  a  charity  which  was
assisting him in securing  employment  in  the  building  trade.  The  OASys
report refers, at page 16, paragraph 7.5 to the lack  of  structure  in  his
day, to his daily use of cannabis and to his association with  drug  dealers
and pro-criminal peers prior to his imprisonment.

There is, furthermore, a lack of evidence to confirm the  appellant's  claim
as to the close family ties he retains in the  United  Kingdom.  Other  than
his mother's letter of support submitted with the Notice of  Appeal  to  the
First-tier Tribunal there is nothing from his mother or brother  by  way  of
statements or oral evidence to support his claim. The appellant  advised  me
that his mother had attended a previous hearing  that  was  adjourned  on  2
February 2015 but there is no confirmation of  that.  He  also  informed  me
that his mother had told him that she would be attending the  hearing  today
but she did not appear. She did not appear at the hearing before the  First-
tier Tribunal and has not provided any statement explaining her  absence  or
confirming her intention to attend. It seems that the appellant  was  living
with his mother and brother prior  to  his  current  imprisonment,  but  the
OASys report suggests that that arrangement has not been confirmed upon  his
release. Page 11 of the report, at section 3, states that he will be  of  no
fixed abode in the  United  Kingdom  on  release  and  requires  support  in
securing accommodation. Page 15 of the report, at section 6, refers to  some
problems with close family members and to a lack of family visits,  although
reference is made to contact through letters and page  38,  section  11.12.2
refers to support from his mother and brother. However, overall, and on  the
basis of the evidence available to me, it seems to me that  the  appellant's
family ties do little to assist his case with  regard  to  the  question  of
integration and even if there was evidence of support from his mother it  is
plain that she has had little or no influence on his behaviour.

Finally, considering the appellant's activities whilst in prison, it is  the
case that during his most recent period of incarceration he appears to  have
made considerable efforts to gain qualifications and to provide a basis  for
his future on release. He has attended  a  course  to  address  his  use  of
cannabis, he has  attended  a  victim  awareness  course  and  he  has  been
successful in his art and graphic design work. Whilst  that  all  stands  in
his favour, the relevant question is whether or not it is sufficient  to  be
able  to  conclude  that  he  has  successfully  rehabilitated  himself  and
provided a solid basis for his integration  into  society.  Unfortunately  I
have to conclude that it is not. Plainly those  activities  were  undertaken
when he was incarcerated and had little alternative and at a  time  when  he
was under a real and imminent threat of  deportation.  Given  his  offending
history  and  his  involvement  in  crime  following  previous  periods   of
imprisonment there can be little confidence in his ability  to  continue  to
pursue such positive activities when at liberty.  That  is  particularly  so
considering that even whilst in prison there continued to be concerns  about
his behaviour and compliance, as expressed at page 23 of the OASys report.

In all the circumstances it seems to me that the  appellant  has  failed  to
show that despite  the  periods  of  detention  interrupting  his  continued
residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  period  of  residence  prior   to
imprisonment and his integrative links to this country are such that  he  is
entitled to the highest level of protection under the EEA Regulations.

Accordingly, and on the basis that it is  accepted  that  he  has  permanent
residence in the United Kingdom, the  appellant  is  entitled  only  to  the
second level of protection under Regulation 21(3) and  his  deportation  can
be justified only on serious grounds of public policy or public security.  I
therefore turn to the question of whether such serious grounds exist.

It is the appellant's case that he no longer poses a risk  of  harm  to  the
public and he relies upon the fact that his level of risk  was  assessed  in
the most recent OASys report as having been reduced  to  medium.  He  claims
that on the basis of rehabilitative work he has undertaken  in  prison,  his
risk should now be considered as low. It is indeed  the  case  that  in  the
OASys report of 7 November 2012,  completed  following  his  conviction  and
imprisonment in September 2012 for the index offence, he was assessed  as  a
high risk of harm to the public and a high risk of  re-offending  whilst  in
the more recent report of 20 November 2014 he has been assessed as posing  a
medium risk of re-offending and a medium risk to the public.  However  there
is no evidence to support his claim to be a low risk. On the contrary it  is
relevant to note that the recent OASys report was written some eight  months
after his conviction, based on  an  assessment  completed  on  19  September
2014, six months after conviction, and thus after a considerable  period  of
time already spent in prison. There is no evidence to suggest that the  risk
he poses has reduced.

The OASys report, at section  2.12,  page  9,  describes  the  appellant  as
follows:

    "[His] behaviour demonstrates a pattern of behaviour in  terms  of  his
    offence of burglary ie a dwelling and theft. He has the  propensity  to
    breach  community  orders/  licence  whilst  being  subjected  to  this
    suggesting his attitude of non compliance and a disregard for the  law.
    His offences suggest that he is opportunistic, impulsive and deviant in
    nature, giving no thoughts of his victims.....there  appears  to  be  a
    willingness for Mr  Longfort  to  resort  to  aggressive  behaviour  to
    resolve conflict or gain what he wants."


Section 12.8 of the report states as follows:

    "Mr Longfort's offending behaviour indicates that he holds pro-criminal
    attitudes, he has not had a stable lifestyle and has  been  willing  to
    engage in offending behaviour that poses a risk of harm  to  others  in
    order  to  get   what   he   wants   either   financial   or   conflict
    resolution....On interview Mr Longfort states that he has  no  problems
    engaging with probation however this conflicts with his  compliance...I
    assess that pro-criminal  attitudes  are  linked  to  risk  of  serious
    harm..."

Section R6.1 of  the  report,  at  page  32,  describes  how  the  appellant
disputed the account of the incident leading to his conviction in  September
2012 for the index offence, minimising the offence  and  claiming  that  the
victim had made up the robbery. That is clearly relevant to  his  perception
of his offending behaviour. Page 36 of the report,  at  R10.6,  provides  an
indication of risk of harm, stating that the appellant poses a  medium  risk
of serious harm, defined as a potential to cause serious harm in  the  event
of a change of circumstances. At page  39  the  report  places  him  in  the
category of a high probability of proven reoffending,  a  high  category  of
proven non-violent reoffending and  a  medium  category  of  proven  violent
reoffending.

Taken as a whole, considering both OASys  reports,  the  lack  of  any  more
recent evidence of risk and the appellant's history of  offending  and  non-
compliance, and bearing in mind in particular the  recent  offending  whilst
already facing deportation proceedings, it seems to  me  that  the  risk  he
poses to the public is considerable. Whilst there  is  evidence,  as  stated
above, of commendable efforts made in prison in attending  various  courses,
there is nevertheless no evidence to suggest that  the  risk  he  poses  has
thereby been reduced. These are all matters which are of course relevant  to
the question of rehabilitation, as discussed in Essa v  Secretary  of  State
for  the  Home  Department  (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)   Netherlands
[2013] UKUT 316. As already  stated  above,  the  appellant  has  failed  to
demonstrate any significant level of integration into  the  United  Kingdom,
despite his years of residence here, and the  absence  of  relevant  factors
contributing  to  integration  also  indicates  a  failure   in   terms   of
rehabilitation.

As to whether or not the likelihood of rehabilitation would  be  greater  in
the United  Kingdom  rather  than  in  France,  it  seems  to  me  that  the
appellant's history of repeat offending  in  this  country  does  little  to
assist him in that regard. He claims that he has now made  a  plan  for  the
future and will attend university and pursue a career  in  art  and  design,
and that  his  deportation  to  France  would  destroy  such  opportunities.
However there is no reason why  such  a  career  could  not  be  pursued  in
France. Whilst he may be more able  in  communicating  in  English  than  in
French, he nevertheless confirmed that he could understand French and  would
therefore be able to communicate in France. In any event  his  communication
would be by way of his art which does not require fluency in French. He  has
extended family there and  has  recently  visited  and  stayed  with  family
friends and there is therefore  no  reason  to  believe  that  he  would  be
without support and homeless as he claims would be the case. It is  relevant
to note in that respect that according to the OASys report he has any  event
no accommodation arranged in the United  Kingdom.  The  OASys  report  makes
frequent reference to the appellant's  pro-criminal  peers  and  association
with drug dealers in the United Kingdom and he would therefore benefit  from
being able to avoid association with former peers by relocating  to  France.
In the circumstances there is nothing in the evidence to indicate  that  the
prospects of rehabilitation would be better in the United Kingdom.

Accordingly, on the evidence before me I  conclude  that  there  are  indeed
serious grounds of public policy justifying and  requiring  the  appellant's
deportation. For the same reasons and on the basis of the  findings  I  have
already made, the principles in Regulation (5) apply. In light of  the  risk
assessments  discussed,  the  personal  conduct  of  the  appellant  plainly
represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one
of the fundamental interests of society. Furthermore, having regard  to  the
considerations in Regulation 21(6) and in  light  of  the  findings  already
made as to the appellant's length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  his
ties to the United Kingdom and  to  France  and  his  integration  into  the
United Kingdom, and considering his age and healthy status, the decision  to
deport him is clearly proportionate.  The respondent was and is entitled  to
seek to deport him and his deportation will not be  in  breach  of  the  EEA
Regulations.

For the sake  of  completeness,  although  the  matter  was  not  raised  or
pursued, I would add, for the same reasons as given above and on  the  basis
of the evidence before me, that the appellant's deportation would not be  in
breach of his Article 8 human rights.




DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  therefore  set
aside and the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed in that regard.  I  re-
make the decision by dismissing Mr Longfort's appeal on all grounds.






















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
