


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00485/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Royal Courts of Justice            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 November 2013                          |On : 11 November 2013        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     A H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, instructed by Blavo & Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This appeal comes before me following a grant of permission to appeal on  23
September 2013.

The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 24 May  1991.  He  claims  to
have arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 June 2007. He applied for asylum  on
13 June 2007. His claim was refused on 11 October 2007 but  he  was  granted
discretionary leave until 24 November 2008 as a minor. On 27  November  2008
he applied for further leave to remain which was  refused  on  16  September
2011. He lodged an out of time appeal on  13  January  2012  which  was  not
accepted by the Tribunal.

On 21 February 2012  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  South  East  London
Magistrates  Court  of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  and  was
sentenced to six months imprisonment. On 25 June 2012 he  was  convicted  at
South East London Magistrates Court of common assault and was  sentenced  to
four months imprisonment. On 14 September 2012 he was convicted  at  Bromley
Magistrates Court of offences against the person (assault) and sentenced  to
three months imprisonment. His total sentence was 13 months imprisonment.

On 12 October 2012 the appellant was served with a notice  of  liability  to
deportation and on 26 October 2012 the respondent made a decision to make  a
deportation order by virtue of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971.
The appellant appealed against that decision, on  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds.

Appellant's Asylum Claim

The appellant's asylum claim was put on the basis of his  religion  and  his
illegal exit from Eritrea. He claimed that, as Pentecostal  Christians,  his
family had experienced problems in Eritrea, that they had  had  to  practice
their faith in secret and that his father was arrested in May  2005  because
of his faith and had not been in contact since that  time.  His  mother  was
also arrested, but released after three days.  Due  to  his  fear  of  being
arrested himself, he left his home in August 2006 and went to  Sudan,  where
he remained for one month, and then went on to Libya where he  was  arrested
and detained for five months before being forcibly returned to  Eritrea.  On
return to Eritrea he was imprisoned for about a month and forced to  perform
manual hard labour, but he managed to escape and in May 2007 fled to  Sudan,
from where he took a flight to an unknown  country  and  then  travelled  by
lorry to the United Kingdom.

The respondent, in refusing the claim on 11 October 2007, noted  significant
discrepancies in the appellant's account of events and did not  accept  that
he was a Pentecostal Christian or that he was imprisoned in Eritrea. It  was
considered that he would be at no risk on return.  In  the  refusal  of  his
subsequent application for leave to remain, on 16 September 2011,  following
his failure to attend  an  interview  on  25  August  2011,  the  respondent
maintained the same reasons for refusal. The respondent also considered  the
country guidance in MA (Draft evaders; illegal departures; risk) Eritrea  CG
[2007] UKAIT 00059 and concluded that the appellant would not  be  perceived
as a draft evader or deserter by the  Eritrean  authorities  and  would  not
face any risk on return on the basis of illegal exit. His  removal  was  not
considered to be in breach of his human rights.

Subsequent representations were made on behalf of the  appellant  requesting
re-service of the decision in order to enable the  appellant  to  attend  an
interview or make an in-time appeal, on the grounds that  his  disappearance
from the immigration system had been as  a  result  of  him  suffering  from
mental health problems and being hospitalised and having been  found  living
on the streets. However, that was not granted and in a decision made  on  17
January 2012 the First-tier Tribunal refused to extend time for appealing.

Deportation Proceedings

Following the appellant's conviction on various counts of  assault  and  his
sentence to a total of 13  months  imprisonment,  a  decision  was  made  to
deport him. The reasons given by the respondent for that  decision,  as  set
out in their letter of 26 April  2013,  were  that  he  had  demonstrated  a
propensity  for  violence  and  that  his  removal  was  necessary  for  the
prevention  of  disorder  and  crime.  It  was  not  considered   that   the
presumption in favour of deportation was outweighed by  any  other  factors.
The respondent, in concluding that the  appellant's  deportation  would  not
breach the UK's obligations  under  the  ECHR,  considered  the  immigration
rules relating to family and private life but found that the  appellant  did
not meet the requirements of those  rules.  Consideration  was  given  to  a
letter from a mental health practitioner at HMP High  Down  confirming  that
the appellant was known to the mental health  services,  that  he  had  been
diagnosed with schizophrenia and was on medication to stabilise  his  mental
state and risks, that he presented psychotic symptoms, and that  on  release
it was important for him to be linked up with the  community  mental  health
services. The respondent concluded, however, that there was adequate  mental
health care available in Eritrea and that the appellant's deportation  would
not breach his human rights.

The appellant's appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal, by a  panel
consisting of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters and Mr  M  E  Olszewski  JP.
The panel heard from the appellant and had regard to  a  psychiatric  report
from Dr David Ho, a Specialist Registrar in Forensic Psychiatry in  relation
to his mental health problems. They were informed that  there  had  been  no
material change in his claim for asylum since it  was  first  made  in  June
2007. They recorded the appellant's evidence that he  had  two  sisters  and
two brothers who lived with their mother in Senafe, Eritrea, and  with  whom
he last had contact, through the Red  Cross,  in  October  2011.  They  also
noted the appellant's claim to have been hearing voices since  he  was  nine
years of age  and  to  have  received  medical  treatment  for  his  medical
condition in Eritrea and been hospitalised in Senafe for  about  two  months
in 2005 before being released and provided with medication for one month.

The panel found the appellant's account of his religion to  be  inconsistent
and rejected as lacking  in  credibility  his  claim  to  be  a  Pentecostal
Christian. They did not accept his account of his father's imprisonment  and
neither did they accept his account of his departure from Eritrea in  August
2006, of being returned to Eritrea and of being imprisoned on  return.  They
considered the question of  risk  on  the  grounds  of  illegal  exit,  with
reference to the country guidance in MO (illegal  exit  -  risk  on  return)
Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190 and MA but found that  he  would  not  have  been
considered medically fit for military or any other service  in  Eritrea  and
that it therefore could not be inferred that he would have had to  exit  the
country illegally. They found that he would be at no risk of persecution  on
return to Eritrea  and  accordingly  dismissed  his  appeal  on  asylum  and
humanitarian protection grounds. With regard to the appellant's  ill-health,
the panel did not find that his removal would breach Articles  3  and  8  of
the ECHR. They considered further that he did not meet the  requirements  of
the  immigration  rules  relevant  to  family  and  private  life  and  they
dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  following
grounds: that the Tribunal had made errors of law in its findings  that  the
appellant did not leave Eritrea illegally; that the Tribunal had  failed  to
determine risk on return to the appellant as a person  of  draft  age;  that
the Tribunal had failed to make a holistic  assessment  of  the  appellant's
individual circumstances in Eritrea when determining whether his removal  in
light of his  mental  health  exposed  him  to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
prohibited by Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR; and that the Tribunal  had  made
errors of law in determining the appellant's Article 8 claim.

Permission to appeal was granted on 23 September 2013 on all grounds.

Appeal hearing

 The appeal came before me on 4 November 2013.  The  appellant  was  present
but was not required to give oral evidence. I  heard  submissions  from  the
parties in regard to the error of law.

 Mr Slatter expanded upon the grounds  of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
Tribunal, when finding that the appellant would have  been  able  to  secure
exemption from military service, failed to give proper consideration to  the
evidence of the expert Professor Kibreab in MO as to the  steps  that  would
have had to be taken in order for him to do so, including having  to  obtain
medical certificates. The  Tribunal  failed  to  show  how  it  got  to  the
conclusion that the appellant  would  have  obtained  exemption  on  medical
grounds. In any event, according to Article  13  of  the  Eritrean  National
Service Proclamation 1995,  as  quoted  at  paragraph  280  of  MA,  and  in
accordance with the findings at paragraph 334 to 336, he  would  still  have
had to undertake 18 months of national service and could be required to  re-
register. The fact that he was required to undergo  hard  manual  labour  on
return to Eritrea raised an issue as to whether he had been declared  unfit.
The Tribunal failed to deal with the question of  whether  the  second  exit
was illegal. With regard  to  Article  3  and  health  grounds,  Mr  Slatter
submitted that the Tribunal had failed to make a holistic assessment of  the
appellant's circumstances, as required in GS and  EO  (Article  3  -  health
cases) India [2012] UKUT 397 and had failed to give full  consideration,  in
terms of assessing the exceptional  cases  referred  to  in  GS  and  EO  at
paragraph 85(5), to the manner in which he would be treated in Eritrea as  a
person with  mental  health  problems.  The  Tribunal  had  also  failed  to
consider Article 8 as a discrete issue,  in  terms  of  physical  and  moral
integrity, including his inability to access the equivalent health care  and
community support in Eritrea; it had failed to give proper consideration  to
the appellant's lack of ties to Eritrea under paragraph 399A; it had  failed
to consider his exceptional circumstances  within  the  rules  in  paragraph
398; and it had failed to consider the  two-stage  process  in  relation  to
Article 8 outside the rules.

Mr Tufan submitted that the Tribunal had  given  detailed  consideration  to
the guidance in MA and MO and was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant
was not telling the truth about having left Eritrea illegally. The  Tribunal
was entitled to accept the appellant's account of having had two  months  of
medical treatment in Eritrea for his mental  health  problems  and  to  have
concluded that he would have been exempt from military  service.  There  was
no evidence before the Tribunal to show that the appellant was able to  meet
the high threshold for establishing an Article 3 claim with respect  to  his
mental health and  his  condition  was  very  different  from  that  of  the
appellants in GS and EO. There was evidence before the Tribunal  of  medical
treatment available in Eritrea, albeit not of the same standard  as  in  the
United Kingdom. The Tribunal was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant
had links to Eritrea  and  that  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 399A and paragraph 398, and to treat the immigration  rules  as  a
complete code with respect to human rights.

In response, Mr Slatter questioned the  Tribunal's  entitlement  to  believe
and rely on only one part of the  appellant's  claim,  namely  to  have  had
medical treatment in Eritrea in 2009,  whilst  rejecting  the  rest  of  his
claim. He also referred to the background evidence produced by Mr  Tufan  in
regard to the availability of medical treatment in  Eritrea.  He  reiterated
his submission as to  the  inadequacies  of  the  Tribunal's  findings  with
respect to Articles 3 and 8.

Consideration and findings.

In my view the Tribunal did not  make  any  errors  of  law  such  that  its
decision needs to be set aside.

The grounds do not challenge the Tribunal's  adverse  credibility  findings.
Mr Slatter submitted that that was not the same as an  acceptance  that  the
appellant's claim was a lie. However  it  is  clear  from  the  respondent's
detailed refusal  reasons  and  the  Tribunal's  findings  that  there  were
significant inconsistencies in the appellant's account, in  particular  with
respect to his religion, his father's detention and his reasons for  leaving
the country, and as such the Tribunal was entitled to take the view that  he
had given a completely untruthful account of his experiences in Eritrea.

The Tribunal was, nevertheless, careful to  remind  itself,  as  it  did  at
paragraph 70, that that was not alone  a  sufficient  basis  for  concluding
that the appellant had lied about having left Eritrea illegally and that  it
was the manner of his exit from Eritrea that was crucial to the question  of
risk on return. That reflected the findings  at  paragraph  449  of  MA,  to
which the Tribunal plainly had full regard. Nevertheless, the  Tribunal  was
entitled to take the appellant's lack of credibility in other  matters  into
account and was in particular entitled to place weight upon  the  fact  that
he had presented an untruthful account of having previously experienced ill-
treatment by the Eritrean authorities as  a  result  of  illegal  exit.  The
Tribunal also gave careful consideration to the country guidance in  MO  and
was aware of the distinction made in that  case  in  circumstances  of  exit
from Eritrea prior to August/ September 2008, when it became more  difficult
for Eritreans to obtain lawful exit from Eritrea, and the relevance of  that
to the appellant's own situation.

It was the finding of the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  would  have  been
considered medically unfit for military or other service  in  Eritrea  as  a
result of his mental health problems. The grounds challenge that finding  as
perverse, although in so doing they erroneously rely on the  fact  that  the
appellant's previous stay in hospital in  Eritrea  was  some  six  to  seven
years prior to his departure from the country, as opposed  to  the  previous
year. In any event, the threshold in demonstrating perversity  is  high  and
the challenge simply fails to meet  that  threshold.  Mr  Slatter  submitted
that the Tribunal was not entitled to reject all of  the  appellant's  claim
but to choose to accept his account  of  having  experienced  mental  health
problems since the age of nine years. However I do not agree.  It  was  open
to the Tribunal to accept part of the  appellant's  claim  whilst  rejecting
others, provided it gave good reasons for so doing, which  I  find  that  it
did.  There  were,  as  already  stated,  significant  inconsistencies   and
discrepancies in the appellant's evidence relating  to  his  experiences  in
Eritrea upon which the Tribunal was fully  entitled  to  rely.  However  his
account of having had mental health problems since the age of  nine  and  of
being  hospitalised  in  Eritrea  for  two  months  in  2005  was   entirely
consistent with other evidence before the Tribunal. The Tribunal had  before
it a psychiatric report from  Dr  Ho  confirming  a  diagnosis  of  paranoid
schizophrenia,  together  with   various   other   reports   detailing   the
appellant's medical treatment and access  to  care  in  the  United  Kingdom
dating back to 2009. Dr Ho's report included the appellant's own account  of
having experienced problems such as hearing voices since  the  age  of  nine
years, as well as accounts given by third parties to whom  he  had  reported
such experiences. As such, the Tribunal was entitled to accept that part  of
the account and to conclude that he would have been and would be, viewed  by
the Eritrean authorities as medically unfit.

Mr Slatter submitted that that was not in itself  sufficient  to  show  that
the appellant would have been able to exit Eritrea legally,  given  that  he
may well still have been required to undertake national service in  Eritrea,
in  accordance  with  Article  13   of   the   Eritrean   National   Service
Proclamation, and that that was a matter to which the  Tribunal  had  failed
to have regard. However it seems to me that that point is  adequately  dealt
with by the evidence the Tribunal had before it at  paragraph  9.48  of  the
UKBA Country of Origin Information Report of 17 August 2012,  in  regard  to
the varying levels of exemption,  and  is  reflected  in  their  finding  at
paragraph 71, that the appellant would have been considered medically  unfit
for military or any other service in Eritrea, a finding  that  was  open  to
the Tribunal to make and that was entirely consistent with the  guidance  in
MO.

Accordingly, I find that the Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude,  on  the
basis of the evidence before it, including the background  information,  the
medical evidence and the appellant's own oral evidence,  and  in  accordance
with the guidance in MA and MO, that he had failed  to  demonstrate  to  the
lower standard of proof that he had exited Eritrea  illegally  and  that  he
would be viewed as a draft evader or deserter.

 With regard to the grounds and to Mr Slatter's submissions  on  Articles  3
and 8, with respect to the appellant's medical condition, I find that  those
matters were more than adequately dealt with by the Tribunal  at  paragraphs
88 to 102. Those findings took full account of the relevant  case  law,  the
background information and the documentary evidence  relating  both  to  the
appellant's  own  circumstances  in  the   United   Kingdom   and   to   the
circumstances to which  he  would  be  returned  in  Eritrea.  Although  the
Tribunal did not cite the case of GS and EO,  there  was  nothing  in  their
findings that was inconsistent with  that  decision.  Mr  Slatter  submitted
that the Tribunal failed to consider Article 8 as a discrete matter, on  the
basis of the appellant's physical and moral integrity. However it  is  clear
from paragraphs 93 to 97 and paragraph 103, as well  as  paragraphs  116  to
118, that the Tribunal gave separate  consideration  to  Article  8,  taking
account of his circumstances in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in  Eritrea  and
taking account of his medical condition and the  care  facilities  available
to him in the United Kingdom and in Eritrea.  The  Tribunal  gave  full  and
comprehensive reasons for concluding that the appellant's deportation  would
not breach his human rights  on  the  basis  of  his  medical  condition  or
otherwise and was entitled to conclude as it did. Mr Slatter's  submissions,
albeit lengthy, amounted to no more than a re-arguing of the case.

As regards the Tribunal's findings with respect to family and  private  life
in general, full and proper reasons  were  given  for  concluding  that  the
appellant's case did not fall within the rules.  With  regard  to  paragraph
399A, the Tribunal was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  retained
ties to Eritrea, on the basis of his  evidence  as  to  his  family  members
remaining there. There was no requirement on  the  Tribunal  to  accept  his
claim to have lost contact with his family, particularly  in  the  light  of
his overall lack of credibility. In any event, in view of the fact  that  he
had not spent at  least  half  of  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  399A,  irrespective
of his ties to Eritrea. Having found that  to  be  the  case,  the  Tribunal
properly  proceeded  to  consider  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
circumstances outweighing the public interest in  deportation,  as  required
by paragraph 398 of the rules. Contrary to the assertion made by Mr  Slatter
it is plain from the findings  made  at  paragraphs  115  to  188  that  the
Tribunal gave adequate consideration to  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
that respect. The Tribunal  was  fully  aware  of  the  appellant's  medical
history and the medical treatment he received and the services to  which  he
had access in the United Kingdom and, whilst no specific reference was  made
to  those  factors  in  those  paragraphs,  such  consideration  was   given
previously within paragraphs 88 and 102 and it is  plain  that  they  formed
part  of  the  Tribunal's  overall  consideration  in  concluding  that   no
exceptional circumstances existed.

With regard to  the  last  ground  of  appeal,  challenging  the  Tribunal's
failure to follow the two-stage approach to Article 8, it seems to  me  that
the Tribunal's approach as set out at paragraphs 120 to  122  was  a  proper
one and one that is  in  any  event  entirely  consistent  with  the  recent
judgement of the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

Taken as a  whole,  the  determination  contains  a  thorough  and  detailed
consideration of  all  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  including  the
evidence specific to the appellant as well as  the  background  information,
and a careful assessment of that evidence in line with  the  principles  and
guidance in the relevant cases of MA and MO and the  case  law  relating  to
health. The Tribunal was entitled to make the findings that it  did  on  the
basis of that evidence and the grounds of appeal do not disclose any  errors
of law in its decision.


DECISION

 The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law, such that the decision has to be set  aside.  I  do
not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
deportation appeal therefore stands.








    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I have  decided
    to continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.















                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
