

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00604/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 July 2017                               |On 25 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                             glezier palmer-luis
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T D H Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This challenge is brought by  the  respondent  in  respect  of  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge J  Robertson  to  allow  this
         appeal against a deportation order made on 1  December  2016  under
         19(3)(b) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  For  ease  of  reference,  I
         continue to refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
         Tribunal.


      2. The appellant is a Portuguese  national,  originally  from  Angola,
         born on 25 July 1989.  He entered the UK in February 2008 aged  18.
         Although the judge  records  that  he  came  with  his  mother  and
         brother, the skeleton argument of 3 December  2017  (sic)  and  the
         appellant's own statement maintain that he came here to join  them.
         On 15 June 2009 was issued with a  registration  certificate  as  a
         dependant. There is no documentary evidence that he has ever worked
         in the UK.



      3. The appellant first came to the attention of the British police  on
         16 March 2010 whether he was cautioned for battery. Between 19  May
         2011 and 16 July 2015, he amassed a number of convictions; two  for
         affray, two failures to comply with community orders, resisting  or
         obstructing a constable, driving  offences  and,  finally,  violent
         disorder. The last, index, offence resulted in  a  two-year  prison
         sentence and the activation of  a  previous  nine  month  suspended
         sentence to run consecutively. The sentence expiry date is 14 April
         2018.



      4. The appeal came before Judge J Robertson at Birmingham on  3  March
         2017. She found that the appellant was  now  remorseful  after  his
         imprisonment, that his actions  were  impulsive  rather  than  pre-
         meditated, that he had family support and that he presented  a  low
         risk to the public. The appeal was allowed.


      5. On 5 June 2017, First-tier Tribunal E B Grant granted permission to
         appeal to the respondent on the basis that the judge  had  arguably
         given  inadequate  reasons  for  her  findings  and  erred  in  her
         conclusion that the appellant did not present a genuine present and
         sufficiently serious threat to the public.


         The Hearing


      6. The appellant was present at the hearing before me on 20 July 2017.
         I renewed his bail and then heard submissions from the parties.


      7.  Mr  Armstrong  submitted  that  Judge  Grant  had  considered  the
         respondent's grounds to be arguable. He relied on  the  history  of
         the  appellant's  offending  and  pointed  out  the  escalation  in
         violence over a period of five years, submitting that both  pointed
         to the danger the appellant presented to the public.  Mr  Armstrong
         submitted that the judge had failed to explain why she  found  that
         the appellant did not present a danger  to  the  public  given  his
         history and that she had erred in placing  weight  on  factors  she
         found went in his favour including the fact that his  actions  were
         impulsive rather than pre-meditated.  Mr Armstrong  submitted  that
         the appellant's repeated offending demonstrated a lack  of  remorse
         and disregard for the  laws  of  the  UK.  There  was  insufficient
         evidence that the appellant had dealt with his offending  behaviour
         and his excuses for  his  actions  did  not  suggest  that  he  had
         accepted responsibility for  them.  If  his  violence  was  impulse
         based, that made it even more dangerous as  it  indicated  a  short
         temper. The appellant had committed all his crimes as an adult.  He
         had spent his formative years in Portugal and the  judge  found  he
         had no health or disabilities and would be able to work  there.  In
         the  circumstances,  he  could   be   expected   to   return.   The
         determination was flawed because the judge had  failed  to  explain
         why a violent person with a  history  of  re-offending  was  not  a
         danger to the public.


      8. Mr Hodson relied on his helpful  Rule  24  response.  He  submitted
         there was no hint of misdirection by the judge and the respondent's
         grounds were essentially a disagreement with  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal.  Past  convictions  did   not,   in   themselves,   provide
         justification for  removal  and  the  complaint  that  insufficient
         weight was given by the judge to the offences was misconceived. The
         issue was whether  the  appellant  presented  a  genuine,  present,
         sufficiently serious threat to the public  and  that  was  properly
         addressed by the judge in her determination. She had not overlooked
         any factors and had considered his offending history.  The  finding
         that the appellant's  actions  were  impulsive  accorded  with  the
         remarks of the sentencing judge and were open to her to  make.  The
         convictions were only relevant if they pointed to  a  future  risk.
         The judge considered the OASys reports, the  oral  and  documentary
         evidence and concluded that the appellant  had  shown  remorse  and
         realised that he behaviour had to change. His family  provided  him
         with support. There were also supporting letters  from  others  who
         had had contact with him whilst he was in prison. The  judge  could
         not be faulted for her assessment. The determination should stand.


      9. Mr Armstrong responded. He submitted that the grounds were arguable
         as indicated in the grant of permission. The  second  OASys  report
         was based on the appellant's own assertions but  he  had  shown  no
         empathy for his victims. He  had  thrown  a  concrete  block  at  a
         security guard with the intention of inflicting harm. He had  shown
         no remorse until he had been  imprisoned.  There  was  insufficient
         reasoning as to why he  would  not  re-offend.  His  assertions  of
         remorse had to be considered in light of the fact that  he  had  an
         upcoming appeal against deportation.


     10. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination, which
         I now give.


                   Findings and conclusions

     11. The judge found that the appellant had not resided in the  UK  with
         the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for   a
         continuous period  of  five  years  and  so  was  not  entitled  to
         permanent residency status.   Neither  party  has  challenged  that
         conclusion and, despite the representations made by the appellant's
         former solicitors about his employment, no  evidence  of  that  was
         placed before the judge. The issue, then, is whether deportation is
         justified on grounds of public policy or  public  security,  taking
         into account the principles set out in reg. 21(5).  These  are  set
         out in  the  respondent's  decision  letter  at  paragraph  22  and
         reproduced below:


    . The decision must comply with the principle of proportionality
    . The decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of  the
      person concerned
    . The personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a genuine,
      present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one   of   the
      fundamental interests of society
    . Matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate  to
      considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision
    . The person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
      justify the decision.


     12. Thus, whilst the offence(s) needs to be serious, there must also be
         a risk of re-offending for an appellant to be considered a genuine,
         present  and   sufficiently   serious   threat.   Essentially   the
         respondent's complaint is that in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
         criminality and conduct, the judge failed to adequately reason  why
         she concluded there was no such threat.


     13. Mr Hodson took me through all the judge's references to the serious
         nature of the appellant's offending and I do not dispute  that  she
         has set out his background at length  in  her  determination  along
         with the respondent's case (at paragraphs 5, 7,  24-27).  She  also
         set out the oral evidence and summarised the written statements and
         the submissions made. The issue is what  she  then  did  with  that
         information.



     14. The judge made several findings against the appellant which weighed
         heavily on the respondent's side. She found that the index  offence
         was a serious crime which occurred against  a  history  of  violent
         offences. She found that he had repeatedly shown  a  disregard  for
         the law and  continued  with  his  anti-social  behaviour  with  no
         apparent consideration for the consequences. He  failed  to  comply
         with the requirements of a community order (in fact there were two)
         and ignored the opportunity to reform granted to him in  2014  when
         he was given a suspended sentence. His girlfriend's miscarriage  in
         August 2013 did not excuse or justify his  actions.  There  was  no
         objective  evidence  of  rehabilitation.  His   family   had   been
         ineffectual in influencing him in the past.



     15. For the appellant, the judge found that his offences (she does  not
         specify  which)  were  based   on   impulse   rather   than   being
         premeditated. The more recent OASys report assessed him as low risk
         in the community. The appellant had  said  he  was  remorseful  and
         accepted  responsibility  for  his  behaviour.  His   family   were
         supportive. He had stayed out of trouble since his release although
         that had been a short time. He had matured and was better  able  to
         deal with his emotions. There were letters of support  which  spoke
         positively of his behaviour and attitude.



     16. Looking at the factors the judge found in favour of deportation and
         against it, it is difficult to  see  how  she  concluded  that  the
         appellant did not represent a threat to the public. No evidence was
         called as to the appellant's previous offences and convictions  for
         affray or his caution for battery so it is difficult to see how  it
         can be said that his "offences" (in the plural) were impulse based.
         It may be seen from the first OASys report that the  appellant  had
         been responsible for head butting a member  of  the  public  in  an
         unprovoked attack,  for  threatening  a  member  of  the  Probation
         Service, for fighting outside a nightclub  (on  an  occasion  apart
         from the index offence) and for  fighting  with  a  girlfriend  and
         another. These incidents were not addressed by the appellant in his
         witness statements or his oral evidence and  indeed  his  testimony
         conflicts with the evidence in certain respects.  For  example,  he
         seeks to pass off the driving offence as "clipping the  side  of  a
         car" without realising what he had done but fails to  mention  that
         he had been driving whilst disqualified and without insurance  (see
         first OASys report). When claiming that he was protecting a  friend
         who was being stamped on by a security guard outside the night club
         on the occasion of the index offence, he did not  explain  why  the
         sentencing judge should have stated that the  CCTV  footage  showed
         that the security staff who came under attack had done  "absolutely
         nothing to provoke the incident".  What the appellant's pattern  of
         offending does appear to show is that he is a person without  self-
         control who has a violent temper and a short fuse. In  the  context
         of what the judge acknowledged as very serious  violent  and  anti-
         social behaviour and a repeated  disregard  for  the  law  and  for
         others, how impulsive behaviour was a factor to  be  considered  in
         the appellant's favour is unexplained.



     17. The evidence the judge referred to as  supporting  the  appellant's
         change of heart essentially amounts to assertions by the appellant,
         his girlfriend, his mother and brother.  There  is  no  independent
         evidence to show a change in behaviour and, as the judge noted, the
         appellant had only been out of prison for a month at  the  date  of
         the hearing. The timing of the assertions  should  also  have  been
         considered, as pointed out by Mr Armstrong. It is said  there  were
         no courses in prison to help him  rehabilitate  but  there  was  no
         independent evidence to confirm that. The letter from the probation
         officer is silent on the issue of  future  behaviour.  The  undated
         letters from two prison  staff  refer  to  cleanliness  and  timely
         locking up but there is also mention by one of the two officers  to
         a proven adjudication in prison and a failure to turn up  for  work
         on several occasions. The appellant's brother claimed that  "social
         links" led the appellant astray but the appellant's own evidence is
         silent on this and provides no  details  as  to  whether  he  still
         retains contact with those it is said were a bad influence on  him.
         None of these matters have been examined by the judge and she fails
         to explain what aspects of the supporting letters she found  to  be
         persuasive. Most simply focus on his skills as a personal trainer.



     18. The judge accepts that the appellant is  remorseful  but  does  not
         adequately explain why she believes his  assertions  when  previous
         convictions did nothing to alter his behaviour and when his  family
         clearly had no influence on him. There is also no  finding  on  the
         issue of the appellant's alcohol abuse (see first OASys report)  or
         what, if anything,  he  has  done  to  address  that  in  terms  of
         rehabilitation. None of the evidence makes any reference at all  to
         whether the appellant has dealt with his alcohol problem. The judge
         accepts that he had found work but no documentary evidence of  that
         (such as the offer of employment) was before her.



     19. The appellant made various assertions that he had learnt to control
         his emotions and change his behaviour but no details were given  as
         to how this had been done.  The respondent is entitled to expect  a
         judge who accepts a change in the behaviour of  a  repeat  offender
         will give sufficient reasons for doing so.  Having  considered  the
         determination and the evidence at length and with the utmost  care,
         I must concur with the respondent that  the  judge's  reasoning  is
         inadequate on the crucial issue of why she concluded  that  despite
         the appellant's history he was no longer  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently serious threat to the community.



     20. For all these reasons, I conclude that the judge made errors of law
         such that her decision must be set aside  and  re-made  by  another
         judge of that Tribunal.


     21. Decision


     22. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law.  The  decision  is  set
         aside and shall be re-made afresh by another judge  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 21 July 2017






