


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00292/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 6 January 2014                           |On : 16 January 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between
                                MOHAMED ELMI
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a Dutch national, born on 1 July 1984 in Somalia. His
      appeal comes before us following a hearing on 21 October 2013 at which
      Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy and I found  an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The further background to the appeal is as set out in our error of law
      decision which is reproduced as follows:

"1. The appellant is a Dutch national, born on 1 July 1984  in  Somalia.  He
    has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to deport him  pursuant  to  regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

2. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in July  2003.
    He first came to the attention of the UKBA on 29 March  2006  following
    his arrest on two counts of possessing a controlled drug with intent to
    supply and failing to surrender to custody at the appointed  time,  for
    which he was sentenced on 18 April 2007 to 39 months' imprisonment.  On
    15 May 2007 he was sentenced to three  months'  imprisonment  following
    his conviction on various counts of failing to surrender to custody and
    assaulting a constable; on 15 June 2007 he was sentenced to  12  months
    imprisonment for burglary; and on 29 April 2009 he received a  fine  on
    conviction for being drunk and disorderly.

3. The appellant was convicted of the  index  offence,  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm, on 25 September 2012 at  Harrow  Crown  Court,  and
    received a sentence of 16  months'  imprisonment.  He  did  not  appeal
    against the conviction or sentence. On 29 October 2012 he was  notified
    of his liability to deportation and he responded accordingly, referring
    to his Dutch nationality and family ties to the United Kingdom.  On  11
    December 2012 the respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  him  under
    regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations, on the grounds that  he  posed  a
    genuinely, present and sufficiently serious threat to the interests  of
    public policy.

4. The appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  was  heard
    before the First-tier Tribunal by  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie and Mrs Bray  JP.  The  panel  heard  from  the
    appellant, his mother and sister. They recorded the evidence  that  the
    appellant had fled the civil war in Somalia with his sister and aunt at
    the age of nine years, in 1991, and had lost contact with  his  mother.
    He and his sister and aunt went to the Netherlands, where they remained
    until they came to the United Kingdom in 2003. His mother travelled  to
    Finland in 1996 and claimed asylum there. She managed  to  re-establish
    contact with him and visited them in Holland before leaving Finland  in
    2008 to join them  in  the  United  Kingdom,  after  obtaining  Finnish
    nationality.

5. Having considered evidence before them from HM Revenue  and  Customs  and
    other evidence relating to  the  appellant's  employment  history,  the
    panel rejected the  appellant's  claim  to  be  entitled  to  permanent
    residence under the EEA Regulations  and  found  that,  whilst  he  had
    resided in the United Kingdom continuously since 2003, he had not  been
    exercising Treaty Rights for a continuous period of five years so as to
    entitle him to such residence. Accordingly he was  considered  to  fall
    within the first level of protection under regulation 21,  whereby  the
    decision to deport him could be taken on the grounds of public  policy,
    public security or public health. The panel went on to consider whether
    the appellant's deportation met the requirements  of  regulation  21(5)
    and, in so doing,  considered  a  NOMS  (National  Offender  Management
    Service)  assessment  and  a  psychiatric  assessment  which  had  been
    produced as evidence  of  the  level  of  risk  of  re-offending.  They
    concluded from that evidence  that  the  appellant's  personal  conduct
    represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently   serious   threat
    affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society  and,  having
    assessed the appellant's circumstances and his family ties, found  that
    the   deportation   decision   complied   with   the    principle    of
    proportionality. They accordingly dismissed the appeal  under  the  EEA
    regulations and also dismissed it on Article 8 grounds.

6. Permission to appeal against that decision  was  sought  on  the  grounds
    that the Tribunal had made mistakes of fact  in  assessing  the  expert
    evidence; that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider  the  European
    dimension when conducting the proportionality exercise under regulation
    21, in accordance with the principles in Essa, R  (On  the  Application
    Of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1718; and that the Tribunal had failed to take the steps  commended
    by the CJEU in Case C-145/09 Land Baden-Wurtemberg v Tsakouridis [2011]
    CMLR 11 in relation to rehabilitation.

7. Permission was initially refused, but was  subsequently  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 15 August 2013, primarily on the "European dimension"
    grounds relating to the judgment in Essa.

8. At the hearing, Ms Radford  relied  upon  all  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal. She submitted that the Tribunal  had  misrepresented  what  the
    psychiatrist had said in her report and had considered, in terms of the
    appellant's risk of re-offending and rehabilitation, only the  negative
    factor of the lack of employment prospects, rather than  giving  weight
    to the positive factors such as  family  support.  Furthermore,  having
    looked at the factors which the psychiatrist said  could  have  reduced
    the risk of re-offending from medium to low,  the  Tribunal  reached  a
    conclusion that the risk was more than medium and, moreover,  conflated
    the risk of re-offending and the risk of serious  violence.  There  was
    therefore a misunderstanding of the expert's conclusions and that  then
    formed the basis for the proportionality assessment  at  paragraph  16.
    The Tribunal also failed to consider the appellant's  progress  in  the
    form of certificates completed in prison. Ms Radford submitted  further
    that the Tribunal failed to set the threshold at the correct level  and
    failed to address the grounds relating to the decision in  Essa,  which
    had formed part of the skeleton argument before it. The Tribunal failed
    to consider the appellant's integration in the United Kingdom  and  the
    fact that cutting his ties in this country, by removing him to Holland,
    would jeopardise his rehabilitation.

9. Mr Melvin submitted that the Tribunal had not materially  erred  in  law.
    It had considered all the factors referred to by the  psychiatrist  and
    had made an overall assessment. The Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant posed a medium risk, given  his  violent  behaviour,
    and was entitled  to  be  sceptical  of  his  last  minute  attempt  at
    demonstrating an attempt at rehabilitation. With respect to the  ground
    upon which permission had been granted, Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the
    cases of Essa, VP (Italy) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2010] EWCA Civ 806 and  Tsakouridis  all  concerned  cases  where  the
    appellant was entitled to  the  higher  levels  of  protection  against
    deportation, whereas the appellant in this case was not  integrated  as
    he did not have permanent  residence.  There  was  little  evidence  of
    rehabilitation, which was relevant  to  the  fourth  paragraph  of  the
    heading in Essa. Although there was some family support, the family had
    not managed to influence the appellant and there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that they would assist in his rehabilitation. The Tribunal  had
    been entitled to conclude as it did.

10. We consider that the  ground  upon  which  permission  was  specifically
    granted can most likely be  adequately  addressed  by  the  President's
    guidance at paragraph 4 of the head-note to Essa, as reflected also  in
    the findings at paragraphs 26 and 35 of that determination. However  we
    have concerns about the conclusions reached by the Tribunal  in  regard
    to the risk of re-offending, namely the finding at paragraph 15(v) that
    "the risk of the appellant re-offending in committing acts  of  serious
    violence is, at the very least, more than medium".  Although  that  was
    not a point specifically raised in the grounds of appeal, Mr Melvin did
    not seek to have it excluded and we consider in any event that  it  can
    be viewed as an extension of the first ground of appeal relating to the
    Tribunal's assessment of the expert evidence. We do not view the  grant
    of permission as excluding the other grounds raised. We find  merit  in
    Ms Radford's submission in regard to  that  matter  and  consider  that
    there is indeed no proper indication in the determination as to how the
    Tribunal reached the finding that the risk  of  re-offending  was  more
    than medium, given that that was not the conclusion of either the  NOMS
    report or the psychiatric assessment.

11. According to the NOMS report, the  appellant  posed  a  medium  risk  of
    serious  harm  to  others,  but  the  likelihood  of  reconviction  was
    considered as being low. That was  also  the  assessment  made  by  the
    London Probation Trust in  2010,  as  stated  in  their  letter  of  28
    February 2013. The psychiatric report started  from  an  assessment  of
    initial risk of general re-offending as medium, but with an  indication
    that that risk would be significantly reduced if various  factors  were
    present: if the  appellant  continued  to  distance  himself  from  his
    deviant peer group, abstained from alcohol and  drugs,  structured  his
    week with  meaningful  activities  such  as  employment,  education  or
    training, had access to a legitimate and dependable income and was able
    to manage his finances, and if he had  the  continued  support  of  his
    family. Thus a finding by the Tribunal that any of  those  factors  was
    not present could not  inevitably,  and  absent  any  other  particular
    circumstances, have led to a conclusion that the risk  of  re-offending
    was higher than that determined by the assessor. Yet there was  nothing
    in the Tribunal's findings at paragraph 15(v)  to  suggest  that  other
    circumstances existed beyond the appellant's inability to address  some
    or all of those factors. As such the Tribunal plainly failed to provide
    any, or any adequate, reasons for concluding that the appellant's  risk
    of re-offending was "at the very least more than medium".

12. Plainly,  the  Tribunal's  finding  on  the  risk  of  re-offending  was
    crucial, not only to  its  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  personal
    conduct represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to  society,  but  also  insofar  as  it  formed  the  basis  for   the
    proportionality assessment at paragraph 16 of the determination, as  is
    apparent at paragraph 16(i). Accordingly, we can only conclude that the
    Tribunal's conclusions as to the threat posed by the appellant and  its
    proportionality assessment are fundamentally flawed and  cannot  stand.
    We set aside its decision.

13. With regard to the re-making of the decision, we do  not  consider  that
    remittal would be appropriate, given that the primary findings of  fact
    made by the Tribunal have not been challenged  and  can  be  preserved.
    Whilst we consider that the "EU dimension" point as established in Essa
    and the other cases we have cited above  can  largely  be  answered  by
    reference to paragraph 4 of the head-note to Essa, as we  have  already
    stated, we consider it would nevertheless be helpful for clear findings
    on the matter of rehabilitation to be made and, in  that  respect,  the
    Tribunal may well be assisted by further evidence  and  submissions  in
    that regard. Ms Radford indicated that  there  would  be  further  oral
    evidence if the decision were to be re-made.

14. Accordingly, we make the following directions for the resumed hearing.

         Directions

   (a) No later than seven days before the date of the  next  hearing,  any
         additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party  is  to
         be filed with this Tribunal and served on the opposing party.

   (b) A Somali interpreter will be booked for  the  hearing,  but  in  the
         event that no interpreter is required the Tribunal must be informed
         of this no later than seven days before the hearing.

   (c) Skeleton arguments from both parties to be served no later than  two
         days before the hearing. "

   3. Prior to the hearing  an  adjournment  application  was  made  by  the
      appellant's representatives in order to obtain  a  supplementary  risk
      assessment from a forensic psychiatrist. That application was  refused
      on the grounds that it had been made at a late stage bearing  in  mind
      that the error of law decision had been promulgated in June 2013.

   4. Ms Radford renewed the application before us, pointing out that it was
      the First-tier Tribunal's decision that had been promulgated  in  June
      2013 and that the error of law decision had in fact been made only  in
      October 2013. She advised us that the appellant had been released from
      custody in October 2013 and it had  not  been  deemed  appropriate  to
      commission a report at that stage, given that it  was  usual  practice
      for a resumed hearing to be listed about three months after  an  error
      of law decision whilst the purpose of the  report  was  to  present  a
      current risk assessment.  However  the  hearing  was  in  fact  listed
      earlier than  anticipated,  shortly  after  the  Christmas  break.  Ms
      Radford advised  us  that  it  was  intended  that  the  report  would
      demonstrate the extent to which the appellant had integrated into  the
      community since his release from custody, in terms of  employment  and
      otherwise, and the risk he now posed to the public. It came to  light,
      during her submissions on the application, that he had  in  fact  been
      recalled into custody in June 2013, following his release on  bail  in
      April 2013, as a result of a  breach  of  the  terms  of  his  licence
      arising from his having spent two nights away from his home,  and  was
      released on bail again on 16 October 2013.

   5. Mr Melvin opposed the adjournment request on the grounds that  it  was
      for the Tribunal to list the appeal when  it  was  suitable  and  that
      there would be little value in a report that simply repeated what  the
      appellant considered to be his current circumstances.  What  was  more
      relevant were witness statements and evidence of his  contribution  to
      the community, but such evidence had  not  been  produced.  Mr  Melvin
      submitted that in any event it was the  appellant's  integration  over
      the ten years of his residence in the United Kingdom that was relevant
      and not in the recent months when the deportation process  would  have
      focussed his mind on staying out of trouble.

   6. We pointed out that a further report from the probation services would
      have been more useful in assessing risk, but  Ms  Radford  advised  us
      that the appellant no longer saw his probation officer  now  that  his
      licence had expired and that a forensic psychiatrist would be able  to
      provide the same information.

   7. We concluded that the interests of justice  would  not  be  served  by
      granting the adjournment request. We considered that  there  had  been
      ample  time  for  the  appellant's   representatives   to   obtain   a
      supplementary psychiatric report and that no proper or adequate reason
      had been given for the delay in commissioning  a  report.  Indeed  the
      initial adjournment request had not been made until 17 December  2013,
      whilst the notice of hearing had been issued on 29 November  2013.  We
      noted further that no indication had been given at the  error  of  law
      hearing, when considering further evidence to be produced at a resumed
      hearing, of an intention to produce a further psychiatrist report.  In
      fact the grounds of appeal leading to the grant of permission and  the
      skeleton argument produced before us  were  based  upon  the  previous
      psychiatric report.

   8.  We  were,  furthermore,  not  persuaded  as  to  the  efficacy  of  a
      psychiatric report, since it was  not  the  case  that  the  appellant
      suffered from any mental illness or that his criminality  was  claimed
      to have arisen out of a mental disorder. We considered the  usefulness
      of a report prepared on the basis of one interview with the  appellant
      and from information provided by the appellant,  would  be  of  little
      assistance, in particular since the report was not to be  prepared  by
      Dr Hundal, the author of the previous report. We considered  that  the
      various  factors  stated  in  Dr  Hundal's  report  to  influence  the
      appellant's  integration   and   risk   of   re-offending,   including
      accommodation,  employment  and  education,  finance,   relationships,
      lifestyle, would be best addressed by evidence from the appellant  and
      his family. Indeed, Dr Hundal stated in her report before the Tribunal
      that "it is not possible to state definitively whether or not Mr  Elmi
      will offend in the future as he,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the
      population, has some ability to determine  his  own  future  actions."
      Finally, we considered the view of the Upper Tribunal  in  Vasconcelos
      (risk-rehabilitation) [2013]  UKUT  00378  in  regard  to  adjournment
      requests to adduce supplementary material, where it said at  paragraph
      51: "It is not intended to give the claimant a second  opportunity  to
      present his primary case." For all of  these  reasons  we  refused  to
      adjourn the proceedings.

   9. It was agreed by all parties that the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
      of fact were to be preserved, in particular at paragraphs 13 and 14 of
      its determination leading to the conclusion that the appellant was not
      entitled to permanent residence in the United  Kingdom.  The  decision
      was  to  be  re-made  in  regard  to  the  risk  of  re-offending  and
      rehabilitation and proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  regulation
      21(5) of the EEA Regulations.

  10. We then heard from the appellant and his mother, both of whom chose to
      give their evidence through an interpreter in the Somali language.  We
      were advised that the appellant's sister was not able  to  attend  the
      hearing since she was at work. There was no additional statement  from
      her. We were referred to her statement  for  the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

  11. The appellant adopted his statement relied upon before the  First-tier
      Tribunal. He confirmed that he lived with his mother. His sister lived
      in East London. He had ceased spending time with  his  old  peers  and
      instead had been assisting his family, had registered with a  gym  and
      played football. He had also started working on 26 December  2013  and
      produced a salary slip to that effect. He had not worked prior to then
      because the conditions of his temporary release prevented  that  until
      the restriction was removed on 16 December 2013. It was  his  attitude
      about life that  had  led  to  him  finding  employment  when  he  had
      previously failed to do  so,  since  he  had  previously  made  little
      effort. He no longer allowed himself to be influenced by bad  company.
      He attended the gym and the  library  and  no  longer  used  drugs  or
      alcohol. When asked to explain the circumstances leading to his  being
      recalled on licence he said that it arose out of the pressure  he  was
      under at the time by reason of the restriction  on  taking  employment
      and his resulting lack of income. His sister had given  him  her  bank
      card to withdraw some money for her and, whilst she had given him  her
      card on previous occasions, on that occasion he  used  the  money  for
      gambling without her knowledge and lost  the  money,  leading  to  him
      being too ashamed to return home and thus breached  the  condition  of
      his residence. He reported the breach to the  probation  services  and
      sought advice.

  12. When cross-examined by Mr Melvin, the appellant  agreed  that  he  had
      stolen the money from his sister and that that had occurred whilst  he
      was on licence and on bail and subsequent to  the  appeal  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal. He had apologised to his sister and she  did  not
      press charges against him. That was not the reason  why  she  was  not
      present at the hearing. She had  not  prepared  a  statement  for  the
      hearing because she was not asked to do so. When asked about his links
      to the community in Neasden where  he  lived,  he  said  that  he  had
      previously had links only with the peers whom he had  believed  to  be
      friends. He now had better relationships with his family, he  attended
      the library and he avoided bad company. His neighbours had noticed the
      change in him. He agreed that he had spent a  considerable  amount  of
      time over the past ten years in prison and unemployed. With regard  to
      assisting the community, he had assisted local Somalis in  the  mosque
      by collecting money and clothes to  send  to  Somalia.  He  could  not
      recall when that was, but believed it was in 2012. With regard to  his
      comment to the psychiatrist that he intended to return to  Somalia  to
      farm his father's land, he had said that when peace  returned  to  the
      country he would like to visit his father's children and look  at  the
      farm. He then  agreed  that  what  the  psychiatrist  had  stated  was
      correct.

  13. The appellant said that he had arrived in the United  Kingdom  at  the
      age of nineteen, having spent ten years in the Netherlands,  including
      seven years attending school there. He had  worked  for  most  of  the
      following three years in a restaurant and  a  hotel.  With  regard  to
      courses attended in the United Kingdom to address his offending he had
      undertaken a two week anger management course just before his  licence
      ended last year. He did not need to attend courses about  alcohol  and
      drugs awareness as he had given up alcohol in 2011 and given up  drugs
      when he was in prison. He was not drunk when he committed the  offence
      in May 2012 - that was just what the judge believed.  His  mother  had
      stopped working shortly after arriving in the United  Kingdom  because
      of pains in her shoulder. She used  to  attend  English  classes.  The
      appellant said that he had no relatives in  the  Netherlands  and  had
      lost contact with  the  friends  he  had  had  there.  He  had  mostly
      forgotten the language.

  14. In response to our further questions, the appellant said that was able
      to speak Dutch fluently when he  left  the  Netherlands.  He  had  not
      thought to ask his neighbours  to  give  evidence  about  his  changed
      attitude. His sister was unable to attend the hearing due to work. The
      amount of money he had taken  from  her  and  gambled  was  �530.  His
      solicitor had succeeded in having the restriction lifted in regard  to
      employment as it had been an error on  the  part  of  the  immigration
      services.

  15. We then heard from the appellant's mother, Sarah  Sedow,  who  adopted
      the statement she  had  given  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  She
      provided evidence of the benefit payments she received, which she said
      was support allowance due to the pain in her shoulder. She  was  aware
      of the appellant having used his sister's bank card. Her daughter used
      to trust him with her card but on that occasion  he  had  misused  the
      money. They had decided to forgive him. The relationship  between  the
      appellant and her daughter was very good. He had  not  given  her  any
      other problems.

  16. When cross-examined the appellant's mother confirmed that her son  had
      been given the bank card by his sister but had not given her the money
      he had withdrawn. She confirmed  that  she  had  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 2008. She was a Finnish citizen.  She  had  worked  in  the
      United Kingdom for five months from March to July 2009 but was  unable
      to work thereafter due to the problem with her shoulder. She  attended
      college in 2010 but was unable to continue her course because  of  her
      shoulder. She later put herself on a waiting list for the college. Her
      daughter was not at the hearing because of work. She had not  produced
      a statement because she was not asked to, but she continued to support
      and assist the appellant. Her daughter paid for  the  electricity  and
      council tax and covered various bills and expenses that  she  and  the
      appellant could  not  afford  to  pay.  When  asked  if  her  son  had
      undertaken any charity or community work, she said  that  he  was  not
      permitted to. She was not aware that he had done any  such  work.  His
      links to the community consisted of his family and  friends.  She  was
      not aware of him being a member of any clubs.  She  was  now  able  to
      influence him directly as he  remained  at  home  most  of  the  time,
      although he had been living with her previously. She was aware that he
      had a job but did not know how he had found it or how  long  it  would
      last.

  17. We then heard submissions from both parties.

  18. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant remained at medium risk of  re-
      offending. Since his release from  custody  he  had  stolen  from  his
      sister. There was no evidence to support his claim  to  have  reported
      his breach of conditions to the  probation  service  himself.  He  had
      shown a disregard for United Kingdom laws. There was  little  evidence
      of employment and no evidence to show  that  he  had  changed  into  a
      respectable member of United Kingdom society. His integration into the
      community was at a very low level. In any  event  he  was  a  multiple
      recidivist. There was no prospect  of  rehabilitation.  There  was  no
      evidence of continuing support from his sister. Any family life  there
      might be was restricted  to  that  between  himself  and  his  mother,
      although that did not meet the legal test of  family  life  given  the
      absence of evidence of dependency. The  appellant  would  be  able  to
      return to the Netherlands and  reintegrate  into  society  there.  His
      removal was just and proportionate.

  19. Ms Radford accepted that the appellant  was  not  integrated  for  the
      purposes of  EU  law,  but  submitted  that  the  issue  was  that  of
      proportionality. In that regard the  relevant  consideration  was  the
      public interest, not of the United Kingdom, but  that  of  Europe,  in
      line with the principles in Batista v SSHD [2010 EWCA Civ 896 and Case
      C-145/09 Land Baden-Wurtemberg v  Tsakouridis  [2011]  CMLR  11.  This
      case, she submitted, was unusual in that it concerned the return of an
      individual to a country of refuge rather than a country of origin  and
      accordingly the appellant's level of connection to the Netherlands was
      much lower. He had no  cultural  and  family  connections  there.  His
      problems began when he left his family and moved  away  and  that  was
      when the bulk of his offending  occurred.  When  he  returned  to  his
      family his level of offending was not as great. He did not commit  any
      offences when at  liberty  between  2009  and  2012  and  he  had  not
      committed any offences when on licence. The incident with his sister's
      bank card was not theft as he had her  permission  to  use  his  card,
      albeit not for gambling. What was relevant was how he had  dealt  with
      and approached that incident with the support of his family.  He  also
      had employment here now.  These  were  all  indications  that  he  had
      changed  his  ways  and  matured  and  that  there  was  a  chance  of
      rehabilitation.  However  the  absence  in  the  Netherlands  of   any
      dedicated support such as that from his family meant that there was  a
      chance that he would go off the rails if returned to that country. The
      circumstances of the family and their separation due to the  situation
      in Somalia were relevant. His mother had spent many  years  away  from
      him and had finally been reunited with her children. When weighing  up
      all those matters and taking account of the high threshold and the low
      risk of reconviction he should be allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom where he had a chance of staying on the right side of the  law
      and where his mother's right to be with her child would be protected.

Consideration and findings

  20. The starting point in this appeal is that  it  is  accepted  that  the
      appellant  cannot  meet  the  higher  levels  of  protection   against
      expulsion  afforded  under  regulations  21(3)  and  (4)  of  the  EEA
      Regulations. Accordingly, his expulsion can be justified only  on  the
      general grounds of public policy, public security  or  public  health,
      following which the relevant test is to be found in regulation  21(5),
      as follows:

    "21(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public  policy
    or public  security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
    preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in  accordance  with
    the following principles-
    (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;
    (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
the person concerned;
    (c) the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society;
    (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which  relate
    to considerations of general prevention do not justify the decision;
    (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in  themselves
justify the decision."

  21. We previously set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  the
      grounds that, in  considering  whether  the  appellant  represented  a
      "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
      fundamental interests of society", the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
      risk of him re-offending was higher than medium, a conclusion that did
      not  appear  to  be  supported  by  the  expert  evidence  before  it.
      Accordingly  we  have,  in  re-making  the  decision,  re-visited  the
      evidence that was before  the  Tribunal  and  considered  the  further
      evidence before us in assessing risk.

  22. In so doing, we note that the most recent  risk  assessment  from  the
      probation services is contained in the  National  Offender  Management
      Service (NOMS) report, taken from an  OASys  report  completed  on  25
      November 2012, two months after the appellant was  convicted  of,  and
      sentenced for, the index offence. When we enquired of Ms Radford about
      the absence of a more recent assessment we were  simply  advised  that
      the appellant no longer saw his probation officer as his  licence  had
      since expired. However we note from the letter  of  28  February  2013
      from London Probation Trust at page 41 of the appellant's main  appeal
      bundle that the appellant's solicitors were provided at that time with
      details  of  his  current  offender  manager  and   from   the   email
      correspondence at page 43 of the  appeal  bundle  that  they  were  in
      contact with his probation officer in May 2013, whilst he was still on
      licence. We consider it unfortunate that a more recent risk assessment
      was not acquired at that time and that no request for further  details
      has since been made to the probation services. We  therefore  have  no
      evidence from an offender manager of the appellant's  progress  during
      the period of  his  imprisonment  and  no  risk  assessment  from  the
      probation services following his release on licence. As we have stated
      above we did not consider that a report from a  forensic  psychiatrist
      would have provided the same assistance  and  evidential  value  as  a
      report from those who had ongoing contact with him.

  23. However, returning to the evidence that is available to  us,  we  have
      taken note of the earliest  risk  assessment,  from  London  Probation
      Trust, which pre-dates the index offence, and can be  found  in  their
      letter of 28 February 2013. That assessment followed  the  appellant's
      convictions for offences committed in 2006 and 2007 and his release on
      licence in November 2008. In  2010  he  was  assessed  by  the  London
      Probation Trust as a medium risk of serious harm with a low risk of re-
      offending. With regard to the assessment following conviction for  the
      index offence, we note from the NOMs report that the likelihood of re-
      conviction was assessed as low, whilst the risk  of  serious  harm  to
      others was assessed as medium. The particular risk factors  identified
      in that report were anger management and managing finances.

  24. Dr Hundal, in her report prepared in  May  2013,  a  month  after  the
      appellant's release on immigration bail, reached similar  conclusions.
      With regard  to  his  behaviour,  she  noted  that  he  minimised  his
      behaviour at the time of the index  offence,  that  he  did  not  show
      regret for the crime and that he minimised the injuries  sustained  by
      the victim. She noted that he had not attended any courses  on  victim
      awareness whilst in custody,  although  he  had  attended  courses  to
      improve his literacy and numeracy.  She  noted  that  he  was  not  so
      forthcoming about his offending history and substance history and that
      there were considerable discrepancies in his account. Dr Hundal was of
      the opinion that there were identifiable factors that precipitated the
      appellant towards engaging in  offending  behaviour:  his  association
      with a deviant peer group with concurrent  illicit  drug  and  alcohol
      misuse, a lack of structured daytime routine, an  absence  of  gainful
      employment or training and a struggle  to  manage  his  finances.  She
      graded his initial risk of re-offending as medium in the next year  if
      he  remained  in  the  community,  but  with  the  possibility  of   a
      significant decrease in that risk if, with the  continued  support  of
      his family, he continued to distance himself  from  his  deviant  peer
      group, abstained from alcohol and illicit substances,  structured  his
      week with meaningful activities, such as paid employment, education or
      training, had access to a legitimate and dependable income stream  and
      was able to manage his finances.  She  noted  that,  at  the  time  of
      writing the report,  he  had  not  maintained  any  contact  with  his
      previous peer group and maintained that he had not  used  alcohol  and
      illicit substances.

  25. We have considered, from  the  evidence  before  us,  the  appellant's
      ability to address the factors identified in the NOMs report and by Dr
      Hundal as contributing to his offending behaviour. It  appears  to  be
      the case, and we accept, that the appellant has continued to  distance
      himself from his previous peer group. However we note that that was in
      any event the case prior to the commission of the index offence  which
      occurred after he had moved to live in Neasden with his mother  -  the
      NOMs report quotes the OASys as referring to disassociation  from  his
      previous peers as of 2010. We also note that  the  index  offence  was
      committed independently and  without  the  influence  of  peers.  With
      regard to abstinence from alcohol and illicit drugs, we note  that  Dr
      Hundal observed that  he  was  not  forthcoming  about  his  substance
      history. We also note that whilst it is the appellant's evidence  that
      he has  abstained  from  alcohol  since  2011  (paragraph  41  of  his
      statement of 22 May 2013 and his  evidence  before  us),  it  was  the
      sentencing judge's view that he had committed the index offence  under
      the influence of alcohol, a view which he rejects.  We  are  therefore
      somewhat sceptical of  his  claim  to  have  entirely  abstained  from
      alcohol and drugs but are prepared to accept that that is largely  the
      case. We note also that,  with  regard  to  addressing  his  offending
      behaviour, he has  not  attended  any  victim  awareness  courses  and
      attended  a  short  anger  management  course  only  days  before  his
      deportation hearing which, as the First-tier  Tribunal  found,  raises
      doubts as to the genuine nature of his motivation.

  26. With regard to education, training and employment, we  note  that  the
      appellant has historically commenced various  courses  without  seeing
      them through to  completion  and  has  not  succeeded  in  maintaining
      employment for  any  significant  period  of  time.  At  the  time  of
      preparation of the NOMs report it was observed that he  had  lost  his
      motivation to find work and  appeared  content  with  receiving  state
      benefits and that he had taken no positive steps to return to college.
      The issue is also addressed at paragraph 6.2.2 of Dr Hundal's  report,
      where reference  is  made  to  courses  attended  in  custody  but  no
      engagement in educational programmes since being in the community. The
      only progress we observe from the more recent evidence  before  us  is
      the appellant's claim to have commenced employment, selling fruit  and
      vegetables in a market. However the evidence  of  that  employment  is
      limited to one wage slip dated 31 December 2013 which we are  informed
      relates to employment commenced on 26 December 2013, consisting of ten
      hours, four days a week. There is  no  supporting  evidence  from  his
      employer to confirm that such employment is intended  as  ongoing  and
      permanent. Given the recent nature of the employment, the fact that it
      commenced only a matter of days prior to his deportation  appeal  and,
      on the appellant's own evidence, followed advice from his solicitor to
      find a job, we are not persuaded that it represents a genuine move  on
      the part of the appellant to establish himself in the work  force.  It
      is the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  unable  to  find  employment
      previously since the conditions of his temporary admission erroneously
      prevented him from working until his solicitors intervened  to  remove
      the restriction. However we note  from  the  IS96  form  of  temporary
      admission that that  condition  appears  to  have  been  imposed  only
      recently, on 16 October 2013,  following  his  release  on  bail,  and
      consider from  his  previous  history  that  that  was  not  a  matter
      particularly influencing his lack of employment.

  27. Other than attendance at a gym and his local  library,  the  appellant
      was unable to provide any evidence of efforts to undertake  meaningful
      activities or engage himself with the  community.  He  referred  to  a
      short stint of charitable work for the Somali  community  through  his
      local mosque, but his mother  appeared  to  be  unaware  of  any  such
      activities.

  28. Of particular significance is the  appellant's  behaviour,  since  his
      release from prison. After being granted bail in  April  2013  he  was
      recalled on licence  in  June  2013  and  remained  in  custody  until
      released on bail in October 2013. It is his claim that he breached the
      terms of his licence by not  returning  to  his  home  and  that  that
      occurred as a result of the shame he felt  after  using  his  sister's
      money for the purposes of gambling. He claims  to  have  reported  the
      breach to the probation services himself and  to  have  sought  advice
      from his probation officer, but we are not persuaded that a failure to
      spend one night at his home (as was his evidence before  us)  followed
      by an immediate and voluntary presentation to the  probation  services
      would result in the revocation of his licence.  It  is  of  note  that
      there is no supporting statement  from  his  probation  officer.  With
      regard to the incident itself, the evidence was unclear as to whether,
      whilst having previously had his sister's consent to use her bank card
      to withdraw money, the appellant had her consent  on  that  particular
      occasion. What is clear is that he did not have  consent  to  use  the
      money for himself, and certainly not to use it for the  purposes  that
      he did, namely to gamble. The incident is particularly relevant to the
      appellant's circumstances, given the financial motivation behind  much
      of his offending including the index offence. His gambling problem was
      referred to in the  NOMs  report  as  a  contributory  factor  in  his
      inability to manage his finances and  was  also  referred  to  in  the
      psychiatric report from Dr  Hundal,  at  paragraph  6.2.3,  where  she
      recorded that he did not admit to having a gambling  problem  and  his
      claim to not  currently  be  in  financial  difficulties.  It  was  Ms
      Radford's submission that the manner in which the appellant dealt with
      the incident, by discussing the way forward with  his  family  and  by
      presenting  himself  to  the  probation   services,   demonstrated   a
      developing maturity on his part. However we do not agree. We  consider
      there to be no reliable evidence to support the appellant's account of
      events and we note the absence of any  evidence  from  his  sister  to
      confirm her ongoing support following the incident.

  29. The continued support from the appellant's family is a  factor  relied
      upon in the claim that he no longer poses a risk to the community  and
      forms part of Dr Hundal's assessment. The appellant  claims  that  his
      sister continues to support him and that her absence from the  hearing
      was due to her work commitments. That was  confirmed  by  his  mother.
      Whilst we acknowledge that she attended previous Tribunal hearings  to
      support him, we do not accept that she would not have  been  aware  of
      the importance  of  attending  the  current  proceedings,  which  were
      decisive in the matter of his deportation. It is particularly relevant
      that she did not produce a statement confirming continuing support  in
      the absence of attendance at the  hearing,  in  particular  given  the
      recent incident. We are not persuaded to accept the  evidence  of  the
      appellant or his mother  in  that  regard.  We  found  neither  to  be
      reliable witnesses and it was clear to us that Ms Sedow  was,  perhaps
      understandably, keen to adapt her evidence to assist her  son's  case.
      We note in particular her claim that the financial support provided by
      her daughter was for the appellant's benefit and  was  dependant  upon
      the outcome of the deportation proceedings, a claim we simply  do  not
      accept - we have no doubt  that  the  support  provided  was  for  her
      benefit and would continue in the appellant's absence.

  30. Whilst we accept that Ms Sedow will continue to support her son in any
      way she can, and would hope to influence him against further  criminal
      activity, we cannot accept that she would be able to do so, given  her
      inability to do so in the past. She has, through circumstances largely
      outside her control, been absent for most of his life and  was  unable
      to exercise any influence over him since joining  him  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The appellant was living with her at the  time  he  committed
      the index offence and there is no evidence  to  suggest  a  change  in
      circumstance such that she would be able to prevent him from offending
      again.

  31. In all of  these  circumstances,  we  conclude  that  the  appellant's
      personal conduct does  meet  the  high  threshold  of  representing  a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
      fundamental interests of society. He has shown a  continued  disregard
      for the law in this country, he is a repeat offender and has failed to
      demonstrate any genuine efforts or motivation to address his offending
      behaviour. Although there is no evidence of offending for three  years
      from 2009, he returned to crime in 2012 at a time when he  was  living
      with the support of his family. For the reasons we have given above we
      consider that, in terms of the findings at paragraph 5  of  the  head-
      note to Essa v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (EEA:
      rehabilitation/integration) Netherlands [2013] UKUT 316, he  has  made
      little, if any, progress during the sentence and  licence  period  and
      there  has  been  no  material  shift  since  the  OASys   assessment.
      Certainly, there is no evidence from either the prison  staff  or  the
      probation services to suggest any such progress. Whilst the period  of
      imprisonment involved elements of rehabilitation, it is the case  that
      he made no  effort  during  that  time  to  engage  in  his  offending
      behaviour by means of victim awareness or other such  courses,  albeit
      that he attended a limited number of education courses. We  find  that
      he has failed satisfactorily to address any of the  risk  factors  set
      out in the NOMs report and in Dr Hundal's report and we find no reason
      to depart from the risk assessments previously made.

  32. With regard to integration, Ms Radford accepted that the appellant had
      not integrated, for the purposes of EU law, and clearly  that  is  the
      case. He has not acquired permanent  residence  and  has  made  little
      effort, in his ten years  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  to
      integrate into United Kingdom society. Indeed, a substantial period of
      the time spent in the United Kingdom has been in prison.  Although  he
      speaks English, he preferred to use an interpreter  for  the  hearing,
      despite having been absent from Somalia since  the  age  of  nine  and
      having lived in the United Kingdom for ten years. There is no evidence
      at all of any ties to the community, other than his  immediate  family
      and even with regard to his family those ties appear to be limited  to
      his mother and, to some extent, his sister.

  33. In view of the absence  of  integration,  and  in  the  light  of  our
      findings above, we consider there to be  no  reasonable  prospects  of
      rehabilitation in the future. Even if  such  prospects  existed,  they
      would carry little weight in the proportionality balance and, in  that
      respect, we refer to paragraph 4 of the head-note to Essa:

   "At the other end of the scale, if there are no reasonable  prospects  of
   rehabilitation, the claimant is a present threat and is likely to  remain
   so for the indefinite future, it cannot be  seen  how  the  prospects  of
   rehabilitation could constitute a  significant  factor  in  the  balance.
   Thus, recidivist offenders, career criminals, adult  offenders  who  have
   failed to engage with treatment programmes, claimants with propensity  to
   commit sexual or violent offences and the like may well  fall  into  this
   category."

  34. Turning, therefore, to proportionality, we accept that  the  appellant
      has family ties in the United Kingdom, but note, as stated above, that
      the only evidence of continued family support emanates from his mother
      and, previously, his  sister.  We  accept  that,  following  years  of
      separation from  his  mother,  for  the  most  part  as  a  result  of
      circumstances beyond their control, he has formed a  close  bond  with
      her. We accept that he provides  her  with  a  level  of  comfort  and
      assistance, in terms of housework, massaging her shoulder  and  taking
      her to the doctor, but  we  do  not  consider  that  that  amounts  to
      dependence for the purposes of any legal test of family life.  Indeed,
      his mother has managed without him for  substantial  periods  of  time
      whilst he was in prison. She is supported by her daughter and receives
      no financial assistance from the appellant. The appellant has lived in
      the United Kingdom for ten years, but has spent much of that  time  in
      prison (Whilst Mr Melvin submitted that it was more than  five  years,
      Ms Radford advised us that it amounted  to  around  three  years).  As
      already stated, he has made little or no effort to  become  integrated
      into  United  Kingdom  society.  He   has   contributed   nothing   of
      significance to the community. Indeed we were struck by  the  complete
      dearth of evidence of any ties or support from friends, members of the
      community or any other parties. Ms Radford relied on the  guidance  in
      Maslov  v.  Austria  -  1638/03  [2008]   ECHR   546   in   terms   of
      proportionality, but we fail to see how the principles  in  that  case
      apply to the appellant, given the lack of  integration  and  ties  and
      considering that he came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  adult  and
      committed his offences as an adult. With regard to the index  offence,
      we note that it was one that involved significant violence  and  that,
      according to Dr Hundal the appellant continued to minimise his actions
      and the victim's injuries and showed no regret for the crime.

  35. We have regard to the "European dimension" in this case, in particular
      given that that was the basis for the original grant of permission  to
      appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Radford
      relied upon the cases of Batista v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Dept [2010] EWCA Civ 896, VP (Italy) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2010] EWCA Civ 806 and Tsakourides  in  referring  to  the
      question of the shared interest of EEA countries, both in terms of the
      interests of the European Union itself and in terms of the appellant's
      own rehabilitation. She submitted that the appellant's removal to  the
      Netherlands would prejudice his  rehabilitation,  given  the  lack  of
      family or other support in that country and that it would  accordingly
      not be in the interests of the EU for him  to  be  deported  from  the
      United Kingdom to a country where his risk of re-offending, due to  an
      absence of such ties, would increase. However we find the  appellant's
      circumstances to be completely different to the circumstances  arising
      in those cases, given the nature of his ties to  the  United  Kingdom,
      his level of integration in this country and  the  relevant  level  of
      protection against expulsion to which he is entitled.

  36. We accept, as Ms Radford submitted, that the Netherlands  is  not  the
      appellant's country of origin, and that his ties to that  country  are
      accordingly not as strong as those of an indigenous Dutch national who
      had come to the United Kingdom at the same age.  Nevertheless,  it  is
      relevant that he spent ten years in the Netherlands, from the  age  of
      nine to nineteen years, his formative years. Although  he  arrived  in
      that country as a refugee from Somalia,  he  was  educated  there  and
      subsequently worked there. He speaks the language fluently - we reject
      his claim to have forgotten  most  of  the  language,  given  that  he
      accepts  he  spoke  it  fluently  when  he   left.   Considering   the
      significance of the period  of  time  spent  in  that  country,  as  a
      teenager and young adult, we  also  reject  his  claim  to  have  lost
      contact with all the friends he had there. Whilst he claims to have no
      family remaining in the Netherlands  we  note  that  his  evidence  of
      subsisting family ties in the United Kingdom is limited to that of his
      mother and, to an extent, his sister. There was no evidence  from  any
      other family members such as the aunt with whom he had  lived  in  the
      Netherlands. His mother is an EU national and is accordingly  free  to
      travel and visit him in the Netherlands, as is his  sister.  There  is
      nothing in the medical evidence before us to suggest that his mother's
      health problems should prevent her from so doing.  Significantly,  the
      appellant  did  not  engage  in  criminal  activity  whilst   in   the
      Netherlands, but only commenced his offending in the  United  Kingdom.
      Although he claims that that was because he was not  living  with  his
      family at the time, it is the case that his most recent offending  was
      committed whilst he lived with his mother. We find no  reason  why  he
      could not return to the Netherlands and re-establish himself there and
      we reject the submission that  removing  him  to  that  country  would
      prejudice  his  rehabilitation  or  that  his  chances  of  successful
      rehabilitation would be any greater in the United Kingdom than in  the
      Netherlands.

  37. For all of these reasons we consider that the appellant's  deportation
      would not  be  disproportionate  and,  having  taken  account  of  the
      considerations in regulation 21(6), we conclude that  the  appellant's
      expulsion is justified on the grounds of public policy and  would  not
      be in breach of the EEA Regulations. In view of our detailed  findings
      on proportionality we  find  no  other  considerations  arising  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR and conclude  that  his  deportation  would  not
      breach his human rights.

DECISION

  38. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and the  decision  has  accordingly  been  set
      aside. We re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds.



                               Signed                                  Date
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
