
[pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00094/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|On 24 October 2014                            | Promulgated                 |
|                                              |  On 30 October 2014         |


                                   Before



                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS



                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ABDILLAHI MOHAMOUD DOUALE
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In person
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    the claimant, against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  on  22
    November 2013 to make the claimant the subject of a  deportation  order
    because she consider his deportation to be in the public good.

 2. The decision is supported by a letter of the same date  which  explains
    in more care the Secretary of State's reasons and paragraph 33 of  that
    letter is particularly illuminating.  The Secretary of State says:

         "The Immigration Rules state that, where a person's deportation  is
         conducive to the public good because they are a persistent offender
         who, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  shows  a  particular
         disregard for the law, in assessing a claim that deportation  would
         be contrary to article 8, the  Secretary  of  State  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies."

 3. It is regrettable that the notice and refusal letter do  not  each  put
    the reasons for deportation absolutely wholly beyond argument but I  am
    satisfied from the above paragraph that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    decided that the claimant should be deported because he is a persistent
    offender and not simply because of one previous conviction  many  years
    ago.

 4. It is quite obvious why the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal.
    They found it grossly disproportionate to  deport  the  claimant  given
    that he has been in the United Kingdom for more than twenty  years  and
    although  was  in  very  serious  trouble  when  he  was  sentenced  to
    imprisonment for six years in 1996 his record since is very  much  less
    shameful.  He has been in further trouble but, as a broad  summary,  he
    has been in trouble in a way that is consistent with his being  a  drug
    user  who  is  addressing  his  addiction  and  is   trying   to   live
    industriously. The evidence is open to that interpretation.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal has clearly erred in two respects although they
    are really related.  The First-tier Tribunal has not  engaged  properly
    with the Immigration Rules which are a necessary starting point.

 6. The first ground complains that the Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  It  clearly  did  because  it
    says in paragraph 38 that the  claimant  has  "an  unanswerable  claim"
    under paragraph 276ADE.  That is just wrong.  He has no  claim  at  all
    under paragraph 276ADE because paragraph 276ADE does not apply in cases
    of deportation.  Ms Isherwood particularly draws attention to paragraph
    S-LTR.1.3. which makes it plain that a person's presence in the  United
    Kingdom is not conducive to the public good if he has been sentenced to
    more than four years' imprisonment and therefore he is not suitable for
    leave to remain and therefore  276ADE  is  not  a  consideration.   Put
    simply Ms Isherwood is right and the First-tier Tribunal was wrong.

 7. The second ground is more subtle but I am satisfied  that  it  is  made
    out.  Given the way the Secretary of State has made the decision it  is
    possible that the appeal should be allowed under paragraph 399A and  HC
    395.  This is not a case where the claimant is relying on  children  in
    the United Kingdom but he has accrued twenty years' residence.   If  as
    may be that he has no ties to the country to which he would be returned
    but the First-tier Tribunal has not made any  clear  reasoned  findings
    about whether he has ties to that country or indeed which country is to
    be considered.  This is important.  It is necessary if a decision is to
    be made on the basis that there are no ties that the reasons for it are
    clear and the Tribunal shows it appreciates the legal tests set out  in
    case law.  This has not been done.

 8. It is also possible that the appeal should have been allowed because of
    exceptional circumstances and I fully understand that the  long  period
    of delay between the six year sentence and now is something that has to
    be considered.  The Tribunal did not come out in  terms  and  say  that
    these were exceptional circumstances. Neither is it plain from  reading
    the  determination  that  the  Tribunal  found  that  there  were   any
    exceptional circumstances, merely that it thought that  was  sufficient
    reason  to  allow  the  appeal  and  unless  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances within the meaning of the law, it was not.

 9. It follows therefore that I  am  driven  to  say  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has not done  its  job  properly  on  this  occasion  and  the
    decision cannot stand.  The claimant is entitled to  a  proper  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that includes  a  properly  reasoned
    decision.  It follows therefore that I send the case back to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

10. I am very aware that the  claimant  has  a  sense  of  grievance  about
    various aspects of his treatment by the Secretary of State.   They  may
    or may not have merit but they are not  what  this  appeal  hearing  is
    about.  He understood that when he was addressing me.  He  was  at  all
    times helpful and respectful.  I  acknowledge  his  other  concerns  to
    explain that I was uninterested in what he had to say but his  was  not
    relevant to the decision I had to make.

11. My decision is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set  aside
    its decision and I direct the case be heard again in the First-tier.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 October 2014                |








