
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00495/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2013                                 |On 12 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                mr Hassan Pih
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ong


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born  on  6  November  1953.
    The respondent made a decision to make a deportation order against  him
    on 18 February 2013.  The appellant  appealed  that  decision  and  the
    appeal was heard by a panel comprising First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beg
    and non-legal member Mr M Griffiths.  The panel dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  the  panel.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was patent that the panel  did  not  consider  the  appellant's
    private and family life  under  the  amended  Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent's decision was dated 18 February 2013  and  the  Rules  were
    amended with effect from 9 July 2012.  It was found arguable  that  the
    panel should have considered the appellant's private  and  family  life
    under those Rules.

 3. Other areas of argument in the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    were that the panel failed to explain adequately how the  appellant  is
    expected to resume normal life in Iran after such a long time of living
    in the United Kingdom.  Furthermore the panel failed to give any or any
    adequate weight to the appellant's submission  on  delay  in  that  the
    respondent had taken almost ten years  to  decide  that  the  appellant
    ought to be deported on conducive  grounds,  notwithstanding  that  the
    appellant has never drawn the adverse attention of the authorities over
    that period of time.

The Hearing before Me

 4. The appellant appeared in person.  He did not expect to be represented.
     There was a letter from his former representatives dated 10 July  2013
    indicating that owing to the appellant's  financial  situation  he  was
    unable to instruct them or to retain a barrister.  The application  for
    permission to appeal had been prepared on a pro bono basis and they had
    no instructions to represent him at the hearing.

 5. I confirmed with the appellant that he was not seeking an  adjournment.
    I therefore decided to proceed and had before me all the  documentation
    that was previously before the panel.  An interpreter was available but
    the appellant did not require his services except on  one  small  point
    that he wished to make during his submissions.

 6. There is on file a Rule 24 submission from the respondent to the effect
    that the panel directed itself appropriately and  came  to  conclusions
    they were entitled to come to on the evidence  concerning  the  serious
    nature of the appellant's crimes.  Furthermore the Article 8 assessment
    was considered under both the old and new Rules.  The  conclusions  are
    neither unreasoned nor perverse and there is no  basis  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal interfering with the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I explained to the appellant the procedure and my powers in relation to
    the challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  clear
    to me from what the appellant said that he is still aggrieved  that  he
    was convicted for the crimes of  rape  and  buggery  of  a  woman.   He
    pointed out that he has been in the United Kingdom since 1977 and since
    the offences for which he was convicted in 1999 he has not been in  any
    trouble.  He has no-one in Iran, having  lost  touch  with  his  family
    there.  He has never claimed housing benefit and at  one  time  he  had
    both an Iranian and a British passport.  He obtained and  was  entitled
    to that British passport.  He travelled abroad using it and he  has  an
    English driving licence.

My Decision and Reasons

 8. As I informed the appellant at the hearing before  me  the  panel  that
    heard his appeal in the First-tier Tribunal made a  decision  and  gave
    more than adequate reasons as to why they arrived at that decision such
    that there could be no successful  challenge  to  it.   The  panel  was
    clearly aware of all the  circumstances  relating  to  the  appellant's
    background.   The  panel  did  not  accept  as  credible  some  of  the
    appellant's evidence and gave good and full reasons for coming to those
    conclusions.   As  to  Article  8  considerations  the  panel  set  out
    perfectly properly at paragraphs 21 and following consideration of  the
    Immigration Rules which came into effect  on  9  July  2012  and  later
    considered the appellant's position under Article 8 ECHR.

Conclusion

 9. There has been no error by the panel.  This is a detailed  and  careful
    determination of the appellant's position.  The panel decided that  the
    appellant could not benefit under the Immigration Rules  and  concluded
    and was entitled to conclude that  deportation  was  the  right  course
    because the appellant's  private  life  did  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deporting him, largely by reason of the seriousness of  the
    offences for which he was convicted.  He has not been in Iran for  many
    years but he does have family there and he speaks  the  language.   The
    panel did not find that the  appellant  provided  credible  documentary
    evidence that he has been in the United Kingdom for over twenty  years.



10. As stated in paragraph 35 of  the  determination  the  panel  carefully
    considered the matter under both the old and new Immigration  Rules  in
    line with the jurisprudence and the approach set out in MF (Article 8 -
    new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).

11. As to consideration by the panel of the delay in issuing a liability to
    deportation notice since the appellant's conviction the panel took into
    account the case referred to in paragraph 37 of the  determination  and
    concluded that the appellant was aware at the time  of  his  conviction
    that one of the consequences  of  that  conviction  and  a  substantial
    sentence of imprisonment was that steps would be taken  to  remove  him
    from the UK.

Decision

12. For the above reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld
    namely that the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

13.  An  anonymity  direction  has  not  been  made  previously.   In   the
    circumstances of this appeal I see no good reason to make one now.


Signed                              Date 12th August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
