
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00524/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RRA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Seehra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A direction for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  this  is
maintained by the  UT.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and   to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.



1.   We shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica and his date
    of birth is 24 September 1982.  He has been in the UK since 2000 and he
    was granted indefinite leave to remain on 11 July 2003 as the spouse of
    a British citizen.

2.   The appellant has ten convictions  for  thirteen  offences  which  were
    committed between 17 November 2000 and 2  April  2012.   Nine  are  for
    possession of  cannabis.   He  has  one  conviction  for  breach  of  a
    conditional discharge and two convictions for failing to  surrender  to
    the Magistrates' Court.  He has never been sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment.

3.   The Secretary of State made a deportation  order  pursuant  to  Section
    3(5) (a) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The appellant appealed  and  his
    appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal (a panel comprising Judge
    Nightingale and Mr GH Getlevog). The Secretary  of  State  was  granted
    permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on 11 August 2015.

4.   The decision to deport the appellant came about as a result of  the  UK
    Border Agency working  in  conjunction  with  the  Metropolitan  Police
    (Operation Nexus).  It was the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the
    appellant was deeply involved with a criminal lifestyle and the  supply
    of drugs.  The Secretary of State relied on 138 entries  on  the  Crime
    Reporting Information  System  (CRIS)  relating  to  the  appellant  in
    support of her case.

5.   The Secretary of State relied  on  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The relevant part reads as follows:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  ...

         (b)  ...

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good [and in the public interest] because, in the  view
             of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused  serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a  particular
             disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,  [the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A]."

6.   The appellant claimed that deportation would breach  his  rights  under
    Article 8 ECHR as a result of the genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his two British citizen children aged 12 and aged 10 respectively.
    He relied on paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rule  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "399.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
             applies if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the seven years immediately preceding the  date
                      of the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  [it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported]; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

                      (c)  ..."

7.   The panel heard evidence from the  appellant,  Ms  G  (the  appellant's
    partner) and PC Dady (who was called on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State). The panel found that the Secretary of State had not established
    that the appellant was a member of a criminal gang or  associated  with
    certain named individuals. They found that it had not been established,
    on the balance of probabilities, that he was a drug dealer  or  a  gang
    member or that he was involved in making money in an illegal way.   The
    panel did not accept the evidence submitted by the Secretary  of  State
    relating to allegations  that  the  appellant  had  committed  criminal
    offences over and above those that resulted in convictions.

8.   The panel found that the appellant's offending had not  caused  serious
    harm, but that he was a persistent offender who had shown a  particular
    disregard for the law. Thus   paragraph 398(c) of the Rules applied  to
    him.  They found that he was a habitual user of cannabis  and  that  he
    may have breached an anti-social behaviour order in  2006.   The  panel
    noted that the appellant had not committed offences since 2012 and that
    he had been employed since 2014.

9.   The panel found that the appellant's relationship  with  his  estranged
    wife and the mother of his two children was strained. At  paragraph 101
    the panel concluded that they could find no basis on which to  conclude
    that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's two  children  to
    go and live in Jamaica with their father and therefore to be  separated
    from their mother.

10.  The panel went on to find  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to remain in the UK without their father.  They gave a  number
    of reasons for this including the level of the  appellant's  offending,
    which they viewed as not "highly criminalised".  They accepted that the
    appellant played a full  role  as  a  parent  and  he  is  a  genuinely
    committed father.  They found that the appellant's estranged  wife  was
    not assisting him as regards contact with the children and that it  was
    highly unlikely that she would facilitate contact between the appellant
    and his children in the event of his  deportation.   She  had  sent  an
    email to the Tribunal stating that the appellant had  no  contact  with
    the children but this was inconsistent with a letter  produced  by  the
    appellant from the children's school.   This  letter  was  verified  as
    genuine by PC Dady and the Tribunal found that it established that  the
    appellant in fact played a full role as a parent  and  that  the  email
    from the children's mother did not represent the position and  that  it
    was "highly indicative of animosity on her part towards the appellant".

11.  The thrust of the grounds is the panel failed to  consider  the  public
    interest and the seriousness of the appellant's offences and the  panel
    did not appreciate the high threshold  required  in  regard  to  unduly
    harsh under the rules.  Ms Holmes produced the case law  cited  in  the
    grounds.  At the start of oral  submissions  she  conceded  that  there
    would be difficulty in challenging the panel's findings in relation  to
    the appellant's estranged wife.

12.  Miss Holmes argued that the findings  in  relation  to  the  impact  of
    deportation do not meet the high threshold in relation to unduly  harsh
    and she made reference to paragraphs 102 and 104 of  the  determination
    submitting that there was no evidence before the panel  about  how  the
    children would feel about their father  being  deported  and  remaining
    here in the UK without him.  In assessing unduly harsh  the  panel  did
    not properly assess public interest and they  did  not  factor  in  the
    amount of offences committed by the appellant and  the  extent  of  his
    criminal activity.  They did not factor into their findings that he  is
    a persistent offender with a clear blatant disregard to the law in  the
    overall assessment.  Miss Holmes referred us to paragraphs 17,  18,  43
    and 44 of KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015]  UKUT  00543.
    She argued that the ties between the appellant and his children in  KMO
    were closer to those between the appellant and  his  children  in  this
    case.

13.  Miss Seehra relied on the appellant's Rule 24  response  and  submitted
    that the decision was detailed and the panel had examined  all  of  the
    evidence.  Many of the points  raised  were  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings and the grounds do not identify an arguable error of law.  The
    Tribunal was clearly aware of the public interest and  attached  weight
    to it accordingly and of the extent of the  appellant's  offending  and
    factored this into the assessment.  The panel  sufficiently  considered
    unduly harsh in accordance with MAB  (para  399;  "unduly  harsh")  USA
    [2015] UKUT 00435 and Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with  Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 00415.  If the UT were correct in KMO, it is  not  material
    because the panel considered the public interest and the seriousness of
    the offences committed by the appellant.

Conclusions

14.  We find that the decision of the panel is detailed  and  well-reasoned.
    Most of the findings relate  to  the  appellant's  criminality  in  the
    context of Operation Nexus and there is no  challenge  to  these.   The
    Secretary of State's case in relation to the appellant  being  involved
    in extensive  and  serious  criminal  conduct,  over  and  above  those
    offences for which he was arrested and convicted, was wholly  rejected.
    The panel's assessment was based on the appellant's  convictions  which
    were, by any account, far  less  serious  than  the  crimes  which  the
    Secretary of State alleged the appellant had been involved in.

15.  We are of the view that the findings in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    estranged wife at paragraphs 103 and 104 were open to the Tribunal  and
    there was no need for independent corroborative evidence.  It was  open
    to the Tribunal to attach weight to the obvious conclusion that, should
    the appellant's two children leave the UK, they  would  effectively  be
    separated from their mother,  who  is  estranged  from  the  appellant.
    Likewise  it  was  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  attach  weight  to  the
    appellant's evidence  of  his  wife's  hostility  towards  him  and  to
    conclude that this would  lead  to  real  difficulties  in  maintaining
    contact between the appellant and his children. We do not find that  it
    was necessary for the appellant to produce  evidence  relating  to  the
    impact of separation on the children in the circumstances in this case.
     The children were young and the appellant's role in  their  lives  was
    accepted.  It is unarguable  in  our  view  that  it  was  not  in  the
    children's best interests for their father to  remain  in  the  UK  not
    withstanding his cannabis habit and persistent low level offending.

16.  The panel considered the public interest and at paragraph 107  properly
    directed themselves  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  From paragraph 108 it is clear that
    they were properly aware that the legislative framework  is  such  that
    Parliament has decided  that  the  public  interest  is  injured  if  a
    criminal's deportation is not effected. The panel adequately considered
    the seriousness of the offences committed by the appellant and  it  was
    open to them to conclude at paragraph 108 that they did not regard them
    as "at the more serious end  of  the  criminal  calendar."   The  panel
    understood  that  frequent  and  continuing  offences  that   are   not
    individually serious may amount to serious offending which may  justify
    expulsion, but did not consider this to be the case here.   They  noted
    that the appellant had  never  received  a  custodial  sentence,  which
    reflected the seriousness of the offences.  The panel accepted that  he
    was a persistent offender and it is implicit in this that  there  is  a
    risk of re-offending and we are satisfied that the panel  were  mindful
    of this.  It was incumbent on the panel to consider this in the context
    of the seriousness of the offences which in our view they did.  It  was
    open to the Tribunal to attach weight to the fact  that  the  appellant
    was in employment at the date of the hearing and had not  committed  an
    offence since 2012.

17.  There is no express reference by  the  panel  to  OH  (Serbia)  v  SSHD
    [2008] EWCA Civ  694.   For  the  reasons  articulated  above,  we  are
    satisfied that the panel factored into the assessment the risk  of  re-
    offending. There is no express reference  to  deterrence  or  society's
    revulsion at serious crimes; however, in the context of the appellant's
    offences this is not in our view  a  material  omission.   It  must  be
    remembered that the  assessment  was  conducted  after  the  panel  had
    rejected the Secretary of State's evidence  about  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's credibility. In any event, having  considered  the  Reasons
    for Refusal letter it does not appear that the Secretary of  State  has
    at any time has explicitly relied on the public interest in the context
    of these discrete components in OH.

18.  The panel made extensive findings  about  the  appellant's  criminality
    and the public interest.  On a proper reading  of  the  decision  these
    should be read together with the unduly harsh  assessment.  The  unduly
    harsh decision has  properly  been  informed  by  the  public  interest
    findings.  This approach is consistent with the findings of the  UT  in
    KMO and indeed the position of the Secretary of State  in  relation  to
    paragraph 399.   If we are wrong about this, it is not  material.  This
    is because the unduly harsh findings also stand alone. We are satisfied
    that the panel was entitled to conclude, on the basis of  their  lawful
    and sustainable findings that the impact of deportation would be unduly
    harsh. If we were to conduct our own assessment  either  in  accordance
    with MAB or KMO, we would allow the appeal on the basis that the impact
    of deportation would be unduly, inordinately or excessively harsh

19.  We find that the assessment conducted by the panel was adequate and  in
    accordance with the legislative framework and  relevant  jurisprudence.
    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal under Article 8 is  maintained.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 13 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

