

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00087/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 June 2017                        |On 25 July 2017                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          CHRIST ADAM STEVEN SAMBA


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person

                                  DECISION

   1. The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
      permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Beach who, by a determination promulgated on 11 April 2017, allowed Mr
      Samba's appeal against a decision that he should be expelled from  the
      United Kingdom. Mr Samba is a citizen of France and the decision  that
      he was to be removed was taken pursuant to Regulation 19(3)(B) of  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regs").


   2. Although this means that it is the  Secretary  of  State  who  is  the
      appellant before the Upper  Tribunal,  as  it  will  be  necessary  to
      reproduce extracts from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,
      it is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   3. Mr Samba arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003.  Before  that,  having
      lived the first eight years of his life in France, he  then  lived  in
      Cote D'Ivoir with his grandmother for about a  year,  travelling  from
      there to join his mother in the United Kingdom. He attended school  in
      the United Kingdom but was excluded from his secondary school in  year
      9, although when he was 15 or 16 years old  he  attended  John  Ruskin
      College where he obtained a BTec in Business studies.


   4. He first came to the attention of the police in April 2007 when he was
      cautioned  for  an  offence  of  theft/shoplifting.  Since  then,  the
      appellant has committed a number of serious offences. In October 2011,
      he was convicted  of  burglary  of  a  dwelling  and,  being  still  a
      juvenile, was made subject to a referral order. In April 2012, he  was
      sentenced  to  one  day's  detention,  deemed  served  at  court,  for
      possession a controlled drug of Class  B.  After  that  there  was  an
      escalation in the seriousness of his offending. In July 2012,  he  was
      fined for offences  of  dishonestly  handling  stolen  goods  and  the
      following year, in August 2012, for three offences of  burglary  of  a
      dwelling and an offence of dishonestly handling stolen  goods  he  was
      sentenced to concurrent terms  of  detention  in  a  Young  Offenders'
      Institution totalling 16 months.


   5. Having served  that  sentence,  he  was  convicted  of  some  motoring
      offences in  August  2013  and  was  made  subject  to  a  conditional
      discharge for assault in January 2014 and was  fined  for  his  second
      offence of possessing controlled  drugs  in  February  2014.  It  was,
      though, while subject to that conditional discharge that he  committed
      his next offence of possessing a bladed article in a public place  for
      which he was sentenced to 4 months' imprisonment.  The  judge  imposed
      concurrent terms of imprisonment for offences of assault  and  failing
      to surrender to bail.


   6. Finally, on 3 September 2015, the  appellant  was  convicted  after  a
      trial before the Peterborough Crown Court of robbery,  burglary  of  a
      dwelling and of  intimidating  a  witness  with  intent  to  obstruct,
      pervert or interfere with justice. For the robbery and burglary he was
      sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment  and  was  sentenced  to   a
      consecutive term of six months' imprisonment for witness  intimidation
      so that the sentence overall was one of 4 years and 6 months.  At  the
      date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant was  still
      serving that sentence but he anticipated that his release  on  licence
      was imminent.


   7. In his sentencing remarks, HHJ Bridge made  clear  the  factual  basis
      upon which the appellant  was  to  be  sentenced.  Together  with  two
      accomplices, the appellant had entered a flat by climbing in to a flat
      roof and through a window:


           "You proceeded with the other two men to attack (the  occupant);
           you'd seen him from the outside speaking on his phone and in due
           course... you stole his  mobile  phone,  clearly  a  high  value
           mobile phone...In the course of the attack, (the  occupant)  was
           punched to the face; he also received blows to  other  parts  of
           his body... and he also said that he was threatened; he was  cut
           to his left eyebrow and that required stiches..."


      The judge then spoke of  the  offence  of  witness  intimidation,  the
      victim being a lady who was the owner or the tenant of the  flat  that
      was burgled where a male person, ("the occupant")  had  been  attacked
      and robbed:


           "... you came across (the victim) on 31 December of  2014;  that
           was an accidental meeting it seems. You were aware that she  had
           been reporting you to the police and  you  threatened  her;  you
           told her that you knew where she lived; she had in fact left the
           flat where the burglary had been committed, you  told  her  that
           you could get people round to, as you put it, smash her face in;
           this was a clear  attempt  to  intimidate  her  as  a  potential
           witness  in  the  pending  proceedings  and  she   clearly   was
           intimidated, and later was to report this incident to the police
           about 2 weeks after this occurred."


      Having noted that the offences were aggravated by the  fact  that  the
      appellant had  8  previous  convictions  for  14  offences  the  judge
      concluded that the least sentence he could properly impose was one  of
      4 years' imprisonment with a consecutive term of six  months  for  the
      witness intimidation.


   8. The appellant gave oral evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
      said that he had worked only for a year, while at college, at  a  shop
      operated by a friend of his mother. He hoped and intended to start his
      own business, either in painting and decorating or by starting a  mini
      cab business. He said he could not do that in  France  because  he  no
      longer speaks French and has no one there to help  him.  He  told  the
      judge that he was wrongfully convicted of  the  serious  offences  for
      which he is currently imprisoned, although he did not  appeal  against
      those convictions. The appellant did not know if his mother had  taken
      out comprehensive medical insurance for herself and him and he was not
      in a position to provide evidence of his mother's work record  as  she
      had not  attended  the  hearing  and  had  not  provided  any  written
      evidence.


   9. Next, the judge summarised  submissions  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent. It was submitted that the appellant had not qualified  for
      permanent residence because he could not demonstrate having spent five
      years' continuous residence in accordance with the 2006  Regs,  either
      in his own right or on the basis of  being  the  family  member  of  a
      mother  exercising  Treaty  rights.  As   his   recent   sentence   of
      imprisonment punctuated the 10 year period prior to the decision  that
      he should be removed from the United  Kingdom,  and  as  the  evidence
      showed that he had failed to integrate into the United Kingdom, he did
      not qualify for any enhanced level of protection  from  removal  under
      the 2006 Regs. Therefore, the appellant enjoyed only the  basic  level
      of protection provided  by  regulation  21.  The  judge  recorded  the
      respondent's submissions:


           "Mr Lowton said that the  appellant  had  the  lowest  level  of
           protection only. He said that the offending was so serious  that
           the decision  to  deport  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
           proportionality. Mr Lowton said that the appellant had had to be
           removed from society on a number of  occasions  which  suggested
           that he had not  integrated  into  the  UK.  He  said  that  the
           decision to deport was based on the appellant's conduct and  the
           appellant's conduct showed that the appellant was a genuine  and
           present threat to society. Mr Lowton  said  that  the  appellant
           broke into the home of the victim,  threatened  him  and  robbed
           him. He said that the decision was not taken on the  grounds  of
           general deterrence but was taken to prevent the  appellant  from
           offending in the UK. Mr Lowton said that the  decision  was  not
           solely based on the appellant's previous  convictions.  He  said
           that the appellant was sentenced to a  four  year  sentence  and
           that the offence must have been  a  terrifying  ordeal  for  the
           victim. Mr Lowton said that the offence was  aggravated  by  the
           appellant threatening a witness.  He  said  that  the  appellant
           claimed he was innocent of the offence but he had  not  appealed
           the conviction and the judge and the jury would have made a full
           assessment of the evidence. Mr Lowton  said  that  the  tribunal
           could not go behind that conviction.


           Mr Lowton referred to the OASys and said that  this  shows  that
           the appellant was a medium risk to adults, the public and staff.
           He said that the risk of reoffending within the next  two  years
           was 54% and the risk of violent reoffending was also 54%..."


  10. Finally, the judge summarised the submissions made  by  the  appellant
      himself:


           "The appellant said that he had made the  decision  to  move  to
           Swindon when he was released from prison because he did not want
           to go back to the area where his old friends lived. He said that
           he has opportunities in Swindon. The appellant said that he  had
           learned everything in the UK and this was where he had offended.
           He said that he  gained  qualifications  in  prison  because  he
           wanted to undertake the qualifications and not because he had to
           do them. He said that he wanted to do  something  positive.  The
           appellant said that the only reason he was found guilty  of  the
           offence was because his friend pleaded guilty and because of his
           past. He said that he had not  committed  the  offence  and  was
           judged on the basis of his past."


      I should add that the significance of the appellant's stated intention
      to move to Swindon when released from prison is that  his  mother  now
      lives in Swindon and it was the appellant's case that  he  would  live
      with her there.


  11. Next, the judge set out the legal  framework  applicable,  and  it  is
      convenient for me to do so also.


  12. Regulation 19 of the 2006 Regs provides, so far  as  is  relevant  for
      present purposes:


           19. ...
           (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), an EEA national who has
           entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a
           national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if -
           (a) ...
           (b) the Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal
           is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
           public health in accordance with regulation 21; or
           ...
      Subparagraphs (4) and (5) of regulation 19 are  not  relevant  to  the
      circumstances of this appeal.


      Regulation 21 provides, again so far as is relevant:


           Decisions taken on public policy,  public  security  and  public
           health grounds

             21. (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an  EEA
           decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security
           or public health.

             (2) A relevant decision may not be  taken  to  serve  economic
           ends.

             (3) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  in  respect  of  a
           person with a permanent right of residence under  regulation  15
           except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

             (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on  imperative
           grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                 (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                 period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                 decision; or

                 (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
                 necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the
                 Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                 General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November
                 1989.

             (5) Where a relevant decision is taken on  grounds  of  public
           policy or public security it shall,  in  addition  to  complying
           with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-

                 (a) the decision must comply with the principle of
                 proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                 represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                 threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                 society;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                 themselves justify the decision.

             (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
           policy or public  security  in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
           resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker  must  take
           account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,
           family and economic situation of the person, the person's length
           of residence in the United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
           cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the  extent  of
           the person's links with his country of origin.

            ...


  13. The conclusions of the judge, and the  reasoning  that  led  to  those
      conclusions, are set out between paragraphs 29-45 of his judgment. She
      determined, correctly, that on the facts  and  on  the  basis  of  the
      evidence before her, the appellant was  entitled  only  to  the  basic
      level of protection  from  removal  provided  by  regulation  21.  The
      evidence did  not  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  had  managed  to
      accumulate a continuous period of residence  in  accordance  with  the
      2006 Regs for five years and, counting  back  from  the  date  of  the
      decision, the continuity of his residence had been interrupted by  his
      last prison sentence of 4 � years.


  14. Pausing there, it is appropriate to note that in SSHD v Franco  Vomero
      (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49 the Supreme Court considered it  "necessary  or
      appropriate" to refer to the Court of Justice the questions:
           (1) whether enhanced protection under article 28(3)(a) depends
           upon the possession of a right of permanent residence within
           article 16 and article 28(2)."
      And, in  case the answer to this question is in the negative, the
      Supreme Court also considered it necessary or appropriate to refer to
      the Court of Justice the further questions:
           "(2)     whether the period of residence for the previous ten
           years, to which article 28(3)(a) refers, is
                 (a)       a simple calendar period looking back from the
                 relevant date (here that of the decision to deport),
                 including in it any periods of absence or imprisonment,
                 (b)       a potentially non-continuous period, derived by
                 looking back from the relevant date and adding together
                 period(s) when the relevant person was not absent or in
                 prison, to arrive, if possible, at a total of ten years'
                 previous residence,
           (3)       what the true relationship is between the ten year
           residence test to which article 28(3)(a) refers and the overall
           assessment of an integrative link."
      In the confident expectation that the first of  those  questions  will
      return a negative answer,  I  recognise  that  the  second  and  third
      questions raise matters that may be thought relevant to the  facts  of
      this appeal. I shall return to this matter later in this judgment.


  15. As I have said, the judge first made clear findings of fact  that  led
      to the conclusion that the appellant did not qualify for any  enhanced
      level of protection from expulsion and said:


           "The relevant test therefore is the lower test of whether  there
           are public policy grounds for deporting the appellant  from  the
           UK."


  16. The judge accepted that the appellant was  convicted  of  "a"  serious
      offence and referred to the sentencing remarks of  the  judge  that  I
      have reproduced above.  She  noted  also  that  the  appellant  had  8
      previous convictions for 14 offences  and  that  his  last  conviction
      included his third  for  burglary  of  a  dwelling  house.  The  judge
      observed that the appellant "seeks to  evade  responsibility  for  his
      offence by denying the offence" and said:


           "... The appellant talks about the effects of his  offending  on
           others but this appeared to me to relate primarily to the effect
           on his family rather than a true understanding of the effect  on
           his victims or the effects on wider society."


  17. Despite this, the judge detected a willingness  by  the  appellant  to
      change. The judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  manged  to  cease
      accumulating prison adjudications because of his bad conduct and  that
      he had completed some courses in prison. The judge continued:


           "It seems to me that this is an appellant who is on the cusp  of
           change and who, if committed, could manage to change his pattern
           of  offending.  However,  this  is,  as  yet,  untested  in  the
           community and it is still difficult to know  how  the  appellant
           would react if he were challenged  or  felt  that  he  had  been
           disrespected."


  18. Next, the judge had regard to the OASyS report,  prepared  in  January
      2016:


           "The appellant at that time was assessed as a medium risk in the
           community to the public, known adults and prison staff. His risk
           of reoffending was assessed as 36% in the first year  rising  to
           54% in the second year. This is a significant figure. The  OASyS
           assessment notes that the appellant has control issues and lists
           a number of factors which increase risk including the  appellant
           becoming angry or being challenged. The assessment also lists  a
           number   of   factors   which   will   reduce   risk   including
           disassociating himself from peers  and  his  family  maintaining
           their support. The appellant spoke in evidence  about  intending
           to relocate to his mother's area upon release in order to  avoid
           his previous peer group and of finding employment by setting  up
           his own business..."



  19. At paragraph 37 of his judgment the judge said:


           "...  I find that the respondent's  decision  is  in  accordance
           with Regulation  21(5)  because  the  decision  has  been  based
           exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  appellant,  the
           appellant has been a persistent offender over a prolonged period
           of time and the  prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  potentially
           reduced by the fact that the appellant denies  his  most  recent
           offence."


  20. Despite expressing herself in those terms, the judge went on to  allow
      the appeal on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with
      the principle of proportionality articulated in regulation 21(5). That
      appears to be because the judge believed that the  appellant  had  the
      potential to be reformed. The judge had observed that it seemed to her
      that the appellant was "on the cusp of change", as I have noted above.
      Developing this theme, the judge then said that although the appellant
      had been assessed as a significant risk to the public:


           "The appellant appears to be starting to understand  the  impact
           of his offending although it is true to state that this is still
           in the early stages..


           ... It seems to me that  this  is  an  appellant  who  has  been
           shocked to some extent by his current sentence and who  has  now
           realised the need to address  is  offending  behaviour.  He  has
           undertaken courses in  prison  which  should  provide  him  with
           skills; both practical and emotional and with  an  understanding
           of the impact of his offending. It does  seem  to  me  that  the
           appellant has only recently begun to understand this but equally
           I find that he is  beginning  to  understand  these  issues  and
           wishes to address is offending and  work  to  avoid  it  in  the
           future....


           ... There is some risk attached regarding the appellant's future
           conduct. However, taking account of all  of  the  circumstances,
           including the lack of family support in France and  the  reasons
           given above, I find that the decision to  deport  the  appellant
           does not comply with the principle of proportionality."


  21. For the respondent, Mr Tufan submitted that this was a conclusion that
      was not reasonably open to the judge on the evidence.  The  judge  has
      not addressed the issue of the appellant's lack of integration in  the
      United Kingdom and  has  failed  adequately  to  have  regard  to  the
      appellant's clearly demonstrated propensity to  offend.  He  may  have
      completed some courses in prison but there was scant evidence  of  the
      nature and effect of it. Whilst the judge speculated as to the  future
      possibility that the appellant might not offend in the future, stating
      that he appeared to be "on the cusp of change", the  evidence  pointed
      in  a  different  direction,  particularly  the  OASyS  report   which
      confirmed that the appellant represented a high risk of  harm  to  the
      public which plainly established that he represented a genuine present
      and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
      interests of society. The nature of the  offences  committed  by  this
      appellant  and  his  propensity  to  offend  plainly   satisfied   the
      requirements of the regulations and it was not reasonably open to  the
      judge to find otherwise.


  22. I agree. I am unable to understand how the  judge,  having  recognised
      that the changes in behaviour of which the appellant has  spoken  were
      of the future, and then  only  if  the  appellant  were  committed  to
      achieving such a change, and that the risks to the  public  identified
      in the OASyS report continued in respect of  "the  appellant's  future
      conduct" could properly and reasonably conclude that the appellant did
      not represent a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.
      Rather than determining the appeal on the basis  of  circumstances  as
      they have presently been shown to be, the judge has allowed the appeal
      on the basis of how those circumstances may be in the future. I do not
      understand the  judge  to  be  saying  that  the  appellant  does  not
      presently represent such a risk. Indeed, at paragraph 43 she  accepted
      that "some risk" attached to the appellant's future  conduct.  Rather,
      the judge allowed the appeal because the appellant was "on the cusp of
      change" which acknowledges that such change as not yet occurred. Every
      aspect of the reasoning of the judge is couched  in  terms  of  future
      events: The appellant is on the cusp of change; if committed, he could
      manage to change his pattern of offending; however, this  is  untested
      in the community; the appellant appears to be starting  to  understand
      the impact of his offending.. this is still in the  early  stages;  he
      has realised the  need  to  address  his  offending  behaviour  -  the
      appellant has only recently begun to understand  this;  he  wishes  to
      address his offending.


  23. Although these matters led the judge to conclude that the decision  to
      remove the appellant from the United Kingdom does not comply with  the
      principle of proportionality, there is no indication in  the  judgment
      that the judge made any  attempt  to  strike  a  balance  between  the
      competing interest in play in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
      required. Proportionality is about balancing one set of considerations
      against another. Here,  the  cogent  and  compelling  public  interest
      considerations arising from the need to protect the  public  from  the
      risk of the appellant continuing to commit serious  criminal  offences
      of a violent nature in the United Kingdom appears to  have  played  no
      part in the decision of the judge.


  24. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge has made  a  material
      error of law and that her decision to allow the  appeal  must  be  set
      aside.


  25. At the hearing, I explained to  Mr  Samba  that  I  would  reserve  my
      decision as to whether or not the judge had made a material  error  of
      law and, having ensured that he understood that if I did find such  an
      error of law had been made, I would go on to remake  the  decision  in
      respect of his appeal against the removal decision, I asked him if  he
      was ready to present his case that I would need  to  consider  if  the
      decision to allow the appeal were set aside and  I  therefore  had  to
      make a fresh decision as to whether the appeal should  be  allowed  or
      dismissed.  I explained that if there was any evidence  he  wished  to
      rely upon that was not available at the hearing, he could apply for an
      adjournment. He said that he did not require an  adjournment  and  was
      content to proceed. His mother was present and he would call  evidence
      from her.


  26. Mr Samba then gave oral evidence.  He said that he had been in and out
      of jail and had learned a lot  from  that.  He  had  decided  that  on
      release from prison he would not continue to live in London but  would
      move to live with his mother in Swindon. He said that there  he  would
      find job opportunities in the construction industry, as he put it.  He
      said that he wanted to make a new start. He had learned his lesson. He
      did not wish to return to France, where he had lived for 8  years.  He
      has been in this country for 14 years and wished to remain here.


  27. For the respondent, Mr Tufan asked  a  very  few  questions  in  cross
      examination. It was put to the appellant that when interviewed  by  an
      Immigration Officer on 2 August 2016 he said that he did  not  have  a
      good relationship with his mother and that "she is not there for  me".
      Mr Samba denied having said that.


  28. Next, the appellant's mother, Vivian Sylvie Touya, gave evidence.  She
      confirmed that she is a  French  national  who  moved  to  the  United
      Kingdom in  2002.  She  has  now  established  a  permanent  right  of
      residence. She described herself as a carer and said that she is  also
      studying to become a nurse. I asked Ms Touya when she and her son  had
      last lived together in the same household. She was uncertain as to her
      answer whereupon the appellant addressed her loudly in  French.  There
      was an exchange between them, again in French, from which it was plain
      that the appellant is fluent in that language.


  29. Ms Touya's recollection was that she and her son  last  lived  in  the
      same household in 2013. She said that he had lived  with  her  between
      the ages of 9 and 16.


  30. Ms Touya said that the appellant could,  once  released  from  prison,
      come to live with  her  and  her  husband  in  Swindon,  provided  the
      probation  officer  supervising  him  on  licence  approved  of   that
      arrangement. It can be seen from this that  although  the  appellant's
      release was thought to be  imminent,  no  such  arrangement  had  been
      approved.


  31. The witness said that  she  had  no  relatives  in  France.  The  only
      question Mr Tufan addressed to this witness was whether  she  accepted
      that the appellant had committed a number of  offences  while  he  was
      living with her. Once again, when  Ms  Touya  failed  to  respond  the
      appellant spoke to her loudly in French but this did  not  elicit  any
      reply.


  32. Drawing all of this together, I reach the following conclusions.


  33. The appellant enjoys  only  the  basic  level  of  protection  against
      removal because it has not been established that  he  has  managed  to
      complete a single continuous five-year period of living in  accordance
      with the 2006 Regs. The continuity of his residence  in  the  ten-year
      period preceding the removal decision  has  been  interrupted  by  his
      sentences of imprisonment. Whatever the outcome of the refence made by
      the Supreme Court  in  SSHD  v  Franco  Vomero,  that  will  take  the
      appellant no further because, even  if  it  were  possible  to  string
      together or accumulate an overall period of ten years during which the
      appellant was not serving a prison sentence, it is unambiguously clear
      that he has not managed to integrate  into  the  United  Kingdom.  His
      education was interrupted by exclusion from school and  in  his  early
      years, as he confirmed in the process  of  the  OASyS  assessment,  he
      involved himself with gangs, although he chose to disassociate himself
      from gang culture as he  grew  older.  The  continuing  commission  of
      criminal offences and the nature of his subsequent record of offending
      is impossible to reconcile with any assessment  of  integration.  Even
      while serving his present sentence  he  has  been  the  subject  of  8
      adjudications, mainly for fighting with other prisoners,  although  it
      is fair to say that there have  been  no  such  adjudications  in  the
      latter part of his sentence.


  34. The appellant's previous convictions do not in themselves justify  the
      removal decision. What is relevant is the  extent  to  which  how  the
      appellant  conducts  himself  informs  the  question  of  whether   he
      represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  risk.  The
      decision must comply with the principle of proportionality and in that
      regard  relevant  factors   include,   but   are   not   limited   to,
      considerations such as the appellant's age, state of heath, family and
      economic considerations, length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,
      his social and cultural integration into the United  Kingdom  and  the
      extent of his links with France.


  35. The appellant has committed a number of serious criminal offences  and
      there has been a clearly demonstrated escalation of the seriousness of
      his offending as time has gone on. I have no  doubt  at  all  that  he
      represents a significant risk of reoffending and that  the  nature  of
      the offences he has a propensity  to  commit  are  offences  involving
      violence. The OASyS  report,  completed  following  an  assessment  in
      January 2016, concludes that the risk of reoffending within 2 years of
      release is 54% and the risk of violent offending during that period is
      assessed to  be  45%.  The  offences  of  robbery  and  burglary  were
      aggravated by the subsequent intimidation of a  witness,  involving  a
      threat of violence calculated to compromise the police  investigation.
      In the OASyS report it is observed:


           "The victim took these threats seriously believing that Mr Samba
           was capable of arranging for her to be beaten up by  others.  It
           was also noted that the victim was aware that Mr Samba had  been
           linked to several stabbings and believed  he  carried  a  knife,
           although this information is obviously not confirmed."

  36. I bear firmly in mind all that has been  said  about  the  appellant's
      motivation to change. However, as I have said above, that all looks to
      the future and will depend upon whether the appellant can  muster  and
      maintain  the  requisite  commitment  to  change.  As  the  judge  who
      initially determined this appeal observed, "this is  untested  in  the
      community and it is still difficult to know how  the  appellant  would
      react if he were challenged or felt that he  had  been  disrespected".
      The appellant has spoken of living with his  mother  in  Swindon  once
      released. She, of course, was unable to prevent his offending when  he
      lived with her when younger and it can be seen that the appellant told
      the author of the OASyS report that on release he had intended to live
      with his girlfriend in Peterborough. In any event, the appellant  will
      be on licence and so his living arrangements will need to be  approved
      and as that has not yet been established, despite  his  release  being
      imminent, there can be no confident  prediction  of  what  his  living
      arrangements will be.


  37. As the appellant has refused to accept  responsibility  for  his  most
      recent offences  the  prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  not  at  all
      encouraging.  The  appellant's  case  is   that   the   prospects   of
      rehabilitation are better in the United Kingdom. However, it is  plain
      that, contrary to what the appellant has said, he retains  fluency  in
      French and although he has spent most of his life living in the United
      Kingdom, as he spent eight years living in France when  younger,  that
      country will not be wholly unfamiliar to him even though,  of  course,
      he will find challenging the prospect of establishing  himself  there.
      The evidence of both his mother and  himself  is  that  they  have  no
      family members now living in France to whom the appellant  could  look
      for support but, of  course,  his  mother  will  readily  be  able  to
      maintain contact with him if that is  what  they  choose  to  do.  The
      appellant has spoken of obtaining work in the construction industry as
      well as in painting and decorating or in running a mini cab  business.
      There appears to be no reason why he cannot find work, for example, in
      the construction industry in France just he hoped  to  in  the  United
      Kingdom.


  38. On the evidence the parties have put before the Tribunal there  is  no
      doubt at all that the personal conduct of the appellant does represent
      a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of
      the fundamental  interests  of  society.  For  the  avoidance  of  any
      possible doubt, if I were wrong to find that  the  appellant  had  not
      accumulated a five-year  period  of  living  in  accordance  with  the
      regulations, the circumstances I have discussed would still,  plainly,
      constitute serious grounds of public policy or public security such as
      to fully justify the decision that has been taken.


  39. Put another way, in terms of proportionality, the level of risk that I
      am satisfied this appellant represents is such as to  displace  firmly
      all the arguments that speak in his favour.


  40. For these reasons the decision under challenge was correct and  lawful
      and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Summary of decision:

           i) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of
              law error of law and her decision shall be set aside.

          ii) I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss Mr Samba's appeal.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 24 July 2017

