
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Given orally at Field House                   |On 7 October 2014            |
|On 29 September 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               CRYTON SIJAONA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Short instructed by Turpin & Miller Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer sitting at
    Richmond on 23 June 2014, in which he  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent  that  the  claimant  should  be
    deported from the United Kingdom.  Permission to appeal was granted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 7 August 2014.  That Tribunal noted that  it
    was arguable the judge had failed to take into account  paragraphs  399
    or 399A of the Immigration Rules and associated case law.

2.   Before me, Mr Shilliday represents the  Secretary  of  State.   He  has
    helpfully  provided  a  bundle  of  authorities,  including   statutory
    authorities.  Ms Short represents the claimant, as she did  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The  facts  of  the  matter  are  essentially  as
    follows.

3.   The claimant is a national of  Tanzania,  born  in  January  1969.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 11 November 2001 with a visa that  was
    valid until 6 September 2002.  He made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a dependant of his wife who was then studying in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He  was  granted  further  leave  until  17  September  2007,
    together with his wife and then child as dependants.  In September 2007
    his leave was extended until 7 September 2012.  In 2008  he,  his  wife
    and now three children were granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.   He
    applied for registration of his three children as British citizens  and
    that was granted in August 2009.  Later that year he and  his  children
    were issued with British passports.  The three  children  were  at  the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal's determination aged 11, 9 and 7.   The
    eldest, E, has an autistic spectrum disorder.

4.   In May 2012 the claimant was convicted of  three  counts  of  obtaining
    leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  by  means  including
    deception.  It appeared that between 2003  and  2007  he  obtained  his
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  a  fraudulent
    United Kingdom ancestry claim.  On 11 May 2012 he was sentenced to  ten
    months' imprisonment for the first count, four months  for  the  second
    count to run consecutively and four months for the third count, also to
    run consecutively, these making a total sentence  of  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment. In June and August 2012 he was notified of  liability  to
    deportation.

5.   The current letter of decision is that dated  27  March  2014.   Having
    set out the circumstances of the claimant's immigration history and the
    circumstances of his offence, including the remarks of  the  sentencing
    judge, the letter continued by noting  the  presumption  in  favour  of
    deportation, before embarking upon an analysis  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  It is relevant  to  observe  that
    the sentencing judge  stated  that  the  claimant's  offences  were  so
    serious that only immediate custodial sentences were justified and that
    they were the shortest which in his judgment matched the seriousness of
    the offences, taking account of the nature of the deceptions  employed,
    the  sentencing  guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  deterrence  and
    mitigation.  The letter  analysed  family  life  by  reference  to  the
    claimant's family life with his wife and his three children.  It  noted
    with some care the position  of  the  three  children.   It  concluded,
    however, that there were "no exceptional  circumstances  known  and  no
    reason apparent why you could not continue your family life in Tanzania
    if it is  decided  that  your  children  and  wife  will  join  you  in
    Tanzania".  There then followed reference  to  the  claimant's  private
    life.  It is common ground that no reliance is placed upon private life
    as such in these proceedings.  The position of the eldest child who  is
    autistic was specifically noted, although it was considered that  there
    were non-governmental organisations available  in  Tanzania  who  might
    provide assistance in that regard.

6.   The  determination  of  the  judge  bears  some  scrutiny.   It  is  of
    considerable length.  That is not to say that it must as  a  result  be
    free from legal error; indeed Mr Shilliday's submission is that, having
    recorded accurately the nature of the task that he  faced,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in effect failed to apply the relevant legal  tests
    in his conclusions on the evidence.

7.   The submissions are recorded  in  some  detail,  as  is  the  evidence.
    There is also supporting evidence from  third  parties,  including  the
    Church of England Chaplain of the prison where the  claimant  had  been
    held, attesting to positive character traits of the claimant.

8.   There was also a probation report, recorded at  paragraph  120  of  the
    determination as presenting "a low risk of serious harm given that  the
    claimant does not have any previous convictions indicative  of  serious
    harm".

9.   The submissions of Mr Bassi and Ms Short are then noted in detail.   Mr
    Bassi was recorded at paragraph 128 as submitting that the interests of
    the children could not be regarded as a "trump card", a phrase repeated
    today by Mr Shilliday in his submissions to me.

10.  At paragraph 136 we see reference made to the leading case of  Nagre  v
    Secretary  of  State  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  as  guidance  on  the
    assessment of what might be meant by "exceptional circumstances" in the
    context of a criminal deportation.

11.  At paragraph 139 the judge recorded Ms Short as  submitting  that  this
    was a case where  the  interests  of  the  three  children  "constitute
    compelling circumstances".  There then follows reference to the case of
    Omotunde (best interests - Zanbrano applied -  Razgar)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 247 (IAC) and other cases bearing on this matter.

12.  The judge's findings begin at paragraph 146.   He  found  at  paragraph
    149 that "from the evidence produced I find that the  appellant  has  a
    very strong bond with his children.  He and  his  wife  managed  to  be
    employed at different hours during the day in order that each would  be
    able to provide full-time care to their daily needs.  Accordingly,  the
    appellant worked at nights so as to be  available  to  look  after  the
    children during the day."

13.  At paragraph 150 the judge noted that, as well as taking  the  children
    to school and other  appointments,  the  appellant  assisted  them  and
    devoted himself to their extra curricular activities, including  taking
    E for piano lessons.

14.  The position whilst the claimant was in prison was noted  at  paragraph
    151.  This was a difficult time for the children.

15.  At  paragraph  152  the  judge  noted  that  the  claimant's  wife  was
    registered for a degree and away during the day: "it is  the  appellant
    who therefore attends to their day-to-day needs.  Her degree has a  few
    years to run."  All this led the judge to  find  that,  if  faced  with
    deportation, "the family face a difficult dilemma and choice".  It  was
    plain in the judge's view that it would be unreasonable to  expect  the
    children to relocate to Tanzania.

16.  At paragraph 156 we find this: "It  is  accordingly  not  disputed  and
    thus I find that the removal of the  appellant  from  the  family  unit
    would have significantly adverse impacts on  them".   Having  concluded
    that telephone communication and other modern  forms  of  communication
    would not provide a satisfactory alternative, the  judge  at  paragraph
    158  recognised  the  need  to  find  exceptional  circumstances   when
    conducting the balancing exercise required  for  proportionality  under
    Article 8.

17.  At paragraph 159 the judge noted that the  claimant's  claim  "must  be
    considered in the context of the relevant provisions of the Immigration
    Rules and in particular paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A".

18.  At paragraph 160 the judge observed that if the  claimant's  case  fell
    within paragraphs 399 and 399A, then the  exercise  involved  a  single
    stage only; but if it did not fall within either of  those  provisions,
    it  was  necessary  to  determine  whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances outweighing the public interest in deportation.

19.  There then follows a recitation of the well-known five stage  test  set
    out by Lord Bingham in  Razgar  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27 and other  cases  including  importantly  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in SS  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.   At
    paragraph  169  the  judge  noted  that  he  had  "had  regard  to  the
    authorities that have been provided to me and  the  principles  derived
    from them".  Having taken account of  all  this,  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 170 that the welfare of the children was a  primary  but  not
    paramount consideration.  It was not the  only  consideration  and  not
    necessarily determinative.

20.  Again, at paragraph 175 the judge reminded himself that the  new  Rules
    provided that it would only be in exceptional  circumstances  that  the
    public interest in deportation would be outweighed by other factors.

21.  The judge then looked again  at  the  position  of  the  eldest  child.
    Although that child  appears  to  have  made  substantial  progress  in
    education, he was about to embark in secondary school and it was likely
    that this would require further monitoring in respect of his  disorder.



22.  At paragraph 184 the judge came to his overall conclusions.   He  found
    that "it is clearly in the children's best interests for them to remain
    in the UK with both parents.  There is,  as  already  found,  a  strong
    relationship between the appellant and the children.  Were that bond to
    be severed by the appellant's deportation to Tanzania there is no doubt
    that this would have an adverse effect on each of them.  I do not  find
    that such severance could be adequately addressed by  indirect  contact
    or even possible visits to him in future.  In any event  the  financial
    circumstances of the appellant's wife are currently not  known  and  in
    particular it is not known whether she will after graduating  from  her
    economics degree find the professional employment she hopes for".

23.  At paragraph 185 the judge noted the  low  likelihood  of  re-offending
    and in particular the low risk of serious harm.

24.  At paragraph 186 the judge concluded  as  follows:  "Having  considered
    the evidence as a whole I conclude that notwithstanding the strength of
    the countervailing interests the best interests of  the  children  must
    prevail.  They give rise to  a  compelling  case  which  displaces  the
    public  interest  in  his  deportation.   I  conclude  that  the   case
    established under Article 8 is sufficiently strong and compelling so as
    to prevail  over  the  pressing  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    deportation".

25.  Before me, Mr Shilliday mounted an energetic and  able  attack  on  the
    judge's determination.  As I have already stated, it comes down to  the
    assertion that the judge has in effect failed to apply the case law and
    rules which govern  decision-making  in  this  context.   Mr  Shilliday
    submitted that the judge had in fact conducted a freewheeling Article 8
    exercise, evidenced perhaps by the references to the  case  of  Razgar.
    At  my  request,  Mr  Shilliday  then  made  submissions  as  to   what
    hypothetically might be the outcome were I to find an error of law  and
    embark on re-making the decision.  He drew my attention to  section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014, which at the end of July 2014 brought into
    force a new Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Mr Shilliday submitted in effect  that  this  test  was  to  all
    intents and purposes the same as had faced the  judge  in  the  present
    case.  Looking at section  117C(5),  the  question  on  the  facts  was
    whether the effect of the claimant's  deportation  on  the  partner  or
    child would  be  "unduly  harsh".   Mr  Shilliday  submitted  that  the
    provisions of Part 5A, and in particular 117C, apply  to  the  claimant
    because insofar as  117C  is  concerned  the  claimant  is  a  "foreign
    criminal" as defined in section 117D(2)  of  the  2002  Act.   This  is
    because, although he has  not  been  sentenced  to  a  single  term  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months, he has "been  convicted  of  an
    offence that has caused serious harm".

26.  Mr Shilliday drew my attention in  that  regard  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's Guidance Instructions,  Chapter  13,  Criminality  Guidance  in
    Article 8 ECHR cases, valid from 28 July 2014.  There we find at  2.1.3
    the definition, albeit non-statutory, of an  offence  that  has  caused
    serious harm as  constituting  "an  offence  that  has  caused  serious
    physical and psychological harm to a victim  or  victims  or  that  has
    contributed to a widespread problem  that  causes  serious  harm  to  a
    community or to society in general".

27.  Paragraph 2.1.5 puts some flesh  on  those  bones  by  indicating  that
    where a person has been convicted of one or more violence, drugs or sex
    offences "he will usually be considered to have been  convicted  of  an
    offence that has caused serious harm".

28.  For the claimant, Ms Short submitted that the  approach  taken  by  the
    Secretary  of  State's  representative  at   the   First-tier   hearing
    essentially followed that set out in the refusal  letter  of  27  March
    2014.  This was the approach which  the  First-tier  Judge  essentially
    adopted and it was therefore in Ms Short's  submission  wrong  for  the
    Secretary of State at this stage in proceedings to seek  to  take  what
    she described as a different stance.  On the basis of the  totality  of
    the facts and the relevant law, Ms Short submitted that the  First-tier
    Judge had made a good, or  if  not  good,  adequate  decision.  He  had
    correctly directed himself to  the  relevant  law.   There  were  ample
    instances in the determination to show that the judge was well aware of
    the need for exceptionality, albeit not as a legal test as  such.   All
    relevant considerations had been taken into account.

29.  So far as Part 5A of the 2002 Act is concerned Ms Short submitted  that
    the claimant's offence could not be said to fall within the  definition
    set out in section 117B(2)(c) for if it did, then  all  other  offences
    would necessarily in practice have to fall within  the  same  category.
    But even if the claimant were regarded as a foreign criminal for  these
    purposes and if the Upper Tribunal were to embark  upon  re-making  the
    decision, for the reasons given by the judge  it  was  plain  that  the
    effects on the children and family in general would be unduly harsh.

30.  I am grateful for both sets of submissions.  I am conscious that it  is
    only where an error of law is found that it is possible for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    therefore have to consider whether such an error has been demonstrated.



31.  I will not repeat those passages of the determination to which  I  have
    made reference.  It is in my view abundantly plain from those  passages
    that the judge was entirely aware of  the  nature  of  the  legal  task
    before him.  The criticism of the judge in my view  comes  down  to  no
    more than that he should have used the language  of  exceptionality  or
    undue  harshness  expressly,  in  the  concluding  paragraphs  of   his
    determination. But to require that of a fact-finder seems to me  to  be
    distorting what is meant by error of law.  It is quite apparent  to  me
    that the judge knew the ambit of his task.  There was ample evidence in
    front of him, in particular in relation to the position of  the  eldest
    of the three children but also as regards the important part played  by
    the claimant in the lives of all three children and the way in which he
    and his wife were organising themselves to  attend  to  the  children's
    needs, to show that deportation  of  the  claimant  would  indeed  have
    disproportionately harsh effects on the  family.   In  coming  to  that
    conclusion the judge undoubtedly and rightly had regard to  the  nature
    of the offence which the claimant had committed.  He  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there was a low risk  of  re-offending.   Accordingly,  I
    accept the submissions of Ms Short as regards error of law.  That means
    that it is strictly unnecessary for me to embark upon any  analysis  of
    Part 5A of the 2002  Act.   I  will  however  say  that,  had  it  been
    necessary for me to re-make the determination, I would have reached the
    same conclusions of the judge; namely that it would be unduly harsh  to
    deport the claimant.  In doing so, I would have parted company with  Mr
    Shilliday, as regards the test of serious harm.  It strikes me that the
    guidance at paragraph 2.1.3, in describing a  widespread  problem  that
    causes serious harm to a  community  and  to  society  in  general,  is
    looking at such things as drugs offences, rather than the offences  for
    which the claimant was convicted.   That  is  not  to  say  that  those
    offences were not significant; and that is not to say that  society  is
    not fully entitled to proscribe them. But I do have some difficulty  in
    seeing why, if this is to be the test of serious  harm,  there  is  any
    purpose in having the additional  threshold  of  the  sentence  of  one
    year's imprisonment. But I conclude that, even if Part 5A  is  engaged,
    it would be unduly harsh for this  claimant  to  be  deported  for  the
    offences which  have  triggered  the  deportation  action  being  taken
    against him.

32.    The claimant should not regard the First-tier's determination and  my
    dismissing the challenge against  it  as  any  indication  that  he  is
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom indefinitely, whether  or  not
    he commits any further offences. If he does commit further offences, no
    doubt action will be taken against him.  However,  for  the  reasons  I
    have given, this appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.






                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



