
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00652/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January, 2016                  |On 18th July 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JONATHAN BOSSINGA MOPO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tom Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis of Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, to whom I  shall  refer  as  being,  "the  claimant".   The
    respondent is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo,  born  on
    24th August, 1989.

2.   The respondent came to the United Kingdom on 20th June, 1994,  when  he
    was aged 5 years, accompanied  by  his  mother  and  his  sister.   His
    mother's application for asylum was subsequently refused  but  he,  his
    mother and his sister were granted exceptional leave  to  remain  until
    10th  March,  2004.   On  3rd  April,  2004,  all  three  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

Appellant's Criminal Activities

3.   The appellant first appeared before  Haringey  Juvenile  Court  on  8th
    September, 2004,  in  relation  to  an  alleged  offence  of  attempted
    robbery.  He was subsequently arrested for being in possession of Class
    A drugs, for possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  and  possession  of
    cannabis.  He was sentenced  to  twelve  months  supervision  order  by
    Thames Juvenile Court in August, 2006.   He  pleaded  guilty  at  Inner
    London Crown Court on 18th July 2006, to handling stolen goods  and  on
    the same day he also pleaded guilty  to  robbery  and  handling  stolen
    goods and was remanded in custody.  On 8th August, 2006, he received  a
    twelve month supervision order and a three month curfew with electronic
    tagging.   On  23rd  August,  2006,  just  some  two  weeks  after  his
    appearance at Inner London Crown Court, the appellant was convicted  of
    possession of an offensive weapon and possession of Class A drugs.

4.   On 11th August, 2009, the appellant was convicted at Blackfriars  Crown
    Court of violent disorder and sentenced to an immediate sentence.   The
    Court  of  Appeal  subsequently  varied  the  sentence  to  two  years'
    imprisonment on 15th July 2010.  On 18th February, 2009, the  appellant
    was convicted of possession of  Class  A  cocaine,  two  offences,  and
    possession of cannabis.  He was sentenced to  six  months  in  a  young
    offenders' institution.

5.   The appellant was subsequently served with a notice  of  liability  for
    deportation on 22nd January, 2010.  This was re-sent to  the  appellant
    in February 2012.

Appellant's First Tier Tribunal appeal.

6.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judges Canavan and  Cockrill  at  Kingston
    Crown Court on 2nd July, 2014.  In allowing  his  appeal  the  Tribunal
    noted the decision of the Administrative Court in R (on the application
    of P (DRC)) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC
    3879 (Admin) and the relevant  country  guidance  case  of  BK  (failed
    asylum seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00098.  The Tribunal  examined  the
    country policy bulletin of February, 2014 and concluded that given  the
    serious conditions and consequences of detention in the DRC  they  were
    satisfied  on  the  evidence,  taken  as  a  whole,  that  there   were
    substantial grounds for believing that a person who is identified as  a
    criminal deportee, specially one who had committed a serious crime, was
    likely to be at risk of ill-treatment amounting to a breach of  Article
    3 if returned to the DRC at the current time.  They allowed his  appeal
    under Article 3 of the European Convention.

7.   The Secretary of State, dissatisfied with  that  decision,  sought  and
    was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  two
    substantive paragraphs set out in the grounds  of  application  are  as
    follows:-

         "It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal has erred  in  law.
         Since the judgment in the case of P & R v Secretary  of  State  for
         the  Home  Department  the  UK  Government  has   sourced   further
         information regarding the safety of returning foreign nationals  to
         the Democratic Republic of Congo, which it considers shows that the
         findings in that judgment does not accurately reflect  the  current
         situation in the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.   This  includes
         confirmation from the Directeur Central de la Chancellerie  at  the
         Direction Generale de Migration  that  they  have  no  interest  in
         return to foreign national offenders  (or  failed  asylum  seekers)
         unless there are criminal matters  outstanding  in  the  Democratic
         Republic of Congo.


         (2) The Home Office has now published a Country Policy Bulletin  (a
         copy of which was a section relating to foreign national  offenders
         as being attached) which updates  the  policy  on  returns  to  the
         Democratic Republic of Congo in the light of the judgments  in  the
         case of P & R based on further information obtained. While  the  UK
         Government has agreed with the claimant in P to withdraw its appeal
         to the Court of Appeal in the case of P, we are confident that  the
         new information confirms our view that foreign  national  offenders
         (or failed asylum seekers) do not on the basis of their  conviction
         in the UK, face any risk of their Article 3 rights  being  breached
         if returned.  It is also submitted  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
         provide adequate reasons why the appellant will be identified as  a
         foreign national offender upon return.  It is submitted that  there
         is no reason to believe that  the  authorities  in  the  Democratic
         Republic of Congo would be aware of his offences or suspect him  of
         being a foreign national offender on return."

Hearing before me

8.   Appearing before me, Mr Wilding on behalf of the claimant, pointed  out
    that the  determination  dealt  with  the  Article  3  risk  points  at
    paragraphs 127 to 146 of the determination.  The panel found that there
    was a risk  that  the  appellant  would  be  detained  on  arrival  and
    identified.   The  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  the   Country   of
    Information Bulletin, but the Tribunal did not accept that the evidence
    could take them beyond  the  situation  in  P.   The  determination  is
    inadequately reasoned.  We now know from the decision in BM and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015]  293  (IAC)  that
    the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo is not as  was  found
    in P.  The Tribunal treated P as a starting point and  erred  in  doing
    so.  They should have assessed all the evidence in the round.

9.   Mr Lewis submitted that there was nothing  irrational  or  perverse  in
    the public law sense in the  determination.   The  conclusion  was  one
    which on the evidence before them was open to them to make.  They  were
    entitled to treat the decision in P as being highly persuasive.   Their
    assessment of the available evidence did not  extend  to  the  evidence
    which was before the Tribunal in BA.   He  invited  me  to  uphold  the
    determination.

10.  Mr Wilding had no further comment to make.

Decision and reasons

11.  I carefully read the determination.  The appellant asserted that  three
    factors were likely to place him at risk.   Firstly,  he  relied  on  P
    relating to the potential risk posed to criminal  deportees,  secondly,
    he asserted that his mother's past detention and  political  activities
    may give rise to  suspicion  that  he  is  not  position  activist  and
    thirdly,  he  relied  on  the  fact  that  he  had   attended   several
    demonstrations in the United Kingdom.

12.  The panel did start by considering BK (failed asylum  seekers)  DRC  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00098 which concluded that failed asylum seekers were not,
    per se, at risk of treatment amounting to persecution or  a  breach  of
    Article 3, unless he or she had  a  particular  political  or  military
    profile.  They went on to consider P and I agree, that decision  by  Mr
    Justice Phillips was very persuasive.

13.  But the Tribunal did not stop there.  They looked at a letter  to  Mary
    Glindon MP from the DRC Ambassador and considered the UKBA fact-finding
    mission to Kinshasa.  They noted the Country Policy  Bulletin  and  the
    meeting held between the Foreign Commonwealth Office with the Directeur
    Central de la Chancellerie at the Direction Generale  de  Migration  on
    15th January, 2015.  They also considered the evidence that was  before
    the Administrative Court in P and noted that having considered all  the
    evidence in the round, they did not believe that it was  sufficient  to
    persuade them to come to a different conclusion to Mr Justice Phillips.



14.  It has to be borne in mind that the First Tier  Tribunal  did  not  see
    all the evidence that the Upper Tribunal saw in  BA.   However,  having
    carefully examined the  evidence  placed  before  them,  including  the
    summary  of  the  evidence  given  by  the  Directeur  Central  de   la
    Chancellerie at the Direction Generale de Migration,  they  found  that
    they could only give the Directeur's evidence limited  weight,  because
    it came directly from an official working for the department that would
    interview and check returnees at the airport.  They believed  that  the
    background evidence showed that State security forces continued to  act
    with impunity and commit many serious  human  rights  abuses.   In  the
    light of that evidence it seemed to the Tribunal highly unlikely that a
    senior official would admit to serious abuses if they did occur.

15.  I believe that the Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude  as  it  did  at
    paragraph 43, that the evidence placed before it was not sufficient  to
    persuade them to come to a different conclusion to that of  Phillips  J
    in P.  I believe that the Tribunal were  entirely  correct  to  take  a
    cautious view, given the very serious conditions  and  consequences  of
    detention in DRC found by Phillips J.

16.  The Tribunal pointed out that the appellant would easily be  identified
    as a criminal deportee and articles naming the appellant in relation to
    the attempted robbery do, apparently,  reveal  themselves  on  a  basic
    internet search.

17.  I believe that the  Tribunal  have  properly  and  adequately  reasoned
    their findings and also  properly  and  adequately  reasoned  why  they
    believe that the appellant would be identified as a criminal  deportee.
    The Tribunal did not have the benefit of all the evidence placed before
    the Tribunal in BK.  On the evidence before it  however,  the  Tribunal
    was, I believe, entitled to reach the conclusion that it did.

18.  The panel of the Tribunal did not make any error on a point of  law  in
    making the previous decision.  I order that the decision  shall  stand.
    No anonymity direction is made.



Richard Chalkley


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
18 July 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley



Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
18 July 2016

