
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00325/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 8 January 2018                      |On: 23 January 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mubarrack nasser hassan
                         (aNONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J de Souza, instructed by City Wide Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Hassan's appeal  against
the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation
23(6)(b) and Regulation 27  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as  the  respondent  and  Mr  Hassan  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands who was born on 8 August  1990
in Somalia and who moved with his family at the age  of  two  years  to  the
Netherlands. He claims to have entered the UK on 11 October  2002  with  his
family at the age of 12 years, and to have remained  here  since  that  time
aside from a two week holiday to the  Netherlands.  He  first  came  to  the
attention of the UK authorities when he was arrested  in  January  2015  and
convicted on 22 July 2015 on two counts of false imprisonment and one  count
of blackmail. He was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.

On 6 May 2017 the appellant  was  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
deportation and was asked to give reasons why he  should  not  be  deported.
The appellant responded by way of written  representations,  asserting  that
he had lived in the UK with his family since October 2002 exercising  treaty
rights. On 26 May  2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
appellant on  grounds  of  public  policy  in  accordance  with  regulations
23(6)(b) and 27 of the EEA Regulations and issued a deportation order.


 In her decision, the respondent noted that there was no evidence  from  the
appellant of his claimed residence in  the  UK  and  it  was  therefore  not
accepted that he had acquired a permanent right of residence or that he  had
been  continuously  resident  for  10  years  in  according  with  the   EEA
Regulations. The respondent considered whether the  appellant's  deportation
was  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public  security.   The
respondent referred to the index offence which involved  the  appellant  and
two co-defendants demanding money and threatening to shoot the  two  victims
whom they believed had sold him a stolen car and keeping them at a  property
from 2am until 5.30pm the following afternoon. The respondent had regard  to
the comments of the sentencing judge in relation to the index  offence.  The
respondent considered that the appellant's actions showed that  he  had  the
potential to cause serious  physical  and  psychological  harm  and  to  act
violently  and  considered  that  he  had  demonstrated  that  he  posed   a
significant risk of harm to the public in the UK. The respondent  considered
that the evidence indicated that the  appellant  had  a  propensity  to  re-
offend and that he represented a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
threat to the  public  justifying  his  deportation  on  grounds  of  public
policy. It was concluded further that his  deportation  to  the  Netherlands
would be proportionate and justified. The respondent  went  on  to  consider
Article 8, noting that the appellant did not have a partner or children  for
the purposes of paragraph 399(a)  and  (b)  of  the  immigration  rules  and
considering that he could not meet the requirements of paragraph 399A as  he
had not been lawfully resident in the UK for half his life, that he was  not
socially and culturally integrated in the UK and that  there  were  no  very
significant obstacles to his integration into the Netherlands.  It  was  not
considered that  there  were  any  very  compelling  circumstances  for  the
purposes of paragraph 398. The respondent  accordingly  concluded  that  the
appellant's deportation would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard on  15
August 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer.  Judge  Saffer  heard  from
the appellant and his mother. He found that the  trigger  offences  did  not
mean that the appellant should be deported  due  to  imperative  grounds  of
public security or that there was a genuine  or  present  threat  to  anyone
specifically  or  the  public  generally.  He  concluded  that  it  was  not
proportionate to deport the appellant either under the  EEA  Regulations  or
on Article 8 grounds and he accordingly allowed the appeal on all grounds.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on
the grounds that the  judge  had  not  applied  the  correct  criteria  when
reaching his decision  and  had  failed  to  take  a  holistic  approach  to
integration and that he had provided no reasons for his  conclusions  as  to
present threat.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  in
the Upper Tribunal on 10 October 2017.

Having heard from both parties it seems to  me  that  the  judge's  decision
cannot stand and has to be re-made in its entirety.


The judge proceeded in his decision on the basis that the appellant had  the
benefit of the highest level of protection of imperative grounds  of  public
security in order for his deportation to be justified, but did  not  provide
any explanation as to how he reached that conclusion. It  appears  from  his
observations and  findings  at  [18],  taken  together  with  [7],  that  he
concluded that the higher level of protection was met as  a  result  of  the
appellant's studies and voluntary work covering a period of over  10  years.
However, and  despite  his  finding  at  [21]  as  to  integration,  such  a
conclusion  failed  to  include  a  consideration  of  whether  or  not  the
appellant's  integrative  links  had  been  broken  by  his  offending   and
imprisonment, in accordance with the principles in Warsame v  The  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 16.


Furthermore, the judge's conclusion  failed  to  include  an  assessment  of
whether the appellant had acquired a permanent  right  of  residence  which,
according to the persuasive Opinion of the Advocate  General  in  B  v  Land
Baden-Wurttemberg and Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Franco
Vomero  C-316/16  and  C-424/16,  was  a  prerequisite  for   the   enhanced
protection under Article  28(3)(a)  of  the  Directive.  As  the  respondent
asserted at [4] of her grounds, there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant
had comprehensive sickness insurance so as to be able  to  demonstrate  that
he had acquired a permanent right  of  residence  in  the  UK  as  a  "self-
sufficient person" or "student" pursuant to Regulation 4(c) and (d).  Ms  de
Souza submitted that the appellant qualified  under  the  Regulations  as  a
member of a household of EEA nationals who came to the UK at the same  time.
However she accepted that there was no evidence that  they  were  exercising
Treaty rights and I do not see, therefore, how membership of the  household,
without more, would  be  sufficient  in  itself  to  make  the  appellant  a
qualified person for a continuous five year period. Accordingly the  judge's
decision was materially deficient in its assessment of  the  relevant  level
of protection available to the appellant.

Had the judge's conclusion that the appellant did not represent  a  genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat to society been a full and  properly
reasoned one,  clearly  independent  from  the  findings  on  the  level  of
protection, the above error may not necessarily have  been  a  material  one
requiring the re-making of the decision. However the judge's  findings  were
not fully and properly reasoned and it is cannot be said that  his  decision
was not influenced by his observations on the enhanced level  of  protection
available to the appellant. Although the judge considered the nature of  the
trigger offence there was otherwise a lack of any detailed analysis  of  the
threat posed  by  the  appellant,  with  the  judge's  entire  consideration
limited to one brief  sentence  at  [20].  There  was  no  consideration  of
efforts  at  rehabilitation  but  simply  an  unexplained  comment  that  no
rehabilitation  was  needed.  There  was  no  proper  consideration  of  the
appellant's conduct, but simply a comment that  he  had  not  misbehaved  in
prison and was previously of good character. The judge, furthermore,  failed
to consider the harm to society of an offence as serious as  that  committed
by the appellant.


Accordingly it seems to me that the judge's decision  is  materially  flawed
and  unsustainable  and  cannot  stand.  There  are  no  findings  that  can
justifiably be preserved and the decision must be re-made in  its  entirety.
The appropriate course, therefore, is for the matter to be remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


DECISION


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's  appeal  is  allowed
and the decision is set aside.


The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice
Statement 7.2(b), to be heard before any judge aside from Judge Saffer.

Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 10 January
2018
