
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00259/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             MAGOMEDS HIZRIJEVS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, instructed by Turpin & Miller, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 28 October 1993 and is a citizen  of  Latvia.
    The Secretary of State decided to deport the  appellant  to  Latvia  by
    decision dated 30 March 2017. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 January 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal against
    that decision. The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) found  that  the  appellant  had
    been living in the United Kingdom for more  than  five  years  and  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence [16]. The judge found that  the
    appellant is a persistent offender (shop-lifting/driving offences)  and
    that there were no obstacles to his returning to live  in  Latvia,  the
    country of which he is citizen, where he can speak  the  language  work
    and 'fend for himself.' The judge acknowledged that the appellant has a
    partner living in the United Kingdom who is a Latvian citizen and  that
    the couple have a child who  was  born  in  November  2016.  The  judge
    considered the child's best  interests  (section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009)  and  Article  8  ECHR  [22]  but
    concluded that the decision to deport the appellant was  in  accordance
    with the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  and
    proportionate.

    The decision of the judge to proceed in the appellant's absence

 3. Notice of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was served on  the
    appellant of his last known address in Barnsley by first class post  on
    13 November 2018. The hearing was  fixed  for  10  December  2018.  The
    appellant  had  previously  been  represented  by  solicitors  but  the
    Tribunal considered that they had removed themselves  from  the  record
    and accordingly a copy of the notice of hearing was not served  on  the
    solicitors. The judge waited until 11:30 am when a call was put out for
    the appellant but he did not attend court. The judge's decision records
    that he was satisfied that the notice of hearing had been effective and
    that it would not be unfair for the Tribunal to hear the appeal in  the
    absence of the appellant who, the judge recorded, 'has a history of not
    attending where he is required to attend.' The judge also recorded that
    he had a 'detailed and substantial bundle of  evidence  filed  on  [the
    appellant's] behalf dealing with the issues.'

 4. The appellant submits that the decision to proceed in his  absence  was
    unfair. The appellant had attended a number of hearings between 2017  -
    2018 in Birmingham and Bradford so the judge's characterisation of  him
    as a non-attender was not accurate. Matters having a serious impact  on
    the appellant's life and those of his partner and child were raised  in
    the appeal and which required the appellant's attendance.

 5. I note that there was a hearing at Bradford on 8 November  2018.  Judge
    Kelly recorded that the appellant, summoned to attend  at  10  am,  had
    eventually reached court 12:50 pm by which time the  court  interpreter
    had been released. Turpin & Miller, the appellant's former  solicitors,
    faxed the court on 8 November 2018 and stated  that,  '[the  appellant]
    informs us that the judge is today prepared to adjourn  the  appeal  if
    the appellant can confirm that we can represent him  at  any  adjourned
    hearing.' The letter went on to say, 'we can confirm that we are  ready
    to represent [the appellant] on condition  that:  (i)  [the  appellant]
    maintains contact with us to enable us to prepare properly for a future
    hearing (ii) [the appellant] provides sufficient information for us  to
    obtain legal aid funding to represent him.' The solicitors asked for  a
    minimum of 25 working days to complete a legal aid  application.  Judge
    Kelly adjourned the hearing to the first available date after 25  days.
    There is a note endorsed  on  the  court  file  (which  I  showed  both
    representatives) which indicates that the Tribunal took the view at the
    time of the service of the notice of hearing on 13 November  2018  that
    the solicitors were  not  acting  for  the  appellant.  No  notice  was
    therefore sent to Turpin & Miller.

 6. I find that the Tribunal did not err in  law  by  proceeding  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the appellant. First, I do not  consider  the
    letter from Turpin & Miller to constitute an unequivocal  direction  to
    the tribunal that they should be placed on the record as acting for the
    appellant. I note that there has been no subsequent correspondence from
    the solicitors notifying the tribunal that their conditions for  acting
    for the appellant had actually been met. Without such  notification,  I
    consider that the Tribunal acted properly by serving notice of  hearing
    on the appellant only. Secondly,  the  appellant  himself  was  validly
    served in accordance with the procedure regulations with the notice  of
    hearing. I am told by his counsel that the  appellant  changed  address
    before the service of the hearing notice for 10 December 2018. However,
    the appellant did not notify the Tribunal of that change and,  even  if
    he notified the solicitors, such notification was  ineffective  because
    they were not on the record as acting for him  at  the  relevant  time.
    Irrespective of whether the appellant had a solicitor acting  for  him,
    he himself was obliged to notify his correct address  to  the  Tribunal
    and to attend the hearing. The judge was entitled to  conclude,  having
    read the court file which showed that the notice had been posted to the
    appellant's last known address on 30 November 2018,  that  service  had
    been properly effected. I find that the judge was also entitled to have
    regard to the fact that the appellant  had  not  attended  other  court
    hearings and had attended late on the last occasion before Judge Kelly.
    Moreover,  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  previously  instructed
    solicitors and that a bundle of relevant documents on  his  behalf  had
    been prepared and filed supported the judge's decision to proceed.

    The respondent's amendment to the basis of the deportation decision.

 7. Mr Karnik, who appeared for the appellant before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    submitted that the basis of the Secretary of State's decision to remove
    the appellant had altered between the date of the deportation  decision
    and hearing before the judge. At [37], the decision letter records that
    the Secretary of State took the view that the appellant represented  'a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
    justify [his] deportation on grounds of  public  policy.'  The  judge's
    finding that the appellant had acquired permanent residence meant  that
    'serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public   security'   under
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, regulation 27(3)
    must now be established. The appellant had been  denied  the  right  to
    respond to this change to the basis of the decision to deport him.

 8. I do not agree with Mr Karnik. The court file  contains  a  copy  of  a
    letter dated 19 April 2018 and sent to the appellant's solicitors  (who
    were on the record at the time) recording that the Secretary  of  State
    was aware that, should the Tribunal conclude at the forthcoming hearing
    that the appellant had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence  then
    'serious grounds' would need to be shown in support of the decision  to
    deport him. I find that the appellant was well aware, from the date  of
    receipt of that letter by his then solicitors, that  the  Secretary  of
    State had made out a case for deporting him on  'serious  grounds'  and
    that he has not been denied the opportunity to develop the  defence.  I
    find also that the judge was entitled to conclude that the  persistence
    of offending by the appellant, a complete absence of  any  evidence  of
    rehabilitation and his finding that 'offending continued unabated after
    his probation officer said that he appeared  to  be  motivated  not  to
    offend' amounted to behaviour posing a genuine present and sufficiently
    serious threat to the reduction of crime and  disorder,  a  fundamental
    interest of society.

    Article 8 ECHR

 9.  The  appellant's  appeal  falls  to  be  considered  under  the   2016
    Regulations. In that circumstance, it is unclear why Article 8 ECHR may
    be engaged at all. Even if it is engaged in the appeal, I find that the
    judge's  findings  at  [22]  need  not  be  disturbed.   I   say   that
    notwithstanding the fact that the judge appears to have overlooked  the
    fact that a consequence of  the  appellant  having  achieved  permanent
    residence is that his child is a British citizen. The reference by  the
    judge to the test of 'undue harshness'  at  [22]  would  appear  to  be
    incorrect. If Article 8 ECHR is engaged, then, as  a  British  citizen,
    the child is a 'qualifying child' for the purposes of section 117 B (6)
    of the 2002 Act. The proper test, therefore, is one of  reasonableness,
    not undue harshness. However, I  find  that,  even  if  the  judge  had
    considered  the  test  of  reasonableness,  he  would  reach  the  same
    conclusion. As the judge correctly observed at [22] the  child  is  not
    required to leave the United Kingdom although the family, who  are  all
    Latvian citizens, could choose to  accompany  the  appellant.  For  the
    avoidance of any doubt, I find that it would be reasonable for a 3 year
    old child to move within the EU to Latvia,  one  of  his  countries  of
    nationality, to continue family life there with his Latvian parents.




Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 13 March 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

