
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2014                                 |On 8 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Munir Saleh Mahmood

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I  shall  refer  to  Munir  Saleh  Mahmood,  the  respondent,  as  "the
    appellant" and the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  as  the
    "respondent".

 2. I refer to my determination dated 21 November 2013  in  which  I  found
    that the First-tier Tribunal determination contained an  error  of  law
    such that it fell to be set aside:

    The respondent, Munir Saleh Mahmood, was  born  on  1  March  1984  and
    claims to be a male citizen of Sudan.  The appellant  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge De Haney and Mr G H  Getlevog)  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 17 January 2013 to refuse to revoke  a
    deportation order made under Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act  1971.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a  determination  promulgated  on  14  June
    2013, allowed  the  appeal  on  asylum/Article  3  ECHR  grounds.   The
    appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.  For the remainder of this
    determination, I shall refer to Munir Saleh Mahmood  as  the  appellant
    (as he was before the First-tier Tribunal)  and  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

    The appellant claims to be of Zaghawa ethnicity.  At [44] the  Tribunal
    concluded that the appellant is a  Zaghawa  from  Darfur,  Sudan.   The
    Tribunal noted at [10] that both parties to the appeal agree  that,  if
    the appellant is a Zaghawa from  Darfur,  he  is  entitled  to  refugee
    status.

    Mr Nicholson, for the appellant, confirmed  that  there  was  no  cross
    appeal  against  the  dismissal  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  At  [39],  the  Tribunal  had
    written that, "given the appellant's criminal conviction and  his  poor
    immigration history, we consider it to be entirely  proportionate  that
    the interference with  the  appellant's  private  and  family  life  is
    proportionate when given the respondent's obligations to maintain  fair
    and effective immigration control and maintain the  economic  wellbeing
    of the United Kingdom".  The index offence in  this  instance  was  the
    appellant's conviction at Liverpool Crown Court in January 2006 for the
    offence of seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom  by  means  of
    deception for which he was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment and
    recommended for deportation.  In the circumstances, I do not intend  to
    revisit the Article 8 ECHR decision.

    The Expert Report: Dr Bekalo

    The grounds of appeal challenge the reliance placed by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal upon the expert report of Dr Bekalo.  At [40-41], the Tribunal
    wrote this:

         We have very carefully considered the expert's report of Dr Bekalo.
          We note the shortcomings referred to by Mr Regan [the Home  Office
         Presenting Officer].  We note that in respect of the  scarring  the
         doctor does not say it is exclusive to the Zaghawa tribe.  We  also
         note that the expert has accepted at  face  value  the  appellant's
         word that he speaks Zaghawa.  The entire interview was conducted in
         or through an Arabic interpreter and would expect Arab Darfuris  to
         be able to speak Arabic.

         Whereas we feel there are some shortcomings in the expert's  report
         we nevertheless have to give weight to this  report  and  give  the
         expert's opinion greater weight than we give to the findings of the
         Adjudicator in 2004.  The Adjudicator in 2004 found  the  appellant
         not to be credible and that was the reasoning  behind  the  finding
         that he was not of the Zaghawa.

    It is not clear to me why the Tribunal considered that it  was  obliged
    to give greater weight to  the  expert's  report,  notwithstanding  its
    shortcomings, than it gave to the findings of the Adjudicator in  2004.
    At [41], the Tribunal appears to  be  stating  some  point  of  law  or
    principle but quite what it is has not made clear.  The respondent  had
    expressed  serious  concerns  regarding  this  appellant's  credibility
    including his claim to  be  a  member  of  the  Zaghawa  tribe.   Those
    concerns were known to the Tribunal since  they  had  before  them  the
    determination of Judge [Adjudicator] Hemingway from 2004.  The Tribunal
    accepted at [18] that the starting point for its  own  findings  as  to
    credibility  should  have  been  that  determination,   following   the
    principles set out in Devaseelan [2004]  UKAIT  000282.   The  Tribunal
    also noted that the appellant had previously used multiple  identities.
    However, the Tribunal does not appear to have applied the principles of
    Devaseelan in its analysis of the  evidence.   Instead,  there  is  the
    rather cryptic remark which I have quoted above which suggests that the
    Tribunal felt obliged to  give  greater  weight  to  an  unsatisfactory
    expert report than to the unchallenged findings of fact of  a  previous
    Tribunal.

    The Appellant's Three Witnesses: Messrs Mahmood, Adam and Saleh

    At [6], the Tribunal recorded that:

         Mr Nicholson sought to adduce the handwritten statements  which  he
         had drafted this morning of three witnesses [Messrs  Mahmood,  Adam
         and Saleh].  Mr Nicholson apologised that no  statements  had  been
         lodged in line with directions and he had only been  able  to  take
         brief statements this morning.

    The Presenting Officer before the Tribunal applied for  an  adjournment
    but that was refused.  The Tribunal noted that the respondent had  been
    "put on notice  about  the  first  two  witnesses  by  the  appellant's
    representatives".  The Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  "the  third
    witness appeared to add  little  to  the  first  witness's  statement".
    Refusing the adjournment  and  allowing  the  witnesses  to  give  oral
    evidence, the Tribunal wrote that, "we also accepted that we would hear
    evidence from the third witness but, given the fact the respondents had
    not been put on notice about the third witness, his evidence  would  be
    given the appropriate  weight  in  all  the  circumstances"  [9].   The
    evidence of the  witnesses  was  thereafter  recorded.   At  [42],  the
    Tribunal indicated that it had "taken account  of  the  witnesses  whom
    today told us that the appellant was of the Zaghawa tribe and  that  he
    is from Darfur (sic)".  The Tribunal acknowledged that there were "some
    little discrepancies" between the evidence given by the  witnesses  and
    the appellant.  At [43], the Tribunal concluded that, "what we do  have
    before us are three people as well as the appellant who state with some
    certainty that the appellant is of the Zaghawa  and  that  he  is  from
    Darfur" and at [44] that, "given the  expert's  report  and  the  three
    witnesses, we do not find that we could reasonably come  to  any  other
    conclusion but that the appellant is a Zaghawa from Darfur.  We come to
    this conclusion despite the lack of credibility of  the  appellant  and
    other aspects of  his  claim,  his  previous  appeals  and  immigration
    history".

    As I noted above, the Tribunal had admitted the evidence of  the  third
    witness (it is not clear exactly who they mean but I assume that it was
    Mr Bakhet Adam) but clearly indicated that, since  the  respondent  had
    not been given the opportunity  of  making  any  checks  regarding  the
    witness, they would give his evidence only the "appropriate  weight  in
    all the circumstances".  At no point  in  the  passages  which  I  have
    quoted above has the Tribunal indicated what that "appropriate  weight"
    might be and how it may differ from the weight given to the evidence of
    the other two witnesses; the evidence of each of  the  three  witnesses
    and the expert appears to have been given equal weight.  There  was  no
    proper analysis of the probative value of the evidence  of  either  the
    witnesses or the expert but instead a rather  grudging  acknowledgement
    that the Tribunal had no alternative but to  find  that  the  appellant
    was, as he claimed, a Zaghawa.  I find that the Tribunal's analysis  of
    the evidence raises  more  questions  than  it  actually  answers.   In
    particular, the method of analysis appears to have been  influenced  by
    considerations  which  have  not  been  properly   clarified   in   the
    determination.  Any reader of the determination would be left in  doubt
    as to the reasoning behind its conclusion.  Consequently, I  find  that
    the Tribunal's determination is flawed by errors of law  which  require
    it to be set aside.  The decision will be remade in the Upper  Tribunal
    following a resumed hearing.  None of  the  findings  of  fact  of  the
    Tribunal shall stand save that in relation to Article 8 ECHR which  the
    Upper Tribunal will not revisit.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 14 June 2013 is  set
    aside.  None of the findings of fact (save in relation to the appeal on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds) shall stand.  The Upper Tribunal  shall  remake
    the decision following a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed.




 3. At the resumed hearing on 15 July 2014, Mr  Diwnycz  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  On 12 June 2014, Mr Diwnycz had written to the Tribunal in
    the following terms:

         Those files requested have arrived at the POU [Presenting Officers'
         Unit] ... colleagues (in my absence) and I scrutinised them for the
         information and corroboration they might have  contained.   On  the
         basis of what has been provided to and accepted by the Home  Office
         historically, I am content to vacate the scheduled hearing arranged
         for 15 July.

 4. I refer to [8] of my error of law determination.  Mr  Diwnycz  told  me
    that the Home Office did not seek to challenge the  evidence  given  by
    the witnesses, Messrs Mahmood, Adam  and  Saleh;  "the  various  files"
    referred to in Mr Diwnycz's letter  concern  those  witnesses.  In  the
    light of this evidence, the Secretary of State accepts the appellant is
    a member of the Zaghawa tribe and, as such, has a well-funded  fear  of
    persecution and/or Article 8 ECHR ill-treatment should he  be  returned
    to his country of origin.  As a consequence, the appellant is  entitled
    to refugee status.  The appeal is allowed on asylum  and  human  rights
    (Articles 2/3) grounds.

DECISION

 5. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

 6. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Articles 2/3 ECHR).

 7. This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.






Signed                              Date 8 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
