
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00724/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 1 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A C
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr M Moriarty, counsel instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to remove him to Italy, his country of origin.  The  Secretary
    of State's decision to remove him was made pursuant to Regulation 21 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 2. This appeal has been heard in the First-tier Tribunal on two occasions,
    on 25 November 2014 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup  and  Dr  C
    Winstanley, a Non-Legal Member. That decision was set aside because the
    panel erroneously applied the  highest  level  of  protection  pursuant
    Regulation 21(4).

 3. The appeal was heard again on 12 June 2015 before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grant and Mrs S Hewitt JP, a Non-Legal Member. The  Secretary  of
    State's  challenge  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reasons  are
    inadequate.  Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.

Error of law decision

 4. There is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    in that its reasoning is inadequate, as Mr Moriarty  for  the  claimant
    conceded at the hearing.  The  question  of  whether  the  claimant  is
    entitled to the imperative grounds level of  protection  in  Regulation
    21(4) remains in issue.

 5. By consent, the First-tier Tribunal decision will be  set  aside.   The
    decision will be remade,  in  the  light  of  any  written  submissions
    received from the parties within 7 days of the error  of  law  hearing,
    with particular reference to the issue  of  the  appropriate  level  of
    protection and the additional material submitted by  the  appellant  in
    Bundle B.

 6. It is not considered that any evidence from the claimant is required in
    order for the decision  in  this  appeal  to  be  properly  determined.
    Neither party has applied for a further oral hearing. I  consider  that
    having regard to  the  submissions  received,  and  to  the  overriding
    objective, the decision can justly be remade on the documents before me
    without a further oral hearing.

 7. I now proceed to remake the decision in this appeal on that basis.

Legal framework

 8. The appeal falls to be decided under Regulation 21 of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended):

         "Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
         health grounds

         21.-(1)  In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                  period of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                  decision; ...

             (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
             policy or public security it shall, in addition  to  complying
             with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken  in
             accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

             (6)   Before taking a relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy or public security in relation to a  person  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin. ..."

 9. That provision implements the provisions of Article 28(3) of  Directive
    2004/38/EC.  The Upper Tribunal  in  2012  referred  to  the  Court  of
    Justice of  the  European  Union  two  cases  for  preliminary  rulings
    concerning  the  proper  interpretation  of  Article  28(3)(a)  for  in
    relation to imprisonment in the host state, in Onuekwere  (imprisonment
    - residence) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 269 (IAC) and in MG (EU deportation  -
    Article 28(3) - imprisonment) Portugal [2012] UKUT 268 (IAC).

10. In Onuekwere (Judgment of the Court) [2014] EUECJ C-378/12,  the  Court
    of Justice held that:

         "1.   Article  16(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the   European
         Parliament and of  the  Council  of  29  April  2004  ...  must  be
         interpreted as meaning that the periods of imprisonment in the host
         Member State of a third-country national, who is a family member of
         a Union citizen who has acquired the right of  permanent  residence
         in that Member State during those periods,  cannot  be  taken  into
         consideration in the context of the acquisition by that national of
         the  right  of  permanent  residence  for  the  purposes  of   that
         provision.

         2.   Article 16(2) and (3) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted
         as meaning that the  continuity  of  residence  is  interrupted  by
         periods of imprisonment in the host Member State of a third-country
         national who is a family member of a Union citizen who has acquired
         the right of permanent residence in that Member State during  those
         periods."

11. In MG's case,  the Court of Justice held that:

         "1.  On a proper construction  of  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive
         2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and  of  the  Council  of  29
         April 2004 ...the 10-year period of residence referred to  in  that
         provision must, in principle, be continuous and must be  calculated
         by counting back  from  the  date  of  the  decision  ordering  the
         expulsion of the person concerned.

         2.   Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a period of imprisonment  is,  in  principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  provided  for
         thereunder, even where the person concerned  resided  in  the  host
         Member State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment.  However,  the
         fact that that person resided in the host Member State for  the  10
         years prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration as part
         of the overall assessment required in order  to  determine  whether
         the integrating links previously forged with the host Member  State
         have been broken."

12. In the light of that decision, the Upper Tribunal in MG (prison-Article
    28(3) (a) of Citizens Directive) [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC) held as follows:

         "(1)  Article  28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC   contains   the
         requirement that for those who have  resided  in  the  host  member
         state for the previous 10 years, an expulsion decision made against
         them must be based upon imperative grounds of public security.

         (2)  There is a tension in the judgment of the Court of Justice  of
         the European Communities in Case C-400/12 Secretary of State v  MG,
         [2014] EUECJ C-400/12, in respect of the meaning of  the  "enhanced
         protection" provision.

         (3)  The judgment should be understood as meaning that a period  of
         imprisonment during those 10 years does not necessarily  prevent  a
         person from qualifying for enhanced protection if  that  person  is
         sufficiently integrated. However, according to the same judgment, a
         period of imprisonment must have a negative impact  in  so  far  as
         establishing integration is concerned."

13. The Upper Tribunal  has  drawn  together  the  various  authorities  on
    rehabilitation in MC (Essa principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC), as
    follows:

         "1.  Essa rehabilitation principles are specific to decisions taken
         on public policy, public security and public health  grounds  under
         regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

         2.   It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned  is
         found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).

         3.   There is no specific reference in the expulsion provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).

         4.   Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).

         5.   Reference to prospects of rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
         prospects of a person ceasing  to  commit  crime  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [35]), not the mere possibility of rehabilitation. Mere  capability
         of rehabilitation is not to be equated with reasonable prospect  of
         rehabilitation.

         6.   Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a factor  to
         be taken into account in the proportionality assessment required by
         regulation 21(5) and (6) (Dumliauskas [41]).

         7.   Such prospects are to be taken into account even if not raised
         by the offender (Dumliauskas [52]).

         8.    Gauging  such  prospects  requires  assessing  the   relative
         prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State  as  compared
         with those in the Member State of origin, but, in  the  absence  of
         evidence, it is not to be assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in that other Member State (Dumliauskas  [46],  [52]-[53]
         and [59]).

         9.   Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community and  the  like  (Essa   (2013)  at
         [34]). However, lack of access to a Probation Officer or equivalent
         in  the  other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,  preclude
         deportation (Dumliauskas [55])

         10.  In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
         residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a  weighty
         factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even when such  prospects  have
         significant weight they are not a trump card, as what the Directive
         and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
         assessment. Both recognise  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
         reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the greater
         the right to interfere with the right of residence (Dumliauskas  at
         [46] and [54])."

14. That then is the basis on which I approach this appeal.

Factual matrix: the claimant's history

15. The claimant was born in Milan in 1963.  He had a twin brother and  two
    other brothers, as well as a sister.  He left school in 1977,  age  14,
    and went into hairdressing.  In 1981, he  opened  his  own  salon.   In
    1985, his twin brother died of complications from an operation  on  his
    heart.  His mother rejected the claimant, because he reminded  her  too
    much of his dead twin.  The claimant  began  taking  drugs  every  day;
    heroin, crack cocaine, cannabis, and any other drug  he  could  obtain.
    He lost interest in his hairdressing salon: his sister tried to  manage
    it but was less successful.

16. The claimant visited London for a few months in 1989, taking  odd  jobs
    to survive, but also shoplifting.  He was convicted of shoplifting  and
    theft on 3 occasions that year, served 2 weeks of  a  4-week  sentence,
    and returned to Italy, where he entered a drug rehabilitation programme
    in Milan.

17. In 1991 or 1992, the claimant returned  to  London  with  his  partner,
    another Italian citizen whom he had  met  on  the  drug  rehabilitation
    programme; she has continued to use drugs with him over the years,  and
    has longstanding mental health problems.  The claimant signed on at the
    job centre, and asked around for work.  He did not speak English so  he
    sought work in the Italian community.  He did whatever came  along  and
    they found a home together in Lambeth.

18. In about 1995, the claimant became ill and was diagnosed  HIV-positive.
    He has been looked after by the South London  and  Maudsley  NHS  Trust
    since then, now for 20 years.  His older brother  came  to  London  and
    also became ill about the same time.  The  claimant  looked  after  his
    brother and his partner.

19. The claimant was still  using  drugs  and  in  September  1995  he  was
    cautioned for possession of a controlled drug (heroin).  He  cared  for
    his brother until his brother died in 1996.

20. The claimant and his partner  continued  to  use  drugs  together.   In
    October 2002, after importing  a  quantity  of  controlled  drugs  from
    Jamaica  to  the  United  Kingdom,  he  was  sentenced   to   2   years
    imprisonment. The claimant served about 9 months then was  released  on
    home detention curfew.

21. In January  2008,  the  claimant  was  convicted  at  Camberwell  Green
    Magistrates' Court of possession of a  controlled  drug  (heroin),  and
    fined.

22. In 2009, the claimant and his partner had a crisis and lost their  home
    in Lambeth because they had been allowing other  people  to  use  drugs
    there.  His partner was sectioned and hospitalised with  mental  health
    problems: she was paranoid  and  hearing  voices.   Their  relationship
    ended, although their friendship continues.

23. After a month in hospital, the claimant's ex-partner was provided  with
    hostel  accommodation.  The  claimant  was  homeless,  moving   between
    hostels, visiting his ex-partner and trying to  look  after  her.   The
    claimant and his ex-partner saw each other  every  day.   The  claimant
    stopped taking his antiretroviral medication; he thought a break  would
    be all right as he had been taking it so long, but he continued to  use
    heroin and crack cocaine.

24. In January  2009,  the  claimant  was  convicted  at  Camberwell  Green
    Magistrates' Court of possession of heroin and cocaine,  and  sentenced
    to a community order and drug rehabilitation for  6  months.  In  March
    2009, he was again convicted of possession of cocaine and heroin, fined
    and sentenced to 1 day's imprisonment.

25.  In  May  2012,  the  claimant  was  convicted  at  South  West  London
    Magistrates Court of possession of heroin, and again  fined.  In  April
    2013, the claimant was given a  community  order  and  a  curfew  after
    conviction at South London Magistrates Court for destroying or damaging
    property with a value of �5000 or less.

26. The claimant claims to have very little memory of events in 2013. On 18
    October 2013, he was convicted at Kingston upon Thames Crown  Court  of
    having an offensive weapon in a public place  and  destroying  property
    valued at �5000 or less. He had been asked to leave a restaurant, waved
    a bread knife at the chef, threw the knife on the floor and then walked
    out, smashing one of the tables en route before crossing  the  road  to
    order a takeaway.  He was  sentenced  to  4  months'  imprisonment  and
    remained in immigration detention thereafter.   The  claimant  did  not
    appeal that conviction.  On 8 November 2013, the claimant  was  sent  a
    liability to deportation letter, but he did not respond.

27. During his imprisonment, records show that the claimant spent some time
    in the prison healthcare wing and was briefly transferred  to  hospital
    for diagnosis of an HIV/AIDS related illness.  His behaviour in  prison
    from September 2013 became increasingly odd: by December 2013,  he  was
    constantly banging on his cell door. His  demeanour  was  odd,  but  he
    denied having hallucinations. By early January 2014,  his  hygiene  was
    poor and he was agitated and odd in his behaviour.   The  furniture  in
    his cell was damaged, the shelves were broken, and  the  floor  of  his
    cell was strewn with teabags, eating utensils and general rubbish.   By
    late January, the prison officers were beginning to  suspect  that  the
    claimant had dementia: he  had  fluctuating  levels  of  cognition  and
    alertness, was not oriented as to time and place, appeared confused and
    disorientated,  was  moving  around  the  cell   and   often   yelling,
    incomprehensibly  and   mostly   in   Italian.    Hospitalisation   was
    recommended, but there were concerns as to whether the claimant had the
    capacity to consent to hospital treatment.

28. A CT brain scan on 29 January 2014 showed an old small  stroke  but  no
    acute intracranial pathology.  By  mid-February,  he  had  deteriorated
    further, shouting incoherently in his cell, throwing a cup of hot water
    through a hatch at  a  member  of  staff,  unpredictable  in  mood  and
    constantly seeking food and  hot  water.   By  late  February,  he  was
    demanding food and sex and making references to stains on his  trousers
    and underpants being caused by masturbation.

29. In February 2014, the claimant was diagnosed with HIV-related dementia,
    chronic pancreatitis, and Hepatitis C. His behaviour and  comprehension
    began to improve towards the end of February and in early  March  2014,
    by which time he had been back on anti-retroviral treatment for about 2
    months.  In early 2014, the claimant described himself as having 'woken
    up' in prison with no memory of the events which had  resulted  in  his
    conviction  and  imprisonment.   The  claimant's  physician,   Dr   Lau
    considered that his aggressive and erratic behaviour  might  have  been
    largely due  to  his  having  been  ill  with  HIV  encephalopathy,  an
    infection of the brain as a result of HIV infection, which appeared  to
    have resolved on anti-retroviral therapy.

30. It seems, however, that the claimant's memory was permanently  affected
    even after he his behaviour improved. In September 2014,  the  claimant
    was noted to have no long term memory and to be unable to explain  past
    events. On 13 November 2014, his consultant physician, Dr Sean Waldron,
    stated that  the  event  which  led  to  his  conviction  was  probably
    temporally associated with his advanced HIV encephalopathy, which could
    recur if he did not keep up his anti-retroviral  therapy.  He  did  not
    give  as  his  opinion  that  the  event  was   caused   by   the   HIV
    encephalopathy, but that it occurred  at  the  same  time  ('temporally
    associated').

31. The claimant served his sentence and  was  then  moved  to  immigration
    detention, from which he was released at the end  of  March  2015.   He
    signs on weekly with the immigration authorities in Croydon  but  finds
    it stressful as it is a considerable distance away  and  he  'does  not
    know the area well'.

32. In the United Kingdom, the claimant has no friends and has not been  in
    any relationship since he broke up with his Italian ex-partner in 2009;
    they remain close as friends, and he sees her about  4  times  a  week.
    The claimant has been away from Italy for over 20  years.   He  remains
    estranged from his mother and has little  contact  with  his  surviving
    sister and brother.  He  does  not  know  how  he  would  get  his  HIV
    medication in Italy.

33. On 16 June 2015, following a meeting with the claimant on 1  June  2015
    at the Helen Bamber Foundation, Professor Cornelius Katona gave as  his
    opinion that:

         "[The claimant's] risk of reoffending

         10.1 [The claimant's] past offences (with the exception of his 2013
         offence) were all related to his drug use.  His 2013 offence was in
         my view related to his progressive HIV-related brain disease.

         10.2 [The claimant] is in my view at low risk of reoffending if  he
         continues to abstain from illicit drug use and if his HIV infection
         remains treated and  monitored  closely  and  if  he  continues  to
         benefit from the close support of [his  ex-partner]  who  sees  him
         several times a week, speaks to him daily by telephone and  ensures
         that  he  attends  appointments  (as  was  evident  by  her  having
         accompanied him to his appointment with me).

         10.3 If [the claimant] resumes his use of illicit  drugs  he  would
         then become at high risk  of  committing  further  drug  possession
         offences.

         10.4  [The  claimant  appears  to  have  been  compliant  with  his
         medication since March 2014 (i.e. for more than a  year).   If  his
         HIV treatment is disrupted for any reason then he would  become  at
         increasing risk of developing a recurrence of his HIV-related acute
         confusional state and associated  erratic  behaviour.   This  would
         significantly increase his risk of further impulsive and aggressive
         behaviour 'driven' by his confusion.

         11.  What effects on [the claimant] might deportation to Italy have
         had in 2014 and what effects might such deportation have now or  in
         the future?

         11.1 [The claimant] is currently being monitored  by  an  HIV  team
         here in the United Kingdom.  He was unable to give  me  details  of
         his current  treatment  and  I  am  concerned  that  without  close
         monitoring he would be very likely to interrupt his treatment.  The
         risk of mental (and physical) worsening would be particularly  high
         if he became unable to access his antiretroviral treatment or found
         it so difficult to do so that he chose to take another  ill-advised
         'break'  from  his  treatment.   His  mild   persisting   cognitive
         impairment increases the risk that he might  do  so  without  fully
         understanding the potential risks and consequences.

         11.2 If [the claimant] were deported to Italy he  would  experience
         the loss of support he currently receives from [his ex-partner] and
         from his medical team  in  Lambeth.   He  would  feel  increasingly
         stressed - which would result in increasing  temptation  to  resume
         illicit drug use.  If he experienced difficulties  (even  temporary
         ones) in accessing his HIV treatment, there is a  very  significant
         risk that he would discontinue his treatment.

         11.3 I therefore share Dr  Waldron's  concern  that  ...under  such
         circumstances  [the  claimant]  would  ...'be  at  high  risk   for
         regressing to the very poor state of health in which  he  presented
         to St George's Hospital from Wandsworth  HMP.   This  could  easily
         reactivate the apparent retroviral encephalopathy that seems likely
         to have been strongly associated with his  difficult  behaviour  in
         the past'."

34. Towards the end of June 2015, not long after that  report  was  written
    and less than a month after  meeting  Professor  Katona  at  the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation, the  claimant  got  into  an  altercation  with  the
    Immigration Officer when signing on, began swearing  at  him,  and  was
    sent away without signing.  He signed without  incident  the  following
    week.

35. At the hearing on 30 November 2015, Mr  Moriarty  disclosed  a  further
    drugs offence.  The claimant had been arrested  on  28  November  2015,
    with some friends, in possession of a 'spliff' (a cannabis  cigarette).
    He had  been  charged  and  was  due  to  appear  at  Camberwell  Green
    Magistrates Court on 15 December 2015.

Submissions

36. For the Secretary of State, Mr Bramble relied on the  decision  of  the
    Court of Justice of the European Union in  MG  and  in  Onuekwere.   He
    argued that the effect, taken together,  of  those  decisions  is  that
    continuity of residence is broken by any  period  of  imprisonment  but
    that where the 10 years continuous residence could be established prior
    to the prison sentence beginning, it is not automatically lost  by  the
    fact that the EEA national spends time in prison thereafter,  but  that
    the time spent in prison must be taken  into  account  in  determining,
    along with all relevant factors, the proportionality of the decision to
    deport. He  relied  on  paragraph  18  of  the  preamble  to  Directive
    2004/38/EC and argued that the residence in question must be lawful and
    'in accordance with the Regulations' throughout.

37. In this appeal, Mr Bramble observed that  although  the  appellant  had
    been physically present for a number of years in  the  United  Kingdom,
    there was  insufficient  evidence  that  he  had  ever  been  a  person
    exercising Treaty rights and thus advancing towards permanent residence
    or any higher level of protection from removal.  The claimant could not
    show 10 years' continuous residence before the decision to  deport  him
    was made, nor could he show permanent residence  and  a  period  of  10
    years in accordance with the Regulations, at any earlier time.  He  was
    not, therefore, to be regarded as entitled to the  enhanced  protection
    afforded by the imperative grounds provision in Regulation 21(4).

38. Mr Bramble relied upon the Upper Tribunal's decision on the question of
    rehabilitation in Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)  [2013]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC), which had been considered and interpreted by the Court  of
    Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Dumliauskas  &
    Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145.  The appellant had at best only shown  limited
    future prospects of integration, which could not be a weighty factor in
    this appeal.  Such prospects were never a trump card: the Directive and
    the Regulations required a wide-ranging, holistic response.   The  more
    serious the risk of reoffending, and  the  more  serious  the  offences
    which might be committed, the greater the right to interfere  with  the
    right of residence.

Claimant's submissions

39. The  claimant's  solicitors,  Luqmani  Thompson,  on  4  December  2015
    submitted that the claimant should be treated  as  having  the  highest
    'imperative grounds' protection, relying on the decision in MG's  case.
    They also relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MG (prison  -
    Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens  Directive)  [2014]  UKUT  392  (IAC)  and
    argued that in the light of the appellant's medical circumstances,  the
    integrating links should not be found  to  have  been  broken  in  this
    appeal.  They contended that the claimant had not been shown to present
    the high level of risk which the 'imperative grounds' test required.

40. In relation to Regulations 21(5) and 21(6), Luqmani Thompson sought  to
    rely on the 2014 First-tier Tribunal decision, which was overturned and
    is no longer relevant to the assessment of the claimant's appeal.  That
    part of the claimant's submissions is of no assistance in remaking  the
    decision now.

41. The claimant argued that there were strong reasons for concluding  that
    he does not represent a  'genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat'  to  the  public  interest;  that  it  was  probable  that  the
    commission of the offence arose from his abnormal state of  mind;  that
    the offence was impulsive; that the claimant was now in  remission  and
    that there was no previous pattern of violent offending.  The  claimant
    had been imprisoned only twice, in 2002 and 2012.

42. The Secretary of State's refusal  letter  was  inaccurate  in  that  it
    stated that the claimant was believed to be in good health; in fact, he
    had well-documented medical issues and complex healthcare needs,  which
    would be likely to be interrupted in Italy, at least for a  time.   His
    Italian ex-partner had been his de facto carer for over 20 years.   The
    claimant was fully integrated into the  United  Kingdom  and  had  very
    little to which to return in Italy.  His  removal  to  Italy  would  be
    disproportionate given his drug problems, health, and background.

43. If the Upper Tribunal did not consider  that  the  claimant  was  fully
    rehabilitated, he would rely on Essa (EEA:  rehabilitation/integration)
    [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) at paragraphs [33]-[36] and on paragraphs  [27]
    and [36] of the Upper Tribunal's decision in MG.

44. The claimant invited the Upper Tribunal to restore the 2014  First-tier
    Tribunal  decision,  or  to  remake  the  second  First-tier   Tribunal
    decision, confirming that the claimant  could  not  be  deported  under
    Regulation 21(4) and/or Regulation 21(5).

Discussion

45. It will always be a question of fact for the decision maker whether the
    applicant has spent 10 years continuously in  the  United  Kingdom.  In
    this appeal, the claimant cannot show 10 years of continuous  residence
    before the decision to deport him was taken.  He  was  in  prison  from
    September 2013, when he was arrested for the  index  offence  to  March
    2015. The decision to deport him was served upon  the  claimant  on  11
    November 2013.   Nor  is  there  satisfactory  evidence  of  continuous
    residence here during all of that  period,  and  the  claimant  himself
    cannot assist, because he has no memory of past events.   Applying  MG,
    save for the reservation about earlier integration, the claimant is not
    entitled to the enhanced 'imperative grounds' protection in  Regulation
    21(4).

46. The next task is to consider whether the claimant had acquired a  right
    of permanent residence at any time prior to his imprisonment.  In order
    to do so, he would need to  be  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  'in
    accordance with the Regulations'.  The evidence in this appeal does not
    reach that standard because the claimant did not  produce  evidence  of
    working, nor of his claimed registration at a job  centre  in  1991  or
    1992.   There are no tax and National Insurance  records  or  bills  to
    support continuity of residence.  In 2002,  he  was  imprisoned  for  9
    months and thereafter it is not  suggested  in  his  evidence  that  he
    worked.  The claimant has not satisfied me, on the evidence before  me,
    that he acquired a right of permanent residence under Regulation 15  at
    any time while he was in the United Kingdom.

47. The claimant is entitled,  therefore,  only  to  the  basic  protection
    provided by Regulations 21(1),  21(2),  21(5)  and  21(6)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations. In considering  his  appeal,  I  remind  myself  that  the
    decision must comply with the principle  of  proportionality,  that  it
    must be based exclusively on his personal conduct,  that  such  conduct
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  (in  this  case,
    public safety); that matters isolated from the particulars of the case,
    or considerations of general prevention do not justify  a  decision  to
    remove him; and that his previous convictions are  not  sufficient  'in
    themselves' to justify removal.

48. The claimant is a drug user of more than 20 years' standing, along with
    his ex-partner.  He has twice been given the opportunity to cease using
    drugs in a drug rehabilitation programme, once in Italy and once in the
    United Kingdom.  He has been unable or unwilling to do so, and  he  has
    failed to cooperate with treatment  for  his  HIV/AIDS  for  a  lengthy
    period from 2009-2014 when the drugs regime was  recommenced  while  he
    was in prison.

49. In the past, he imported drugs into the United Kingdom on at least  one
    occasion, and he was found guilty of  a  violent  offence  involving  a
    knife, and threats. He has a  long  history  of  drug-related  criminal
    offending, and his impulsive behaviour, which his doctor  described  as
    aggressive, has not ceased:  as recently as June 2015,  he  behaved  in
    such a way when signing on before an  Immigration  Officer  at  Croydon
    that he was told to leave and come back the following week.

50. His criminal behaviour has also resumed: just a  few  days  before  the
    Tribunal hearing, the claimant was again  arrested  for  possession  of
    cannabis, which is a criminal offence. He has therefore  returned  both
    to drug taking and to crime.

51. The medical evidence is clear:  now that the claimant has  returned  to
    drug use, he is likely to  stop  taking  his  HIV/AIDS  medication,  if
    indeed he has not already done so,  and  to  become  ill  and  unstable
    again, which on the last occasion led him  to  violence  and  on  other
    occasions  has  led  him  to  theft  and  to  aggressive  language  and
    behaviour. The claimant's HIV encephalopathy  and  other  AIDS-defining
    ailments are attributed to his long drug abuse and  poor  self-care  in
    the United Kingdom.  The  evidence  of  Dr  Waldron  was  that  if  the
    claimant returned to drug taking, or ceased taking his medication,  his
    HIV encephalopathy and the confusion of mind it entailed was likely  to
    recur.

52. Professor Katona's opinion was that with the close support of  his  ex-
    partner, and medical treatment and monitoring, the claimant was at  low
    risk of reoffending, but that if he resumed  using  illicit  drugs,  he
    would be at high risk of committing further drug  possession  offences.
    I recall that despite the strength of the bond between them,  both  the
    claimant and his ex-partner are  long-term  drug  users  and  that  she
    herself has had mental problems, including paranoia, arising out of her
    own drug use.  It is not clear that her support of  him  is  enough  to
    keep him away from drugs, and certainly in the past that has  not  been
    the case.

53. In reaching my decision,  I  am  required  to  take  into  account  the
    claimant's age, state of health, family  and  economic  situation,  his
    social and cultural integration into the United Kingdom, and the extent
    of his links with his country of origin, Italy. The  claimant's  health
    is poor, due to his extended drug  use,  but  for  at  least  one  long
    period, he was unable or unwilling to use the support available in  the
    United Kingdom. The claimant relies on his connection  with  the  South
    London and Maudsley NHS Trust, dating back to 1995, but it appears that
    he  lost  touch  with  them  and  ceased  taking  his   anti-retroviral
    medication in 2009 or 2010, and that this was not picked  up  until  he
    was ill in prison in early 2014. They were able to support him while he
    was in prison, but he was released in March 2015, and by June  2015  he
    was abusive to an Immigration Officer, shouting and  swearing,  and  by
    late November 2015, he had  returned  to  crime  and  was  arrested  in
    possession of  cannabis.   It  is  unclear  whether  the  claimant  has
    disengaged again from the support provided by the Trust, or whether his
    impulse towards drug-taking  is  so  strong  that  the  support  cannot
    prevent it.

54. Professor Katona's concerns have  been  borne  out  by  the  claimant's
    return to drug taking and thus to crime, by possession of the drugs for
    which he was arrested, which occurred only a few months after Professor
    Katona prepared his report.  There is no evidence before me to indicate
    whether the claimant continues to take his medication in these  changed
    circumstances. There is an unsourced assertion  in  Professor  Katona's
    report, that he has doubts as to the availability of HIV/AIDS treatment
    in Italy.  However, as set out at (8) in the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    in MC, that is not evidence of sufficient strength  to  require  me  to
    presume that  no  appropriate  treatment  will  be  available  for  the
    claimant in Italy.  I note, in particular, that the claimant did access
    drug rehabilitation treatment in Milan in 1992, where he  met  his  ex-
    partner.

55. The claimant's integration into the United Kingdom is not  strong.   He
    has no friends here: he does not work or study and his only  friendship
    is with his ex-partner, whose own status is unclear and who is also  an
    Italian citizen.  The claimant has a  very  long  history  of  criminal
    offences, all connected to his apparent inability to stop using heroin,
    cocaine, and crack cocaine.  A drug rehabilitation programme  in  Milan
    in the early 1990s was ineffective, except that he met  his  ex-partner
    there, and  she  has  been  part  of  his  life  ever  since.   Another
    requirement to undertake a drug rehabilitation  programme,  imposed  in
    January 2009 by Camberwell Green  Magistrates  Court,  was  ineffective
    because the claimant was re-convicted of drugs offences 2 months later.



56. The claimant seems to be a loner:  in  neither  Italy  nor  the  United
    Kingdom has he friends or family relationships, save  his  relationship
    with his  ex-partner,  who  also  has  a  history  of  drug  use.   The
    claimant's evidence is that he has spent a  long  time  outside  Italy,
    where he has a brother and sister with whom his links  are  not  close,
    and a mother from whom he is estranged, and has lost his links  to  his
    country of origin.  However, the claimant is still only  52  and  lived
    more than half his life in Italy, where he was educated  and  grew  up.
    He still has family there, and as he went to school in Italy, there are
    likely to be other people he knows, who  have  not  been  mentioned  in
    evidence in these proceedings.  A  drug  rehabilitation  programme  was
    available in Italy and there is  no  reliable  evidence  before  me  to
    suggest that he could not receive such support as  he  would  need,  or
    use, in his country of origin.

57. On the evidence before me, I conclude  that  this  claimant  remains  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to public  safety  and
    that his removal to Italy under Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations is
    not disproportionate, and is lawful.

DECISION

58. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision and substitute a decision  dismissing
    the claimant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    deport him to Italy.


Date:    Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
