
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00996/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 February 2015                  |On 27 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR SZABIN ARGYELAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, I shall continue to  refer  to  Mr  Szabin  Argyelan  as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   This is a re-hearing of the appellant's appeal against the decision  of
    the respondent made on 19 May 2014 to make a deportation order  against
    him by virtue of  Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Hungary, born on 10 August 1972.

3.   He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in December  2000.   As
    this was more than three years before Hungary gained accession  to  the
    European Union, the Secretary of State said he would have been  subject
    to  immigration  control.   Furthermore  there  was  no   evidence   to
    corroborate his claim of the date of entry.  Home Office  records  show
    that on 16 August 2005 he applied for an EEA registration  certificate,
    but this application was withdrawn on 7 October  2005.   The  appellant
    has not provided evidence of continuous residence in the UK  since  the
    claimed date of arrival, or that he has been exercising treaty  rights.



4.   On 4 December 2009  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
    shoplifting and  given  a  conditional  discharge  for  twelve  months.
    Subsequently, between November 2010 and March 2014, he was convicted of
    some 37 offences,  principally  of  shoplifting,  being  in  breach  of
    community orders and failing to attend, etc.  On 1 March  2014  he  was
    convicted of an offence of shoplifting and a further offence of  having
    committed that offence during the operational  period  of  a  suspended
    sentence and was subjected to a sentence of twelve weeks'  imprisonment
    for the shoplifting and eleven weeks' imprisonment to run consecutively
    for the second offence.  After  completion  of  that  sentence  he  was
    detained in immigration detention and has not  been  at  liberty  since
    then.

5.   On 19 May 2014 the  Secretary  of  State  gave  formal  notice  to  the
    appellant of her decision to make a deportation order  against  him  on
    the basis that between  4  December  2009  and  1  March  2014  he  was
    convicted 37 times in relation to 38 offences in the UK.  The Secretary
    of State considered the offences of which he had been convicted and his
    conduct, in accordance with Regulation 21 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  She was satisfied that the  appellant
    posed a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    interests of public policy if he were to be allowed to remain in the UK
    and that his  deportation  was  justified  under  Regulation  21.   She
    therefore decided under Regulation 19(3)(b) that he should  be  removed
    and an order be made in accordance with Regulation 24(3), requiring the
    appellant to leave the UK and prohibiting him  from  re-entering  while
    the order was in force.  For the purpose of the order  Section  3(5)(a)
    of the Immigration Act 1971 will apply.

6.    In  a  determination  promulgated  on  4  September  2014,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blundy allowed the appellant's appeal.  The judge  found
    the appellant to be a credible witness.  He accepted on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that he came to this  country  in  November  or  December
    2000.  Therefore he accepted that the appellant has resided in  the  UK
    for a continuous period of at least ten years prior to the respondent's
    decision.  By virtue of Regulation  21(4),  the  respondent's  decision
    being a decision taken on the grounds of pubic policy, public  security
    or public health, "may not be taken except  on  imperative  grounds  of
    public security" because he found that the appellant is indeed  an  EEA
    national.  The appellant does  not  have  to  show  that  he  has  been
    exercising treaty rights over any part of that  period  of  ten  years'
    residence.  The judge had accepted the appellant's evidence as  to  his
    employment until sometime after he committed his  first  offence.   The
    judge was satisfied on a balance of probabilities  that  the  appellant
    was indeed exercising treaty rights as a worker for a continuous period
    of five years since Hungary joined the  EA  on  1  May  2004.   He  was
    therefore satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the UK in accordance with Regulation 15.  However, because
    he had also found that the appellant as an EEA national, had resided in
    the UK for a continuous period of at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the
    respondent's decision, the only issue before him was whether or not the
    respondent's decision may be justified on "imperative grounds of public
    security".  The judge found that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter did not seek to justify the decision on that ground at all.  The
    Secretary of State simply sought to justify her decision on grounds  of
    public policy, and not on grounds  of  public  security,  which  was  a
    completely different concept.

7.   The judge said that no jurisprudence was brought to  his  attention  as
    to what precisely constitutes "imperative grounds of public  security".
    It was not defined in the Regulations.  Nevertheless the judge  thought
    that it clearly meant that for  deportation  to  be  justified  in  the
    appellant's circumstances, it must be imperative, or absolutely  vital,
    in order to protect the security of the public.

8.   The judge then held as follows:

         "29. I find that the appellant is not now any significant  risk  to
             the public  or  the  security  of  the  public  at  all.   His
             detention since the beginning of March has had  the  desirable
             effect of enabling him to rid  himself  of  his  addiction  to
             drugs.  The courses he has undertaken will have benefited him.
              His brother, who clearly introduced him to drug scene is also
             facing deportation and is therefore in no position to lead him
             astray.  The appellant has considerable insight into his  past
             problems and appeared to me to be strongly motivated to  avoid
             any relapse.  His basic plan, to move away from the  area  and
             people connected with his past abuse of drugs, and  move  back
             to north London,  an  area  which  he  knows,  demonstrates  a
             resolve to regain his life as it was.  For all these reasons I
             find that the appellant's deportation cannot be  justified  on
             'imperative grounds of public security'."


9.   In a determination promulgated on 26 November 2014, I  found  that  the
    judge materially erred in law firstly in  requiring  the  Secretary  of
    State to prove that the appellant had been in the UK exercising  treaty
    rights.  I found that the burden remained on the appellant  to  satisfy
    the Tribunal that he has been exercising  treaty  rights  in  light  of
    corroborative evidence, whilst he has been in the UK  and  therefore  a
    qualified person in accordance with  Regulation  15  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.

10.  The  second  error  was  the  judge's  misdirection  in  law  that  the
    appellant has acquired ten years' residence in the  UK.   This  finding
    was made in the absence of documentary evidence and the judge's failure
    to consider the European Court's decision in MG [2014] EUECJ  C-400/12.
    This is a case which requires the claimant to  demonstrate  ten  years'
    residence from the date of  the  immigration  decision,  and  that  any
    period of imprisonment in that intervening period  had  the  effect  of
    interrupting the appellant's residence and therefore affects the  level
    of protection afforded to him.  The Secretary of  State's  decision  in
    this case is dated 19 May 2014.  Ten years from that  date  would  mean
    that the appellant would have to show that he has been resident in  the
    UK from 19 May 2014 to May 2004 and that throughout that period, he has
    not been in prison in order to acquire the  high  level  of  protection
    which in this case on the evidence, the judge wrongly accorded him.

11.  At today's hearing the appellant submitted a letter to  him  from  HMRC
    dated 9 December 2014.  The letter gave his national insurance  number.
    It states that the date of entry into the national insurance scheme was
    2 May 2004.  Their records show that he ceased self-assessment in 2009.
     It also gave  his  various  addresses  from  28  June  2004  until  14
    September 2013.  The date of his marriage was stated to be 26  February
    1996.

12.  The appellant said that this was all the  information  the  HMRC  would
    give him.  They did not give him any information about  his  employment
    record in the UK.

13.  He confirmed that he came to the UK in December 2000 on a tourist  visa
    and overstayed his leave.  Since Hungary joined the EU on 1  May  2004,
    he has been in the UK exercising treaty rights as a worker.  He had  no
    evidence of his employment.

14.  Mr Avery relied on the respondent's Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  dated
    19 May 2014.  He said that the appellant has a history of offending  in
    the UK.  They are theft related  offences.   There  is  no  significant
    evidence to prove that the appellant can be accorded any other level of
    protection other than the basic level of protection  which  means  that
    his removal is justified on public policy grounds.

15.  Mr Avery said we have the PNC record of the  appellant.   His  previous
    convictions  have  not  deterred  him  from  re-offending.   He  has  a
    propensity to offend and has continued a desire not to engage with  the
    rehabilitation process.   In  addition  he  committed  a  drugs-related
    offence for which he was given a  community  order  of  twelve  months'
    supervision on 17 August 2011.  He  was  given  a  drug  rehabilitation
    requirement of six months' non-residential drug/alcohol treatment.  The
    appellant's offences have a financial impact on the companies  involved
    and overall price increase  in  due  course  which  customers  will  be
    subjected to.  It is hard  to  justify  why  the  appellant  should  be
    allowed to stay.  He has re-offended whilst on licence and  has  failed
    to learn from his past.  The Secretary of State's view is that the only
    option is the removal of the appellant from the UK which  is  justified
    under the EEA Regulations.

16.  With regard to Article 8, Mr Avery relied on what was set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter.

17.  The appellant said that from 2000 until 2010, a period  of  ten  years,
    he did not offend.  In 2010 he picked up a drug habit from his  brother
    and committed various offences of theft in  order  to  feed  his  drugs
    habit.  He has been on six or seven different  courses  which  included
    drug-related courses and a victim awareness course.  He said  that  the
    courses have made a difference to his life.

18.  With regard to Article 8, he said he has a family  life  with  his  son
    who is 7 years old although he accepted that he has not seen his son or
    the child's mother since he has been in prison.

19.  He said that from 2004 until 2010 he was in full-time  employment.   He
    had three jobs.

20.  Mr Avery submitted that if I were to find that the appellant  has  been
    exercising treaty rights for five years, then removal would have to  be
    justified on serious  grounds  of  public  policy.   The  Secretary  of
    State's position is that as there is no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    employment in the UK, he has the lower level  protection  which  is  on
    public policy grounds only.

Findings

21.  In the  light  of  the  appellant's  failure  to  provide  evidence  of
    exercising treaty rights or of residence in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations for a period of five years or more, the Secretary of  State
    took the view  that  the  appellant  has  not  acquired  the  right  of
    permanent residence in  the  UK.   This  led  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered whether the appellant's deportation is warranted on  grounds
    of public policy or public security.   Mr.  Avery  submitted  that  the
    decision to deport the appellant was taken on grounds of public policy.
     However, if I were to find that the  appellant  has  exercised  treaty
    rights for 5 years, then his deportation would have to be justified  on
    serious grounds of public policy

22.  The appellant has still not  provided  evidence  of  exercising  treaty
    rights or residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations for
    a continuous period of five years.  In my error of law decision I ruled
    out the ten year period of residence given that he  started  committing
    offences before he had been in residence for ten years.

23.  The only evidence I have is the appellant's oral  evidence  that  prior
    to 2010 he was in full-time employment and had  had  three  jobs.   The
    evidence from HMRC states that he entered the national insurance scheme
    on 2 May 2004.  His records show  that  he  ceased  self-employment  in
    2009.  It is not precise as to when in 2009 he ceased  self-assessment.
    As Hungary joined the EU on 1 May 2004, it is from this period that the
    appellant has to show that he has been exercising treaty rights or  has
    resided in the  UK  in  accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  The PNC  record  of  the  appellant's
    criminal behaviour shows that on 19 June 2009 he entered a guilty  plea
    on the charge of theft, shoplifting and was  convicted  on  4  December
    2009.  This evidence means that the appellant must  have  ceased  self-
    assessment in the month of June 2009.  This would mean that from 2  May
    2004 until 19 June 2009 the appellant would have acquired a  record  of
    five years of national insurance contributions.   However,  the  letter
    from HMRC states that this record  should  not  be  viewed  as  a  work
    history, or as a comprehensive record  of  employment  over  any  given
    period of time.  In accordance with Regulation 15(1)(a) a person  shall
    acquire the right to reside in the United Kingdom  permanently  in  the
    case of an EEA national who has resided in the UK  in  accordance  with
    the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  The evidence is
    insufficient to enable me to find that the appellant has  acquired  the
    right of permanent residence in the UK.  The evidence from  HMRC  would
    suggest that he was in the national insurance contribution scheme for a
    period of five years but that evidence does not lead me  to  find  that
    the  appellant  was  exercising  treaty  rights  or  was  residing   in
    accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  over  the  five  year  period.
    Accordingly, I find that the appellant has  not  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence in the UK.

24.  Consequently I have to consider whether the appellant's deportation  is
    justified on grounds of public policy or public security.

25.  The evidence shows that the appellant has been  a  persistent  offender
    from June 2009 until 24 October 2010 when he pleaded  guilty  to  theft
    and on 14 March 2014 was given a sentence  of  imprisonment  for  eight
    weeks to run concurrent from a previous similar offence.  He  committed
    the last offence when he was on bail.  In fact, in total, the appellant
    has been convicted of some 37  offences,  principally  of  shoplifting,
    being in breach of community order and  drugs  offences.   He  said  he
    picked up the drugs habit from  his  brother  who,  from  the  evidence
    before  the  judge,  was  also  facing  deportation  for  his  criminal
    behaviour.  He has been in immigration detention now for  nine  months.
    This  followed  completion  of  his  sentence  for  shoplifting.    The
    appellant claims he has been rehabilitated and that the courses he  has
    taken in prison have made a difference to his life.   However,  as  the
    appellant has not been released from  detention,  we  have  no  way  of
    knowing whether he has indeed learnt his lesson and has  been  properly
    rehabilitated.  His last offence was committed whilst he was  on  bail.
    His offending behaviour covered a period of at least four  years.   The
    appellant's offending behaviour has an impact on the companies he stole
    from which eventually impacts on prices generally to the  customer.   I
    find that as a result of his behaviour, he has not had  any  regard  to
    the impact his offences would have on society generally.  He  was  more
    concerned with  feeding  his  drugs  habit.  He  claimed  that  he  has
    undertaken six or seven courses whilst in prison and the  courses  have
    made a difference to his life.  He has not submitted  evidence  of  any
    certificates that he achieved as a result  of  these  courses  and  has
    failed to produce evidence of his efforts to rehabilitate  himself.   I
    also find that his offences demonstrate that he has not integrated into
    the UK society to any significant extent.

26.  Accordingly I find that his deportation  is  justified  on  grounds  of
    public policy.

27.  I find that evidence of the appellant's Article 8 family life  in  this
    country is woefully inadequate.  He separated from his partner and  has
    not seen his 7 year old son for quite a while.  Mother and  child  have
    not visited him in prison.  He has a daughter in Hungary with  whom  he
    informed the judge he had contact by phone and postcards.  His daughter
    is 16 years old.  He therefore has family to return to in Hungary.

28.  As to his private life, while there is no evidence that  the  appellant
    has been in the UK since 2000, the evidence from HMRC indicates that he
    has been here for at least ten years from 2  May  2004.   His  criminal
    behaviour from June 2009 shows that  the  appellant  has  not  properly
    integrated into British society.  He claimed he  picked  up  the  drugs
    habit from his brother.  His brother was also facing  deportation.   He
    claims that the drug-related courses and the  victim  awareness  course
    have made a difference to his life.  However, because he is  in  prison
    there is no telling whether these courses have indeed made a difference
    to his life.  He claimed in evidence before the judge that he  had  not
    seen his son for a couple of years  because  he  had  agreed  with  his
    partner that he needed to get clean before he saw him.  The judge  made
    a comment that the appellant's detention since the beginning  of  March
    has had the desirable effect of enabling him  to  rid  himself  of  his
    addiction to drugs. Despite this, the evidence from the  appellant  was
    that his former partner and child have not been to visit him in prison.
     I am not satisfied on the  evidence  that  his  deportation  would  be
    disproportionate to his family and private life.

Notice of Decision

29.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 25 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

