
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00587/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 3 July 2020         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 22nd July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 20 November 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Myers  ('the  Judge')
        allowed the appeal of DK under the Immigration  (European  Economic
        Area) Regulations 2016 against the order for his  deportation  from
        the United Kingdom.
     2. DK is a citizen of Lithuania born on 1 October 1986 who entered the
        UK in 2013.
     3. DK is the subject of an order of his deportation  from  the  United
        Kingdom as a result of his criminality.



Background


     4. The Judge considered the documentary and oral evidence relied  upon
        by DK before setting out findings of fact from [24] of the decision
        under challenge.
     5. The Judge records that it was conceded on DK's behalf that he could
        not show that he has a permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  UK
        meaning he is only entitled to the lowest level of protection. That
        finding has not been challenged.
     6. The Judge records at [26] that DK's last conviction for  a  violent
        offence was over two years ago and that both offences for which  he
        was convicted occurred in relation to incidents with his partner J.
        The Judge found it significant that  following  each  incident  the
        couple  reconciled  and  were  said  to  remain  in  a   supportive
        relationship.
     7. The Judge finds the  fact  DK  lied  to  Social  Services  and  his
        repeated contravention of an unpaid work requirement order did  not
        reflect well upon him and that his behaviour in  that  respect  has
        been persistent.
     8. The Judge's core findings are set out at [36 - 40] in the following
        terms:


             36.   In  my  judgement,  taking  into  account  the   various
                  protective factors in this case, the passage of time since
                  the last offence of violence, and its relative gravity,  I
                  find that the Respondent has not shown that the  Appellant
                  has a propensity to reoffend. Consequently, I do not  find
                  that  he  presents  a  genuine  present  and  sufficiently
                  serious threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society.


             37.  Even if he did present such  a  threat  the  decision  to
                  deport the Appellant would have to be proportionate.  This
                  is assessed by reference  to  the  fact  are  set  out  in
                  regulation 27(6).


             38.  In the Appellant's case he claims that he has not resided
                  in Lithuania since 2013. He still has family living  there
                  but for the reasons given above I find that his return  to
                  Lithuania would mean that he would no longer  be  able  to
                  continue his family life with his partner and children  by
                  means of face-to-face contact.


             39.  Having regard to the public  interest  considerations  of
                  section 117B-117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
                  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  Appellant  has  not  received   a
                  custodial sentence of  sufficient  length  to  engage  the
                  foreign offender provisions, nor is  there  evidence  that
                  his offending has caused serious harm or that he could  be
                  reasonably considered as  a  persistent  offender.  In  my
                  judgement   his   deportation   would    amount    to    a
                  disproportionate interference with  his  right  to  family
                  life.


             40.  For these reasons I find  that  the  Appellant  does  not
                  present a genuine present and sufficiently serious threats
                  to one of the fundamental interests of  society  and  that
                  his deportation is not necessary  or  proportionate  under
                  the EEA regulations and I allowed the appeal.


     9. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was
        granted on a renewed application, the operative part of  the  grant
        being in the following terms:


             It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in her
             assessment of future risk as is averred in ground 1 and points
             2 and  3,  in  that  there  was  likely  to  be  a  change  of
             circumstances arising from the evidence that the appellant and
             his partner intended to resume cohabitation which had been the
             situation in which the criminality had arisen.  There  appears
             also to have been little attention paid to how "serious  harm"
             is defined in the OASys Manual.


             While there is less merit in some of the other grounds,  I  am
             nevertheless persuaded that all grounds are  arguable,  albeit
             that the error pleaded in ground 2 may not be material.


    10. Standard directions were given by the Upper Tribunal and the appeal
        listed for hearing on 10 March 2020 to enable it to be  established
        whether the Judge had erred in law and  whether  any  errors  found
        were material to the decision to allow the appeal. That hearing was
        vacated at the  request  of  DK's  representatives  who  were  also
        granted an extension of time to enable  them  to  file  a  Rule  24
        response, to 9 April 2020. The appeal was  relisted  for  23  April
        2020.  That hearing  was  vacated  as  a  result  of  the  Covid-19
        pandemic and directions sent to the parties by email  on  29  April
        2020 indicating a preliminary view that  the  error  of  law  issue
        could be determined without a hearing and inviting the  parties  to
        make submissions upon this point within specified time limits.
    11. On 26 May 2020, an email was received by the  Upper  Tribunal  from
        DK's solicitors confirming that they are no  longer  instructed  by
        him and asking for their details to be removed  from  the  Tribunal
        record.
    12. Further submissions  have  been  received  from  the  Secretary  of
        State's representative dated 18 May 2020 maintaining the  challenge
        to the decision and indicating that if an error in law is found  it
        is appropriate for the appeal to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.
    13. Further communication has been received from DK in the form  of  an
        email sent by his partner J confirming a change of his  address  to
        that of his partner's property,  indicating  that  DK  and  J  have
        recommenced cohabitation, but not making any observation or comment
        upon the directions.
    14. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
    15. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
    16. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2)and (3), the Upper Tribunal may  make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The  Upper   Tribunal   must   have   regard   to   any   view
             expressed  by  a  party  when   deciding  whether  to  hold  a
             hearing to consider any matter,  and  the  form  of  any  such
             hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.(4)Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of  the
             Upper Tribunal to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);
             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39,without a hearing.


    17. The only party to have expressed a view is the Secretary of  State.
        The letter from Wilsons advising they are no longer instructed does
        not say that have been unable to contact DK or  have  not  informed
        him of the directions which were sent on 29  April  2020,  a  month
        before Wilsons came of the record. Although DK may from 27 May 2020
        be a litigant in person it has not been made out on  the  facts  or
        evidence that he could not have let the Tribunal know his view.  It
        has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair  to  exercise  the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to  be  determined  on  the  papers.  There  has  been  no
        cooperation from DK in relation  to  the  filing  of  the  Rule  24
        response either and nothing on the  facts  or  in  law  that  makes
        consideration of the issues on the papers not  in  accordance  with
        overriding objectives at this stage.



Grounds and submissions



    18. The Secretary of State asserts the Judge's  findings  at  [36]  are
        unsustainable and that whilst the 'protective factor course'  is  a
        relevant consideration it cannot be construed as  determinative  in
        light of further errors. The author  of  the  grounds  raises  five
        points in Ground 1 which can be summarised in the following terms:


                    i. The Judge has inadequately reasoned her reliance  on
                       the passage of time in light of the  fact  that  for
                       four out of the five years  since  DK  and  J  first
                       cohabited DK has repeatedly offended resulting in  J
                       having to call the police four  times  due  to  DK's
                       behaviour.
                   ii. The Judge's reference to violence and  its  relative
                       gravity fails to take  into  account  not  only  the
                       lower threshold under regulation  27  but  also  the
                       Judge inconsistently recognising at [32]  that  DK's
                       risk of harm is assessed as medium to known children
                       and adults. Although this could  transgress  to  the
                       potential to cause serious harm it would only do  so
                       if there was  a  change  in  circumstances  such  as
                       further relation breakdown. The grounds  assert  the
                       Judge fails to give adequate reasons for effectively
                       finding the relationship would not break down  hence
                       there being no  risk  of  reoffending.  The  grounds
                       assert the Judge has failed to  properly  take  into
                       account not only the history of  violent/threatening
                       behaviour  during  the  relationship  but  also  its
                       repeated  break-ups.  There   is   also   inadequate
                       reasoning in light of the OASys risk assessment tool
                       defining 'serious harm'.
                  iii.  At  [26]  the  Judge  found  it  significant   that
                       following  each   previous   incident   the   couple
                       reconciled which is said to show the Judge evidently
                       recognises the risk of repeat domestic violence even
                       if the couple only cohabit, yet fails  to  make  any
                       findings at all as to the possibility of  DK  and  J
                       resuming cohabitation which is  said  to  be  highly
                       material in light of  their  stated  intention  that
                       they will cohabit in the future. It is asserted  the
                       Judge failed to consider the possibility of  resumed
                       cohabitation in  the  context  of  the  relationship
                       chronology. It  is  asserted  the  Judge's  comments
                       regarding reconciliation are not properly  explained
                       in view of DK's  repeat  offending  and  police  and
                       social  services  intervention  following   previous
                       reconciliations.
                   iv. The Judge fails to  consider  or  make  findings  in
                       respect of an inconsistency in the evidence in which
                       it is claimed the only incident of domestic violence
                       was in 2015 yet DW was convicted of battery  against
                       J for a second time in 2017.
                    v. The Judge finds social services were not  supporting
                       the relationship with the parents because they  were
                       of the opinion that the children would not  be  safe
                       due to further incidents of Domestic Violence  since
                       the child protection plan ended in 2016 yet rejected
                       this evidence  and  allegedly  irrationally  accepts
                       statement by an independent social worker that there
                       had been  some  confusion  on  the  part  of  social
                       services that DK had been arrested and imprisoned in
                       July 2018 for domestic  violence,  failing  to  take
                       into  account  that  DK  was  convicted  after   the
                       protection plan ended in 2016,  and gives inadequate
                       reasons as to why the  independent  social  worker's
                       comments  undermine  certain  concerns   of   Social
                       Services in respect of child safety.


    19. Ground 2 argues a  misdirection  of  law/inconsistent  findings  of
        fact/  inadequate  reasons,  asserting  the  Judge's  findings   in
        relation to proportionality at [37 - 40] are  wholly  unsustainable
        as the Judge has conflated Article  8  ECHR  with   proportionality
        under the 2016 Regulations. The grounds assert section 117  has  no
        application to an appeal under the 2016 Regulations  under  the  EU
        Treaties. The only legal test the Judge should have considered  was
        that under the 2016 Regulations. It is also argued that the Judge's
        findings at [39] that there was no evidence DK could reasonably  be
        considered a persistent offender was unreasoned in  light  of  DK's
        offending history and the fact the Judge found at  [27]  that  DK's
        behaviour had been consistent.



Error of law


    20. The Judge noted DK's criminal convictions which are  summarised  in
        the following terms:


                 . 28/4/15 Battery against spouse, Community Order.


                       o 30/10/15 Failure to comply  with  Community  Order,
                         additional unpaid work requirement


                 . 27/7/17 Battery against spouse, Community Order.


                       o 4/1/18 Failure  to  comply  with  Community  Order,
                         additional unpaid work requirement.
                       o 8/3/18 Failure  to  comply  with  Community  Order,
                         suspended 12-week sentence.
                       o 2/7/18 Failure to comply with Community Order,  12-
                         week custodial sentence.


    21. So far as the chronology of the relationship in which the  domestic
        violence rose is concerned, as set out in the oral evidence  of  J,
        the following is disclosed:


            . October 2014 DK, J and J's child A begin cohabiting.


            . April 2015       J calls  the  police  leading  to  DK  being
              convicted of Battery,  Social  Services  intervening,  and  A
              being put on the child protection register.

                  o DK and J later reconciled with DK moving back  into  the
                    property.


            . February 2017 J  calls  police  again.  This  led  to  Social
              Services involvement again. J  signs  agreement  with  Social
              Services that she will not have DK back.


            . April 2017 despite agreement with Social Services  DK  and  J
              reconciled.

            . November/December 2017 DK moves back into property.

            . December 2017 J calls police again and  Social  Services  are
              informed.

            . DK and J reconciled again

                  o DK's evidence was that he moved back in with  J  before
                    July 2018 but lied to  Social  Services,  telling  them
                    that he had moved out in February 2017.


            . July 2018 J calls the police again.


            . DK sent to prison but J visits DK in prison with children.


    22. The OASys risk assessment tool defines 'serious harm'  as  'a  risk
        which is life-threatening and/or traumatic and from which recovery,
        whether physical or psychological, can be expected to be  difficult
        or incomplete'. There is clearly a consistent pattern of DK  and  J
        reconciling but then separating as a result of  domestic  incidents
        involving  the  police  and  Social  Services.  The  Judge  clearly
        recorded  at  [34]  that  she  found  DK  to  be  in  a  supportive
        relationship with J and that they had both expressed their wish  to
        continue their relationship and cohabitation, a statement which has
        been borne out by the recent confirmation that DK has  his  changed
        addressed to that of the property in which J lives indicating  they
        have once more become reconciled.
    23. At [32] the Judge finds:


             32.  He is  not  assessed  as  posing  a  risk  of  deliberate
                  physical harm to his children, rather  that  it  would  be
                  inadvertent emotional harm for the children be present  at
                  any further incidents of domestic abuse. His risk of  harm
                  is assessed at medium known children and adults.  Although
                  this could translate to the  potential  to  cause  serious
                  harm it would  only  do  so  if  there  was  a  change  in
                  circumstances  such  as  further  relationship  breakdown.
                  However, the  offence  focused  work  would  hopefully  be
                  protective factors against such a risk.


    24. The Judge was aware of the content of the OASys report in  relation
        to the offences which at section 1.2 reads:


             "DK assaulted his partner on two  different  days  during  the
             month of February 2017, the assault involved him attempting to
             strangle her, slapping her about the  face,  pushing  her  and
             preventing her from leaving the house. The  offences  happened
             when the children were in the house.


             When discussing the offence with DK  he  stated  that  in  the
             first instance (14 February), he returned  home  earlier  from
             work to find his partner at home and "dressed up" which he was
             not expecting. He remembers saying "what's all this nonsense?"
             DK reports to asking his partner why she was "dressed up",  to
             which she replied it was not his "business". At this point, he
             reports to his mother-in-law entering the  room  and  agreeing
             with her daughter. DK appears to struggle to remember how  the
             situation turned physical, saying "it's been a long time",  "I
             don't remember who pushed who".


             CPS documents states that "On the 14th she describes being  at
             home when he has grabbed her by the neck and  'pressed  really
             hard'. She describes  there  being  a  'tussle'  and  she  was
             'pushed onto the bed'. She again  describes  him  choking  her
             throat and she states that she grabbed his face. She attempted
             to leave the address, but her path was blocked as he was stood
             in the doorway. She began shouting 'help' from the windows".


             In reference to the offence  of  16  February,  CPS  documents
             state that his partner described how DK "again grabbed her  by
             the face and chin. He began screaming at her and  she  slapped
             him".


    25. The Judge also had evidence indicating DK's  attempts  to  minimise
        his offending and  blame  others  although  a  change  in  such  an
        approach as a result of offender focused work is noted. DK's mother
        in law suggested in her evidence he needed psychological  help  but
        there are no specific findings on this aspect of  DK's  personality
        or what caused him to behave in such  an  unacceptable  manner  and
        whether such issues have been properly addressed.   What  causes  a
        person such as DK to  commit  acts  of  domestic  violence  can  be
        complex requiring the Judge to deal with the  issue  in  sufficient
        depth. The Judge clearly recognises the risk  of  further  violence
        albeit this is associated with  DK  resuming  cohabitation  with  J
        which he clearly stated he intended to do at the hearing and  which
        he now appears to have done, and the strong possibility of  serious
        harm to both J and the children if there are further  incidents  of
        domestic violence.
    26. The risk of such consequences was clearly recognised  by  Doncaster
        Children's Services Trust who became initially involved on 8  April
        2015 when  safeguarding  concerns  were  raised,  albeit  that  the
        parents were informed that no further concerns existed in  December
        2015 resulting in the closure of a  Child  Protection  Plan  on  10
        February 2016. Doncaster Social Care  did  however  become  further
        involved following DK being arrested on 16  February  2017.  It  is
        recorded in the Independent  Social  worker's  Report  that  J  was
        informed by the allocated social worker that the children  will  be
        removed from her care if DK returned to the property.
    27. As a result of  the  incident  in  February  2017  a  'Contract  of
        Expectations' was drafted and put in place stating that  DK  should
        not have contact with J or come to  their  house,  and  if  he  had
        contact with the children it must be through a third party, until a
        risk assessment has been conducted. The agreement included a clause
        requiring J to inform the social worker if she decides  to  restart
        her relationship with DK.
    28. At [24] of the Independent Social Worker's Report considered by the
        Judge it is recorded that the maternal grandmother indicated during
        interview that DK needed psychological help as he used to  be  very
        jealous  although  he  was  much  calmer  following  his  time   in
        detention. There is no indication in the evidence or findings  made
        by the Judge that DK has received such assistance or interventional
        which may have been required to ensure that  personality  or  other
        issues that  led  to  previous  offences  are  no  longer  relevant
        factors. The evidence before the Judge clearly indicated that  they
        were.
    29. The Independent Social Worker refers to the evidence from Doncaster
        Social Care at page 43 of the report in the following terms:


             "I propose to go briefly through the information received from
             Doncaster Social Care on 28 August 2019. Doncaster Social Care
             are not currently supporting the relationship of the  parents,
             due to the impact on the children of domestic abuse, they  are
             of the opinion that the children will not be safe.  Since  the
             Child Protection Plan ended in 2016 there  have  been  further
             incidents of domestic  abuse,  although  not  for  two  years.
             Father  has  contact  to  the   children   at   the   maternal
             grandmother's  house.  The  couple  abide  by   Social   Cares
             "Agreement. Contract of Expectations"  which  does  not  allow
             them to see each other and is in place until  a  further  risk
             assessment takes place (I  could  not  find  a  copy  of  this
             Agreement the 2018). The couple have  said  they  want  to  be
             together  with  the  children,   have   said   they   wish   a
             rehabilitation plan to take place at a slow pace.  The  answer
             from Social Care is that they are not prepared to assess  this
             until DW's position with the Home Office has  been  clarified.
             My opinion is that this is not in the best  interests  of  the
             couple or their children or very fair them,  as  if  the  Home
             Office decided he should leave it will be too  late  to  carry
             out an assessment. There appears to be some confusion  on  the
             part of  Doncaster  Social  Care  that  DW  was  arrested  and
             imprisoned in July 2018 for domestic violence.  This  was  not
             the case; he was  imprisoned  after  failing  to  comply  with
             unpaid work requirements.


             DW engaged well with probation and  has  done  well  from  the
             courses he attended. Although he did not  always  comply  with
             all the Community Orders, he learnt a lot from his  time  with
             probation.  I  understand  that  the  Social  Workers  written
             response is that they have no intention of taking a Public Law
             Application. From my investigation it  seems  there  has  been
             very little involvement from  Social  Care  in  the  last  two
             years. Upon talking with both parents they  are  confused  and
             not clear what future plans are.


             The further information obtained from  Doncaster  Social  Care
             following my assessment meetings does not alter my view that a
             plan for the couple to  be  rehabilitated  should  be  put  in
             place, and to return DW to Lithuania would not be in the  best
             interests of the children, as the children need  their  father
             in their lives and this will not be the  case  if  he  has  to
             leave the country.


    30. As noted in the grounds there was clear evidence before  the  Judge
        of the real risk of serious harm as a result of DW's conduct. There
        is merit in the submission the Judge fails to give any reasons  why
        the concerns of Social Services in  respect  of  the  child  safety
        issues are not valid concerns especially in light of  DW  admitting
        to lying to social services in relation to  his  contact  with  the
        family, which appears to be contrary to the  agreement  with  them,
        and their position that for the sake of the children rehabilitation
        should not occur unless there has been a proper assessment and plan
        of action agreed.
    31. Although  post  hearing  evidence,  it  is  not  known  whether  DW
        returning to live with J now is as  a  result  of  Social  Services
        having undertaken such an assessment or whether DW has  just  taken
        it upon himself to do so. It is not known whether Social  Services,
        if they have become further involved, were made aware of  the  fact
        that permission to appeal has  been  granted  against  the  Judge's
        decision. If DW has recommenced cohabitation with  J  without  such
        work being  undertaken  and  without  Social  Services  approval  a
        credible real risk of future harm may exist.
    32. The Judge recognises that DW and J have recommenced cohabitation in
        the past after the various incidents as many partners  involved  in
        domestic violence situations do,  but  that  is  itself  does  not,
        arguably, reduce the risk of offending or DW presenting  a  genuine
        and sufficiently serious threat to  the  fundamental  interests  of
        society. As noted in the grounds the chronology clearly shows  that
        DW's repeat offending and the involvement of the police and  social
        services follows periods  of  reconciliation.  Whilst  DW  may  not
        present a risk to those with whom he is  not  cohabiting  with  the
        evidence before the Judge clearly showed that he can  to  those  in
        the same situation as J.
    33. Ground 1, point 4, refers to [22] of the decision  under  challenge
        asserting the Judge failed to consider or make findings in  respect
        of the tension between J's claim there had only been  one  incident
        of domestic violence in 2015 whereas DW was convicted of battery on
        a second occasion in 2017. There is arguable merit in the claim the
        Judges failure to make findings as to whether the  statements  were
        probative of risk or J seeking to hide the truth  from  the  Judge,
        such as to amount to legal error. This is clearly an  element  that
        was considered by the Judge upon which proper finding  should  have
        been made, the failure of which amounts to arguable legal error.
    34. I find  there  is  arguable  merit  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
        position, reflected in the grant of permission  to  appeal  by  the
        Upper Tribunal, that the Judge has erred in law  for   the  reasons
        set out in Ground 1, when assessing whether the appellant  presents
        a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat  to  one  of  the
        fundamental interests of society bearing in mind DW's  history  and
        propensity to offend in the past for reasons that do not appear  to
        have been properly explored or sufficient evidence provided to show
        that no such concerns will arise in  the  future,  particularly  in
        light of the real likelihood on the evidence before the Judge of  a
        change in circumstances such that  DW  and  J  intended  to  resume
        cohabitation which recreates the situation in  which  the  previous
        criminality has arisen and risk of serious harm  being  experienced
        by both J and the children.
    35. Ground 2 concerns the proportionality  assessment.   I  find  legal
        error in relation to the same in light of  my  findings  concerning
        Ground 1 as a proper assessment of any risk an individual poses has
        to be undertaken to enable an assessment of  whether  the  person's
        removal is proportionate. There is merit  in  the  submission  that
        provisions considered by the Judge are not directly relevant to  an
        EEA appeal albeit that if the outcome  is  the  same  under  either
        regime any error would not be material. I find in this case however
        it has been established that the error is material.
    36. I set aside the decision of the Judge.  DW's  immigration  history,
        criminal history, composition of the family  unit,  involvement  of
        social services and the  police,  together  with  DW's  failure  to
        establish a permanent right of residence, meaning his only entitled
        the lower level of  protection,  are  not  points  in  dispute  and
        therefore do not need  to  be  categorised  as  specific  preserved
        findings.  These  matters  will  form  the  basis  for  any  future
        consideration of the appeal.
    37. It appears, as noted above,  that  there  has  been  a  fundamental
        change in DW's situation following his apparent reconciliation with
        J. It may be that this has arisen as a result of an  assessment  by
        Social Services that it is safe for him to do so.  If so there will
        be considerable additional material that was not before the  First-
        tier Tribunal originally on which substantial factual findings  may
        need to be made in addition to those matters  upon  which  findings
        were not made as identified in the grounds  seeking  permission  to
        appeal.
    38. Having considered the Presidential Guidance on  the  Remittance  of
        appeals, I consider it appropriate  in  all  the  circumstances  to
        remit this appeal to the First-tier Hearing Centre at Bradford  for
        it to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Myers.


Decision

    39. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        Bradford Hearing Centre to be heard afresh by a  judge  other  than
        Judge Myers.

   Anonymity.


    40. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 July 2020












