
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00472/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 15th May 2015                         |           On 27th May 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                       yves alban raoul degnon dossou
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Howorth of Irving & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Benin born on  7th  July  1976.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 15th October 2002 when he was granted  leave
    to enter as a student.  Subsequently that leave was extended until 31st
    October 2004.  On 12th October 2004 the Appellant married Linda Dossou,
    a French national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  On  that  basis,
    the Appellant was issued a residence card as confirmation of his  right
    to reside in the UK as the family member of  an  EA  national  on  18th
    January 2005, and on 22nd August 2010 the Appellant was issued  with  a
    permanent residence card.

 2. On 15th March 2012 the Appellant was convicted at Lewes Crown Court  of
    rape and sentenced to four years' imprisonment.  As a  consequence,  on
    13th March 2014 the Respondent decided  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against  the  Appellant  under  Regulation  24(3)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Higgins (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 27th August  2014.
    He decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  given  in  his
    Determination dated 19th October 2014.  The Appellant sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 11th November  2014  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The Judge decided the appeal  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    Regulation 21(3) of the 2006 Regulations whereby  the  Appellant  could
    only be removed on serious grounds of public policy or public security,
    taking account of the principles set out in  Regulation  21(5)  whereby
    the decision to remove must be proportionate, and the factors  set  out
    in Regulation 21(6).  The Judge dismissed the appeal  because  although
    the Judge found that it would not be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's two children for him to be  removed,  the  public  interest
    outweighed  other  considerations.   The  Judge  attached  considerable
    weight to a report from a probation officer which stated that  in  June
    2013 the Appellant still presented as a medium risk of serious harm  to
    others on the basis that the Appellant  was  unwilling  to  accept  any
    responsibility for his criminal actions and  to  recognise  the  impact
    they might have on his victims.  As  the  Judge  stated  in  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 33 of his Determination,  he  was  satisfied  the
    risk of serious harm the Appellant  represented  remained  unacceptably
    high and that the Appellant remained a present risk to society.

 5. At the hearing, Miss Howorth argued that the Judge had erred in law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  She referred to her Skeleton  Argument  and
    submitted that the Judge had applied the wrong test.  The Judge  should
    have used the "imperative grounds of public  security"  test  given  in
    Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations to determine the appeal.  This
    was because the Appellant had resided in the UK for a continuous period
    of at least ten years prior to the  relevant  decision.   Miss  Howorth
    further argued that as there was acceptable evidence of  rehabilitation
    there should not be  removal  following  the  decision  in  Essa  (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316  (IAC).   The  Judge  had
    erred in not taking this factor into account, and had further erred  in
    construing a medium risk of re-offending as an unacceptably  high  risk
    of offending as referred to in Essa.

 6. In response, Mr Bramble referred to the Rule  24  Response  and  argued
    that the Judge had used the correct test.  The  period  of  ten  years'
    residence was to be calculated backwards from the date of the  relevant
    decision which was the decision to deport made on 12th March 2014.  The
    Appellant could only go back to the date when  he  acquired  rights  of
    residence for EEA purposes which would be the date when he married  his
    wife being October  2004.   Therefore  by  the  date  of  decision  the
    Appellant had not acquired ten years' continuous residence.  There  was
    no evidence that the Appellant had acquired any Treaty rights prior  to
    his marriage.  The opening  words  of  Regulation  21(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations indicated that the requirement  of  imperative  grounds  of
    public security applied only to EEA nationals  who  otherwise  met  the
    requirements of that Regulation.  Regulation 21(4) could only therefore
    apply to the Appellant from the date of his marriage.

 7. Mr Bramble went on to submit that the Judge had not made  an  error  of
    law in respect of the second ground argued by the Appellant.  The Judge
    had dealt with the risk of re-offending properly at paragraphs  27  and
    28 of the Decision.  The Judge had considered all  the  other  relevant
    factors in the context of the decision  in  Essa  and  had  come  to  a
    conclusion open to him.

 8. I find that there was no error of law in the decision of the Judge  and
    therefore I do not set aside that  decision.   The  Judge  decided  the
    issue in the appeal by applying the provisions of Regulation  21(3)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  I note the comment of  the  Judge  that  it  was
    common ground at the hearing before  him  that  that  was  the  correct
    Regulation to  apply.   Therefore  the  Judge  considered  whether  the
    relevant decision had been taken on serious grounds of public policy or
    public security.  Regulation 21(4) would only apply  if  the  Appellant
    had resided in the UK for a continuous period of  at  least  ten  years
    prior to the relevant decision.  The relevant  decision  was  taken  on
    12th March 2014.  It is not in dispute that the Appellant first arrived
    in the UK on 15th October 2002.  I do not agree with the submission  of
    Mr Bramble that time begins to run only from the  Appellant's  marriage
    to his EEA national wife in October 2004.  That is not provided for  in
    the relevant Regulation.  Therefore on the face of it the Appellant had
    resided for a continuous period in excess of ten  years  prior  to  the
    relevant decision.  However, it is clear from the decision in Essa that
    -

         "Periods of penal custody following  conviction  and  sentence  and
         periods of remand in custody that are followed by conviction and  a
         sentence of imprisonment"

     cannot contribute towards the acquisition of residence rights.   It  is
    not in dispute that the Appellant was so detained from 15th March  2012
    by which time he had not resided in the UK for a continuous  period  of
    ten years.

 9. Miss Howorth has also relied upon paragraph (vi) of the  head  note  to
    Essa which states:

         "If permanent residence has been acquired but a custodial  sentence
         is served in the period of residence between years  five  and  ten,
         then the period of residence in prison may be counted  towards  the
         ten years if the person concerned remains integrated with the  host
         state by reason of home, employment, family and social nexus."

10. It is true that the Appellant  achieved  permanent  residence  on  22nd
    August 2010 which is prior to his custodial sentence and  falls  within
    the period of between five and ten years after the required  period  of
    residence commenced.  However, it was never  argued  before  the  Judge
    that this part of the decision in Essa applied, and although there  was
    evidence as to the Appellant's history and  circumstances  in  the  UK,
    none was adduced to the Judge specifically on the point of integration.
     Therefore it cannot be an error of law  for  the  Judge  not  to  have
    considered the issue.

11. Finally, the Appellant's propensity to re-offend and hence his risk  of
    serious harm was considered thoroughly by the Judge  at  paragraphs  32
    and 33 of his Decision.   The  Judge  decided  to  attach  considerable
    weight to the assessment of the  probation  officer,  which  was  of  a
    medium risk, and the Judge was entitled to come to his final conclusion
    on this subject which appears in the final sentence of paragraph 33  of
    his Decision.  The Judge fully explained that decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


