
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00288/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2018                            |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              mr Sahal Farhaan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is  a  remaking  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    deportation order made against him pursuant to Regulation  19(3)(b)  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006.

 2. The appellant is a national of the Netherlands, born on 23  July  1997.
    It is undisputed that he entered the UK with his mother  in  2000.  The
    respondent's deportation order followed convictions on 13 January  2016
    for robbery, four counts of attempted  robbery,  threatening  a  person
    with a blade/sharply pointed article in a public place and  failing  to
    surrender to custody. On 2 August 2016 the appellant was sentenced to 2
    years, 6 months and 14 days in a Youth Offender Institution.

 3. The remaking of this appeal is  required  following  an  error  of  law
    decision issued on 3 September 2018, reissued on 26 September 2018.  In
    that decision the conclusion of the Upper Tribunal was that the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision issued on 19  March  2018  allowing  the  appeal
    disclosed material errors. The first error  was  in  finding  that  the
    appellant was entitled to  the  highest  level  of  protection  against
    deportation, that is, the "imperative" level,  where  the  question  of
    integration had not been holistically assessed. Further, there  was  no
    assessment of whether the appellant had obtained  permanent  residence,
    that status being essential for someone to qualify for the "imperative"
    level of protection; see B v Land of Baden-Wurttemberg and Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v Franco Vomero (C-316/16 and  C-424/16).



 4. The errors of law and the issues to be addressed in this re-making were
    identified in paragraphs 8 to 10 and paragraph 15 of the error  of  law
    decision. At the hearing before me the appellant indicated that he  had
    not seen the error of law decision. He was therefore afforded  time  to
    read the decision. When the hearing resumed, I summarised it  for  him,
    highlighting the key issues that had to be re-decided.  An  adjournment
    was also granted until later in the day in order  for  the  appellant's
    mother to provide documents showing her work record in the UK.

 5. Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations 2006 provides that an EEA national
    who has permanent residence  can  only  be  deported  where  there  are
    "serious" grounds of public policy or  security.  The  same  Regulation
    provides that an  EEA  national  who  has  resided  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of 10 years prior to  the  deportation  decision  may
    only be  deported  where  there  are  "imperative"  grounds  of  public
    security.

 6. The first assessment that must be conducted, therefore, is to establish
    the level of protection  from  expulsion  to  which  the  appellant  is
    entitled. Thus far, the appeal had proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had been continuously resident in the UK  from  2000  onwards
    albeit it was disputed that he had been integrated for that  period  of
    time. The evidence given before me by the appellant and his mother, Mrs
    Kahin, was fundamentally altered that position. They were both entirely
    clear and consistent as to the appellant living in Kenya from  2012  to
    2014, being educated with his brothers at boarding school.  He did  not
    return to the UK until the summer of 2014 after completing his A levels
    in Kenya.

 7. The case of MG v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (C-400/12)
    [2014] 2 CMLR 40 sets down clearly in paragraph 37  that  the  ten-year
    period of residence necessary for a grant of enhanced  or  "imperative"
    protection "must be calculated by counting back from the  date  of  the
    decision  ordering  that  person's  expulsion".   That  date  here  was
    26 January 2017. The  appellant  cannot  show  ten  years'  continuous
    residence prior to that date where he was absent from the UK from  2012
    to 2014.  It is therefore my finding that he cannot  benefit  from  the
    "imperative" level of protection.

 8. Following Regulation 15, in order to qualify for the "serious" level of
    protection, the appellant must show that he is "a family member  of  an
    EEA national who is not an EEA national but  who  has  resided  in  the
    United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with   these
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years". For the reasons set
    out below, it is also my conclusion that the  evidence  does  not  show
    that the appellant has  obtained  permanent  residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 and so does not stand to benefit from "serious"  level
    of protection from deportation.

 9. The appellant's mother provided a letter dated  12  October  2018  from
    Oasis Care and Training Agency confirming that she had worked for  them
    from 21 June 2010 to 5 September 2014.  She provided P60 documents  for
    the tax year to 5 April 2015, 5 April 2014 and 5 April  2013,  together
    with a P45 from 2014.  Her oral  evidence  was  that  she  had  started
    working in 2010, had worked since then but  had  not  worked  prior  to
    2010. I accept that  the  evidence  was  consistent  as  to  Mrs  Kahin
    exercising Treaty rights from 2010  to  2015.  The  appellant  was  not
    present continuously during this period, however, as above, studying in
    Kenya from 2012 to 2014.  He  cannot  show  that  he  was  continuously
    resident for 5 years as her dependent whilst she was exercising  Treaty
    rights, therefore.

10. Following Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations 2006  I  must  therefore
    assess  whether  the  appellant  represents  "a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society". That assessment must encompass  the  other  considerations
    set out in Regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006, as follows:

    -    the decision must comply with the  principle  of  proportionality,



    -    the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of
         the person concerned,

    -    the personal conduct of the  person  concerned  must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society,

    -    matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which  relate
         to  considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not  justify   the
         decision, and

    -    the person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in  themselves
         justify the decision.

11. Further, Regulation 21(6) states that:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         in the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his
         country of origin".

12. As above, the appellant  was  convicted  of  robbery,  four  counts  of
    attempted robbery, threatening a person with  a  blade/sharply  pointed
    article in a public place and failing  to  surrender  to  custody.  His
    sentence was 2 years,  6  months  and  14  days  in  a  Youth  Offender
    Institution. Regulation 21 (5) provides that these  convictions  alone,
    albeit they are serious, do not in themselves justify deportation.  The
    appellant must represent a "present" threat to public policy or  public
    security.

13. The sentencing remarks here show that the appellant  was  charged  with
    having threatened one of the victims with a knife.  He  did  not  plead
    guilty to that offence but was convicted of it. Before me  he  remained
    clear that he does not accept his guilt for that offence, arguing  that
    the evidence on this point had not been consistent and should have been
    assessed otherwise by the jury. He maintained  that  he  had  not  been
    carrying a knife. The appellant's inability  to  accept  responsibility
    for his conviction for carrying a knife appeared to me to be  a  matter
    that had to be weighed against him when assessing whether he remains  a
    "present" or current risk to public policy and security.

14. To that must be added the assessment in the  Probation  Service  letter
    dated 24 October 2018 which confirmed that the appellant was  found  to
    show a medium risk of serious harm albeit he has obtained low scores in
    other risk assessments such  as  OVP,  OGP  and  OGRS.   The  Probation
    Service letter is  brief.  It  states  that  the  appellant  has  shown
    positive motivation to address previous offending  behaviour.   Without
    further detail, however, it is difficult to place much weight to  place
    on that statement and there is no reference to his  refusal  to  accept
    his conviction for carrying a knife.  I  take  into  account  that  the
    Probation Service letter also  confirms  that  the  appellant  has  not
    provided any concerns in the supervision assessments  he  has  attended
    with the Probation Service and  has  attended  regularly.   The  letter
    states that he has shown  "great  compliance"  in  complying  with  his
    criminal licence and was engaging well.

15. There is the further issue of the appellant being called for sentencing
    whilst he was on bail but absconding, avoiding the police for 3 months.
    It appeared to me that this was also a factor that carried some  weight
    as regards a "current" risk as it had to be set against the appellant's
    statements of remorse and showed that although  the  robbery  may  have
    been a one-off  event,  he  later  sought  to  defer  or  avoid  taking
    responsibility for his behaviour and  obstructed  the  due  process  of
    criminal justice system.

16. Having taken all of these matters into account, my conclusion  is  that
    the appellant does  represent  "a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society"
    where his offending was serious, he has  been  assessed  as  showing  a
    medium risk of causing further serious harm and his acceptance  of  his
    behaviour and conviction is partial.

17.  I  must  therefore  consider  the  proportionality  of  deporting  the
    appellant, taking into account the additional  factors  highlighted  in
    paragraph 21(6) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  There is no dispute  that
    the appellant came to the UK in 2000 at the age of 3 and has lived here
    since then other than between 2012 and 2014 when he was in Kenya.  This
    is an extensive period of  time  and  comprises  the  majority  of  his
    formative years. I accept that this will have led to significant social
    and cultural integration in  the  UK,  even  taking  into  account  his
    criminal offences.  The appellant speaks fluent English. I accept  that
    his immediate family are in the UK, other than an uncle who remains  in
    the Netherlands and his brother who was involved in the  same  criminal
    offending as the appellant and who  was  deported  to  the  Netherlands
    pending his  appeal  against  deportation.  He  has  not  been  to  the
    Netherlands since 2010. At the time of his offence, the  appellant  was
    studying at under-graduate level and  was  working  part-time.  All  of
    these matters weighed on his side of the balance in the proportionality
    assessment.

18. Other factors weigh  against  him.  As  I  have  indicated  above,  his
    criminal profile is serious and he accepts only partial  responsibility
    for what happened. The appellant is now aged 21  and  in  good  health.
    Those are factors that will assist in re-establishing  himself  in  the
    Netherlands. I accept that the majority of his family are in the UK but
    he appellant will have limited links to the Netherlands given  that  he
    left 18 years ago and has only been for a visit  since  then.  He  does
    have family support, there, however, an  uncle  and  brother  currently
    living there.

19. There are important factors weighing on both sides of the  equation  in
    this matter. The appellant's long  residence,  most  of  his  formative
    years being spent in the UK and the  offences,  albeit  serious,  being
    limited to one occasion, in particular, weigh against deportation being
    proportionate.  It  remains  the  case  that,  on  balance,  it  is  my
    conclusion that it is proportionate  and  appropriate  to  deport  here
    where the offence was undeniably serious, where the appellant continues
    to deny having carried a knife, where he also  refused  to  accept  the
    process of the  criminal  justice  system  by  absconding  rather  than
    attending for his sentencing hearing and is assessed as being a  medium
    risk of serious harm. In all the circumstances, it is my view that  the
    respondent  is  entitled  to  deport  the  appellant  under   the   EEA
    Regulations 2006.

20. For all of these reasons I refuse the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to deport him.

Notice of Decision

21. The appeal against deportation is refused.


Signed: [pic]                       Date: 14 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
