



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00644/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2013                            |On 27 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                                     and
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                             Jacob Mahahil Abdi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Spurling (of counsel), instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 [1] By its  determination  promulgated  on  18  June  2013  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the Respondent's
    decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.  The appellant  appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission.


[2]  There are two permitted grounds of appeal.  The first  [per  the  judge
    granting permission] is that it is at least arguable that the  Tribunal
    may have erred in law in its assessment of whether the  hearing  should
    be adjourned in the  light  of  the  Appellant's  non-appearance.   The
    background to the first ground of appeal is that the Appellant was  not
    present at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  was
    linked, one can say uncontroversially, in one way  or  another  to  his
    conduct.  The conduct in  question  unfolded  in  the  context  of  the
    arrangements to escort him as a detained person to the premises of  the
    court.  The first ground of appeal resolves to the contention  that  by
    proceeding in the absence of the  Appellant,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    committed the error of law of depriving him of a fair hearing.

[3]  We consider that there is substance in  this  ground.   While  it  has,
    potentially, a series of different elements, it suffices  to  highlight
    and concentrate on one.  Paragraph [11] of  the  determination  records
    that counsel for the Appellant addressed the Tribunal on  the  question
    of  adjournment.   A  specific  application  for  an  adjournment   was
    formulated.  A number of reasons were  advanced.   One  was  to  obtain
    disclosure of the notes from the persons described as the escorts.  The
    second was to allow the  Appellant  to  lodge  a  supplemental  witness
    statement giving his version of what had happened.  In  the  course  of
    this submission, counsel also contended that the hearing could  proceed
    in his absence on the basis of submissions i.e. without evidence,  only
    if the Respondent were to concede that the Appellant's credibility  was
    not in issue and accept that his evidence that  he  was  kidnapped  and
    robbed in 2008 as claimed.

[4]  The response on behalf of the respondent was, according to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination, the following.  The  Presenting  Officer
    stated that the Respondent had "...clarified in the refusal letter what
    the position is with respect to  the  2008  incident...",  and  he  had
    nothing further to  say  regarding  the  adjournment  request.   It  is
    uncontroversial that the detailed letter of decision  did  not  address
    one  way  or  another,  the  credibility  of  the  various  claims  and
    assertions made by the Appellant.  There is  a  striking  absence  from
    that very detailed letter of anything approaching either  rejection  or
    acceptance of the Appellant's story, whether in whole or in part.   The
    letter, properly analysed, was neutral on this key issue.

[5]  It is abundantly clear from the text  of  the  Determination  that  the
    Appellant's credibility  featured  prominently  in  the  hearing  which
    following and, in due course, it became the subject of adverse findings
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  In our judgment, the error  of  law  which
    materialised has its origins in the acceptance by the Tribunal  of  the
    submission made on behalf of  the  Respondent  regarding  the  decision
    letter which, as we have highlighted above, was plainly erroneous.  The
    ensuing unfairness to the Appellant is manifested in paragraph [29]  of
    the Determination, where the Tribunal says:

          "We are of the view on reading the refusal letter as a whole that
         the Respondent did not   accept the Appellant's  story  about  what
         happened to him."

     Thus, the hearing and  ensuing  decision  consisted  of,  in  part,  an
    assessment of  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  findings  manifestly
    adverse to him, in circumstances where he  had  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to respond and to put his case in the context of the cross-
    examination which, we consider, would inevitably have unfolded  had  he
    been present [properly  conceded  by  the  Respondent's  representative
    before us]. This was compounded by an  erroneous  construction  of  the
    decision letter.

[6]    The Tribunal made an assessment that there would be no  injustice  to
    the Appellant in refusing the application to adjourn.  They  made  that
    assessment,  by  implication,  in  their  recitation  of  the  relevant
    procedural Rule.  However, we are of the opinion that they provided the
    wrong answer to the question which they posed.  Furthermore, they erred
    in principle, in our judgment.  Their ruling and ensuing conduct of the
    hearing denied the Appellant his right to a fair hearing,  contrary  to
    the fundamental common law right enjoyed by  him.   This  exercise  had
    significant adverse consequences for him. See R v Thames Valley Police,
    ex parte Cotton [1990] WL 753309 and in particular the six precepts  of
    Bingham LJ [at p 17 of the internet version].

[7]   The test to be applied by this appellate court is whether the  outcome
    might have been different if  an  adjournment  had  been  granted.   We
    consider that the answer to this question, applying the  correct  legal
    test, must be affirmative. In  addition  to  the  above,  at  a  purely
    prosaic level  an  adjournment  would  have  given  the  Appellant  the
    opportunity  to  counter,  and  correct,  the  significantly   negative
    impression which the Tribunal must, realistically, have formed of  him.
    This is reinforced by the new evidence regarding the  'incident'  which
    we have admitted in evidence today. We note the submission on behalf of
    the Respondent today that justice might  better  have  been  served  by
    acceding  to  the  Appellant's  application  for  an  adjournment.   We
    acknowledge the correctness and the propriety  of  that  submission  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  For these reasons the first ground of appeal
    succeeds.

 [8] The second permitted ground of appeal is articulated in  the  grant  of
    permission in the following way:

         "It is also arguable that the panel may have erred in the way that
         it approached the guidance in AMM in relation to safety on return".




    It is common case that  the  decision  in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;
    humanitarian crisis; returness; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]  required  the
    First-tier Tribunal to
    enquire into the issue of the Appellant's vulnerability on-in the event
    of returning to Somalia. The vulnerability equation  had  a  number  of
    ingredients.  We do not propose to detail those for  present  purposes.
    It is agreed by the parties that there were several.

[9]   On  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  it  is  acknowledged,  we   consider
    correctly, that there was, particularly within paragraphs [31] and [32]
    of the Determination, a failure to deal adequately with the  obligatory
    issue of vulnerability.  While this might be explicable by reference to
    the formulation of the Appellant's skeleton argument, it is nonetheless
    an error which cannot be overlooked.  This constitutes, in our view, an
    error of law, which cannot be dismissed as trivial or  inconsequential.
    We would merely add to our determination of the second ground of appeal
    that, had it been  necessary  to  do  so,  we  might  also  have  found
    substance in the free-standing argument that in the Determination there
    is no clearly conducted exercise  of  grappling  with  the  substantial
    volume of country evidence assembled by the Appellant  and  explaining,
    at least briefly, the Tribunal's  assessment  and  evaluation  thereof.
    This, in turn, gave rise, arguably, to a further error of law infecting
    the  judgment,  namely  a  failure  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    preferring one part of the country evidence before the Tribunal to  the
    competing other parts.  It is not necessary, however, for  us  to  make
    any concluded determination of this discrete issue.  For the reasons we
    have articulated, the second ground of appeal succeeds also.

[10]     We would merely add that if the criterion  for  evaluation  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination of  the  adjournment  request  were
    that of reasonableness then it would clearly  pass  muster.   What  the
    Tribunal did was perfectly reasonable and  entirely  understandable  in
    the circumstances, having regard to the evidence available to it at the
    time. Moreover, the Tribunal  approached  its  task  with  demonstrable
    care.  However, the relevant criterion is that of fair hearing and, for
    the reasons which we have articulated, we consider that the  Tribunal's
    approach had the effect of depriving the Appellant of a fair hearing.

Decision and Disposal

[11]  Accordingly,  we  set  aside  the  Determination  of  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  Given our finding that there  was  an  unfair  hearing  and,
    secondly, the intimation to this court that the Respondent  would  wish
    to adduce further evidence  on  certain  issues  and,  thirdly,  having
    regard to the terms of the  letter  dated  22  October  2013  from  the
    Appellant's  solicitors,  we  are  of  the  clear  opinion   that   the
    appropriate course is not to proceed to remaking in this forum, with or
    without  an  adjournment.  We  remit  the  matter  to  a   differently-
    constituted First-tier  Tribunal.   We  decline  to  give  any  further
    instructions or directions at this stage as that is a matter  belonging
    pre-eminently to the forum of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  [pic]


Date: 25 October 2013
Mr Justice McCloskey
President, Upper Tribunal

