
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00674/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 11 November 2015                       |           On 18 January 2016       |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MASTER EMMANUEL OLUWASEYI OLAREWAJU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr V Rwegasira (Solicitor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, I shall continue to refer to Mr Olarewaju  as  the  appellant
    herein.

2.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach allowing the appeal of
    the appellant against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  27
    March 2014 to make a deportation order by virtue of Section 5(1) of the
    Immigration Act 1971.

3.   The appellant who is a citizen of  Nigeria  was  born  on  9  September
    1996. He was issued with a family visit visa on 3 May 2005.  He entered
    the UK on 9 September 2005 at the age of 9.

4.   On 15 March 2010 he  was  convicted  of  robbery  at  Camberwell  Green
    Juvenile Court and was sentenced to a referral order for  four  months.
    On 18 May 2011, he was convicted at Camberwell Green Juvenile Court  of
    possession of a knife blade/sharp pointed article in  a  public  place,
    possession of a controlled drug - Class B and  handling  stolen  goods.
    He was sentenced  to  twelve  months,  youth  rehabilitation  order,  a
    supervision requirement and curfew order.  On  26  June  2012,  he  was
    convicted at Taunton Juvenile Court  of  two  counts  of  possessing  a
    controlled drug with intent to supply - Class A.  On 10 July  2012,  he
    was sentenced to eighteen months' detention and training order  to  run
    concurrently.

5.   On 13 March 2013, a notice of liability  to  deportation  questionnaire
    was sent to the  appellant.   On  10  April  2013,  the  appellant  was
    released at the end of his custodial sentence.  On  27  March  2014,  a
    decision was made to deport him.  He gave notice of appeal against  the
    decision on 15 April 2014.

6.   The Judge recorded that the appellant was not in the UK lawfully  after
    the expiry of his visit visa and that the respondent  had  granted  all
    the family, including the appellant, discretionary leave to  remain  in
    the UK.  The respondent stated within the grant  that  the  appellant's
    criminal  history  would  be  reviewed  and  he  remained  subject   to
    deportation.  I was informed at the  hearing  that  the  appellant  was
    granted discretionary leave along with his mother and siblings in  July
    2013 and that his discretionary leave expired on 9 September 2014  when
    he was 18. Prior to the grant of discretionary leave the appellant  was
    here unlawfully.  He has not had further  leave  to  remain  since  the
    expiry of the discretionary leave.

7.   The Judge heard evidence from the appellant,  various  members  of  his
    family, his key worker, Ms Janina Hibble, and  his  social  worker,  Ms
    Henrietta Trevor.

8.   The Judge noted that the appellant has been convicted of  a  number  of
    offences in the UK.  The most recent was in 2013 for  assault  and  the
    conviction prior to that was for possession with intent to supply Class
    A drugs.  She noted that all the offences occurred when  the  appellant
    was under 18 and that this was a relevant factor.  She  noted  that  he
    still committed yet another offence in 2013 by assaulting an inmate  in
    the young offenders' institution.  Whilst he may have found  the  young
    offenders' institute an extremely daunting  experience,  the  appellant
    said he was being bullied but nevertheless clearly accepted that he had
    assaulted a fellow inmate and was not found to have a  defence  against
    his actions.  She had also noted that in giving evidence the  appellant
    did not show any particular remorse for this offence and instead sought
    to justify it by suggesting that he had no option  but  to  commit  the
    assault.

9.   The Judge then went on to say that at the time the appellant  committed
    the Class A drugs offence, he was only 15 years old and had left  home.
    He was in the care of social services at that time under a  care  order
    but chose to leave the security of  social  services  care  and  become
    involved in criminal activities.  She said the appellant's  family  had
    effectively glossed over the appellant's estrangement from  the  family
    and the fact that he had left home.   The  Judge  said  that  a  deeper
    understanding of how the appellant came to be in this  situation  would
    have been helpful and she was left with the impression that there  were
    still some fractures in the family relationship as  a  whole  with  the
    appellant choosing to live away from home.

10.   The  Judge  considered  the  positive  factors  in   the   appellant's
    circumstances.  She found that he had obviously affected  professionals
    in a significant way, that both his key worker and  his  social  worker
    had attended the hearing to give evidence on  his  behalf.   She  found
    that the appellant now lives away from the areas  in  which  he  became
    involved in criminal activities.  It appears that he  had  a  difficult
    time on his arrival in the UK given that he was hospitalised  for  stab
    wounds on two occasions, although again the  circumstances  surrounding
    these incidents were vague.

11.  The Judge considered that the appellant arrived in the UK  in  2005  at
    the age of 9.  He was not in the UK lawfully after the  expiry  of  his
    visit visa but equally he was a  minor  and  was  not  the  one  making
    decisions regarding the family status in the UK.  She  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had seen fit to grant all the family  including  the
    appellant discretionary leave to remain in the UK.  The respondent  did
    state within the grant that the appellant's criminal history  would  be
    reviewed and he remained subject to deportation but even so she did not
    choose to exclude the appellant from the grant of  discretionary  leave
    as  she  could  have  done.   Furthermore,  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions contain an exemption for foreign offenders who are sentenced
    when they were still under the age of 18.  This was of relevance  given
    that the respondent could not  therefore  deport  the  appellant  under
    those provisions and instead relied  on  deportation  being  conducive.
    The Judge noted that the  appellant  has  not  been  convicted  of  any
    further offences since 2013 and the evidence of the  professionals  was
    that the appellant had turned his life around and now acknowledged  his
    past mistakes  and  had  an  understanding  of  how  his  offences  had
    adversely affected society.  The Judge said this was not simply a  case
    of family members assuring the Tribunal of changes  in  the  appellant,
    but was a case where experienced professionals have  expressed  a  firm
    opinion that the appellant has changed.  This view was  echoed  by  the
    witness statement from the senior youth offending  service  officer  to
    whom the appellant was allocated.  She  remains  in  contact  with  the
    appellant on a voluntary basis and has confirmed that she will continue
    to provide support to the appellant.

12.  The Judge then considered the  appellant's  circumstances  in  the  UK.
    She found that he has lived in the UK for more than half his  life  and
    even now was only 18 years old at the time of the hearing.  He accepted
    that he had been unlawful in the  UK  but  that  was  not  of  his  own
    choosing.

13.  The Judge considered the evidence of the appellant and his family  that
    the appellant's father was a violent and abusive man.  Nevertheless she
    found on the evidence that there  was  some  level  of  domestic  abuse
    within the family but that it was not as  violent  as  the  appellant's
    mother, in particular, sought  to  portray.   She  also  found  on  the
    evidence that the appellant had contact with his father  more  recently
    than he was prepared to say.  She found that his  father  continued  to
    play some role in his  life  although  this  role  is  likely  to  have
    diminished given the time the appellant spent in custody and given that
    he is now  living  independently.   The  Judge  found  that  given  the
    appellant's apparent dislike of his father, it seems unlikely  that  he
    would have sought to maintain much contact with  his  father  and  also
    found that his father was unlikely to provide much support for  him  if
    he returned to Nigeria given that he  seemed  to  provide  very  little
    support for the appellant or his family whilst in the  UK.   The  Judge
    did not find however that there was sufficient evidence to suggest that
    the appellant would be at risk from his father in Nigeria.

14.  On the evidence the Judge found that there would be  extremely  limited
    family support if the appellant were deported to  Nigeria.   She  found
    that this is an appellant who has spent the formative years of his life
    in the UK and would, to  all  intents  and  purposes,  have  considered
    himself to be British albeit that he was in fact  unlawfully  here  for
    most of the time he  was  present  in  the  UK.   She  found  that  the
    appellant would be returning to a country with which he  is  no  longer
    familiar and with little, if  any  support.   His  mother  has  visited
    Nigeria twice recently and would no doubt do what she could  to  assist
    the appellant in reintegrating but this would be  with  minimal  family
    support in Nigeria.

15.  The Judge then considered the public  interest.   She  found  that  the
    appellant was now 18 years old and he has had a difficult life.  He has
    been convicted of serious offences and it is in the public interest  to
    deport foreign criminals particularly when they have been convicted  of
    serious offences involving  drugs.   Deportation  can  also  act  as  a
    deterrent to other foreign nationals.

16.  The Judge found that the appellant is living independently  in  the  UK
    and this is only with  a  significant  level  of  outside  professional
    support.  It does not automatically mean that he would be able to  find
    accommodation and employment in Nigeria.  He has not  lived  there  for
    many years and has no support structures he could  turn  to.   Although
    the appellant raised issues with regard to the  security  situation  in
    Nigeria, following consideration of the background evidence, the  Judge
    did not find that the situation was so serious that the appellant would
    be at risk of a breach of Article 3 in Nigeria.

17.  The Judge ended by repeating that the appellant arrived in the UK at  a
    young age, his offences were all committed under the age of 18.  He has
    not committed any further offences for two years and  has  professional
    support in the UK, support which would continue and  which  would  mean
    that the appellant would be  extremely  unlikely  to  reoffend  in  the
    future.  He has turned his  life  around  from  a  very  difficult  and
    turbulent  teenage  time.   The  public  interest  argument   and   the
    deterrence argument are both strong arguments in  favour  of  deporting
    the appellant but, she found, that in the particular  circumstances  of
    this case for the reasons she has  given,  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the exceptions set out  in  paragraph  399
    and 399A of the Immigration Rules and Section 117C of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which mean that  the  appellant  should
    not be deported from the UK.

18.  The grounds on which the Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission
    argued that the Judge failed to assess whether the appellant's case  as
    to "very compelling circumstances" should succeed when "viewed  through
    the lens" of the Immigration  Rules;  and  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    properly factor in the public interest in the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on those grounds.

19.  I find that the Judge from  the  outset  accepted  that  the  appellant
    could not fit within either paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and properly directed herself that he must  therefore  show  that
    there are compelling circumstances over  and  above  these  paragraphs.
    She also properly factored into her consideration the  public  interest
    in the deportation of foreign criminals.

20.  In line with Section 117C, the Judge found  that  the  public  interest
    argument and the deterrence argument  were  both  strong  arguments  in
    favour of deporting the appellant.  Again in  paragraph  83  she  found
    that the appellant had been convicted of serious offences and it is  in
    the public interest to deport foreign criminals particularly when  they
    have been convicted of serious offences involving drugs.

21.  The Judge considered the appellant's circumstances here in the  UK  and
    if he were to be deported to Nigeria and came to  the  conclusion  that
    those circumstances were compelling over and above those  in  paragraph
    399 and 399A and that his deportation would not conducive to the public
    good.

22.  I find that the Judge did not err in her  decision.   The  respondent's
    grounds of appeal amount to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.  The Judge's decision allowing the appellant's appeal
    shall stand.

23.  The respondent's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



