
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00808/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 October 2013                               |On 14 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ALEXSANDER MAHOV
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Pickup, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. For the sake of  convenience  we  shall  refer  to  Mr  Mahov  as  "the
    claimant" herein.

 2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge  Davidson  and  Mrs  J  Holt  [non-legal  member]),
    promulgated on 2 July 2013, allowing an appeal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department of  10  August  2012  to
    remove the claimant to Latvia pursuant to regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006   ['2006
    Regulations'] (and thus him being treated as if he  were  a  person  to
    whom  sections  3(5)(a)  and  5  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  apply
    [regulation 24(3) of the 2006 Regulations]).

Relevant Legal Framework

 3. The relevant provisions of the 2006 EEA Regulations state as follows:


       Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom
       This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
       19. -
          (3) Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5),  a  person  who  has  been
          admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the United  Kingdom
          under these Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if-


          ...
             (b) he would otherwise be entitled to  reside  in  the  United
             Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has
             decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of public
             policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
             regulation 21.




       Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public  health
       groundsThis section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum
       21.-
          (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
          taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or  public
          health.
          (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.
          (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a  person
          with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except  on
          serious grounds of public policy or public security.
          (4) A relevant decision may not be  taken  except  on  imperative
          grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
             (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
          policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying  with
          the  preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,  be   taken   in
          accordance with the following principles-
             (a)  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
          proportionality;
             (b) the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)  the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned   must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;
             (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;
             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.
          (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of  public
          policy or public security in relation to a person who is  resident
          in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take  account  of
          considerations such as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
          economic situation of the person, the person's length of residence
          in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  person's   social   and   cultural
          integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's
          links with his country of origin.

First-tier Tribunal's determination - a summary

 4. It is not in dispute that the claimant is a national of Latvia born  14
    January 1985. He first entered the United Kingdom on 21 April 2007  and
    has,  since  that  date,  managed  to  accumulate  convictions  for  35
    offences; many of which were met with short sentences of  imprisonment.
    Full details of the claimant's convictions are set out in  paragraph  2
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. Most  recently  he  was,  on  11
    February 2011, convicted of Theft (shoplifting)  and  sentenced  to  16
    weeks  imprisonment.  Thereafter,  he  was  again  convicted  of  Theft
    (shoplifting) on the 20 May 2011 and sentenced to 26 weeks imprisonment
    and was further convicted of the same offence on  25  August  2011,  on
    this occasion being sentenced to a term of four months imprisonment.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found the claimant  not  to  have  a  permanent
    right of residence in the United Kingdom and that  his  removal  could,
    consequently,  be  justified  on  public  policy  grounds  [36].   When
    considering whether such justification had been made out, the  tribunal
    accepted the Secretary of State's assertion that the claimant presented
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
    fundamental interests of society but  concluded  that  his  removal  to
    Latvia would not  be  proportionate  [44].  It  therefore  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal on "immigration grounds" [48].  Given  the  reasoning
    which precedes  such  conclusion  it  is  accepted  that  the  tribunal
    intended to allow the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's
    decision would lead to a breach of  the  claimant's  rights  under  the
    Community Treaties.

 6. The tribunal also went on to consider the claimant's appeal on  article
    8 ECHR grounds, allowing it on the basis that 'deportation' would be  a
    disproportionate interference with his  private  life;  ostensibly  the
    same reasons it allowed the appeal in relation to the 2006  Regulations
    [46-55].

Grounds of challenge

 7. The Secretary of State's pleaded grounds,  in  summary,  challenge  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that it erred;

      i) By failing to provide adequate reasons for its conclusion that  the
         claimant will not re-offend in  the  future  [paragraph  1  of  the
         grounds];

     ii) By failing to provide adequate reasons for  its  conclusions  that;
         (i) the claimant's mother, who lives in Latvia, could  not  support
         him if he is returned there [paragraph 2] (ii) the claimant is less
         likely  to  find  work  in  Latvia  than  in  the  United   Kingdom
         [paragraphs  2  -  3]  (iii)  the  prospect   of   the   claimant's
         rehabilitation would be lower in  Latvia  [paragraph  4]  (iv)  the
         facilities in the United Kingdom  for  assisting  those  with  drug
         addiction are better than those which exist  in  Latvia  [paragraph
         5],  (v)  the  claimant  suffered  a  traumatic  event  in   Latvia
         [paragraph 13] and (vi) the claimant's partner  and  children  were
         killed in a road accident in the United Kingdom [paragraph 13].

    iii) By misdirecting itself in law when considering the availability  of
         medical care for the claimant in Latvia [paragraph 6 - 12].

Discussion on Error of Law

 8. The First-tier Tribunal found the claimant not to be a person  who  had
    resided continuously in the United Kingdom for a period of  five  years
    in accordance with the 2006 Regulations  and,  consequently,  concluded
    that a decision to remove him could be justified  on  a  public  policy
    grounds (as opposed to serious grounds of public policy  or  imperative
    grounds of public security) [36].

 9. In relation to the prospects of the claimant reoffending  the  tribunal
    state as follows [37]:

       "[T]he threat we perceive is that if, and when, he is released,  and
       does not manage to control his drug use, then he will  return  to  a
       life  of  using  illegal   drugs,   with   the   almost   inevitable
       consequential serial  theft and shoplifting to obtain the  money  to
       pay for drugs, as has happened in the past."

10. Having first referred to the  conclusory  paragraph  of  a  psychiatric
    report authored by Dr Lavender [38], the tribunal state [39 & 40];

       "...[w]e feel bound to find that, as a serial  shoplifter,  and  the
       likelihood that he  will  relapsed  into  drug  use,  and  the  same
       behaviour as previously, the threat  he  poses  to  society  by  the
       possible continuation of his life of drug use, and consequent theft,
       does pose a threat to the interests of public  policy,  which  makes
       him liable to deportation...

       [W]e are satisfied that our decision would be based  solely  on  the
       personal conduct of  the  appellant,  which  we  accept  presents  a
       genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  the
       fundamental interests of society, viz. law and order, because of the
       likelihood of his relapsing, as described  by  Dr  Lavender  in  his
       report;..."

11. Given the passages set out above, it is plain that paragraph 1  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds is  based  on  a  misapprehension  of  the
    findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Contrary  to  the  premise  of
    paragraph 1 of the grounds, the tribunal determined the appeal  on  the
    basis that there was a risk of the claimant reoffending.

12. Paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 13 of the grounds generally  challenge  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  such  findings  are  not
    underpinned by the required sufficiency of reasoning. Those  paragraphs
    also assert matters of fact which, it is said, ought to  have  led  the
    tribunal to come to alternative conclusions in the Secretary of State's
    favour.

13. The tribunal found the claimant generally to be a credible witness.  It
    particularly accepted the  claimant's  evidence  (i)  that  it  is  his
    intention to rid himself of his drug  addiction  [26],  (ii)  that  his
    father and stepmother were shot whilst out shopping in Latvia  in  2006
    and that  as  a  consequence  he  suffers  from  Post-Traumatic  Stress
    Disorder resulting in, inter alia, intermittent flashbacks  [29]  (iii)
    that his mother would provide little support to him if he were returned
    to Latvia, because she has problems of her own [42], and (iv) that both
    his UK based partner and the couple's  twins  were  killed  in  a  road
    accident in the United Kingdom in 2009 [30].

14. During his submissions  Mr  Saunders  maintained  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in failing  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  its
    findings. We reject this submission.

15. Neither the Secretary of State's pleaded grounds, nor  the  submissions
    of Mr Saunders, sought to  highlight  any  particular  feature  of  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that it was said ought to  have
    led it to doubt the truthfulness of the claimant's assertions of  fact,
    save that it was observed that the claimant failed to produce  evidence
    to corroborate his account.

16. The First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to  provide  reasons  for  its
    conclusions on the central issues on which the appeal  was  determined.
    Its reasons need not be extensive if the  decision  as  a  whole  makes
    sense and the losing party can ascertain  why  they  lost.  Even  if  a
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  of  law
    because the requirements to give adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the
    Upper Tribunal would not normally set aside  such  decision  where  (i)
    there has been no misdirection of law or (ii) the fact-finding  process
    cannot be  criticised,  unless  the  conclusions  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal drew from the primary data before it were not reasonably  open
    to it [Shizad (sufficiency of reasons; set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085].

17. In the instant appeal the First-tier Tribunal came to  its  conclusions
    having considered the entirety of the documentary  evidence  before  it
    [11] and having heard the  claimant  give  lengthy  and  detailed  oral
    testimony, including evidence adduced under  cross-examination  by  the
    Secretary of State's representative [12 - 25].  It  is  not  said  that
    there were serious inconsistencies in the claimant's evidence, or  that
    the assertions he made were wholly implausible such that they were  not
    capable of belief. Although  the  claimant  did  not  produce  evidence
    directly corroborating his account, he did  produce  medical  evidence,
    including a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Lavender, which,  as  the
    tribunal identified, was consistent with the account he gave.

18. In our view the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find  the  claimant
    to be a witness of truth, indeed it is difficult to see that  it  could
    have found otherwise on the available  evidence.  Having  done  so  the
    tribunal was entitled to come to the conclusions of fact challenged  in
    paragraph 2, 3, 4 and 13 of the grounds. Insofar  as  those  paragraphs
    assert that the tribunal ought to have come to alternative conclusions,
    such a challenge amounts  to  no-more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    tribunal's findings. We do not  accept  the  tribunal's  findings  were
    perverse and consequently any challenge brought  in  relation  to  them
    must fail.

19. Turning to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  treatment  of  the  claimant's
    medical conditions, the Secretary  of  State  does  not  challenge  the
    tribunal's acceptance of Dr Lavender's evidence as to claimant's mental
    health problems [29], nor was the claimant's addiction to Class A drugs
    in dispute.

20. The Secretary of State's submits that the tribunal's  conclusion,  that
    the facilities available in the United Kingdom to assist  the  claimant
    with his health issues are better than those available in  Latvia,  was
    inadequately reasoned and wrong. As an alternative,  the  Secretary  of
    State asserts that the First-tier Tribunal misdirected  itself  in  law
    when taking into account the lack of  medical  care  available  to  the
    claimant in Latvia; relying when  doing  so  on  the  decisions  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
    279 and GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases)  India  [2012]  UKUT.  She
    submits that it is established principle that there is no obligation on
    the United Kingdom to provide those liable to deportation with  medical
    treatment that is lacking in their home countries (as per N v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2005] 2 AC 296)

21. The pleaded grounds also  direct  the  reader's  attention  to  lengthy
    extracts from a report of 27  May  2013,  relating  to  drug  treatment
    facilities in Latvia, authored by the European  Monitoring  Centre  for
    Drugs and Drug Addiction (EMCDDA). This report was not before the First-
    tier Tribunal in its full form, but was summarised within a Home Office
    Country of  Origin  Information  Response,  dated  29  May  2013  ('COI
    report').

22. The quoted passages indicate that addiction treatments  in  Latvia  are
    generally state funded, although there are  also  private  institutions
    proving  such  treatment;  that  there  are  41  outpatient   addiction
    specialist  treatment  institutions  as  well  as  inpatient  treatment
    available in specialised psychiatric hospitals, regional  multi-profile
    hospitals and other medical institutions. Two  specialised  psychiatric
    centres in Latvia provide long-term medical rehabilitation. Since  2010
    nine opioid maintenance treatment  offices,  in  five  cities,  operate
    multi-disciplinary rehabilitation teams providing methadone maintenance
    treatment. Opioid substitution treatment is also available  within  the
    Latvian prison system.

23. The First-tier Tribunal took into account the May 2013 COI report  when
    coming to its conclusions [9 & 11]. It did not proceed, as  appears  to
    be the premise behind the Secretary of State's grounds,  on  the  basis
    that the claimant would not have access to relevant medical  facilities
    in Latvia  but  rather  that  there  are  'better'  medical  facilities
    available in the United Kingdom for treating his medical condition as a
    whole.

24. The claimant's medical requirements are not restricted to his need  for
    treatment for his drug  dependency.  The  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be viewed as a whole and in particular in the context  of
    its acceptance of Dr Lavender's evidence that (i) the claimant has Post
    Traumatic Stress Disorder and (ii) deporting him to Latvia  would  lead
    to a deterioration in his  mental  illness.  When  looked  at  in  this
    context  it cannot be said that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    were inconsistent with the evidence referred to  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds, nor did Mr Saunders draw our attention  to  any  other
    evidence that could be said caste doubt on the lawfulness of the First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion. We find such conclusions were open  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

25. As to the Secretary of State's alternative submission, the cases  cited
    in the grounds are of no import on the facts on the instant appeal, and
    her reliance on the  submission  derived  from  the  decision  in  N  v
    Secretary of State is entirely misplaced.

26. Neither of the cited cases, nor the decision in N v Secretary of State,
    considers removal/deportation in a European  Union  (EU)  law  context.
    This  is  significant  given  that  consideration  of  the   issue   of
    proportionality, when removal is of an EU citizen within the EU, has an
    entirely different emphasis;  the  decision  maker  being  required  to
    consider not only the interests of the United Kingdom but also  of  the
    European Union as a whole (Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA Civ 1199. This,  of  itself,  is  sufficient  to
    dispose of the Secretary of State's grounds pleaded in this regard.

27. In any event, neither of the cited authorities provides support for the
    contention that the lack of "equivalent medical care[1]" in the country
    to which a person is to be removed  is  an  irrelevant  matter  in  the
    consideration of proportionality, even in a pure article 8 context, nor
    do they seek to restrict its relevance to only to  circumstances  where
    "an individual's personal ties to the UK have a direct bearing on their
    prognoses[2]" (see for example paragraph 23 of judgment of Moses LJ  in
    MM).

28. Under regulation 21(6) of the 2006 Regulations, the decision  maker  is
    required  to  take   into   account   various   considerations.   These
    considerations are not expressed as an exhaustive list and in our  view
    regulation 21(6) is wide enough to include within it a consideration of
    the availability of relevant medical care in a persons  EU  country  of
    origin.

29. In our conclusion, when looked at as a whole, the reasons given by  the
    First-tier Tribunal for allowing the claimant's appeal pursuant to  the
    2006 Regulations are adequate, clear and cogent. We do not  accept  the
    tribunal took into account any irrelevant matters, neither did it  fail
    to take into account any matters of relevance. Whilst we may  not  have
    to come to same conclusion had we been required to determine the appeal
    de novo for ourselves, we are in no doubt that the First-tier  Tribunal
    were entitled to come to the conclusion it did. It is not our  function
    to replace the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions with those of our own,
    unless we first find  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  erred  in  a
    material manner such that its  determination  is  required  to  be  set
    aside. That is not the case in the instant appeal and  its  conclusions
    made in relation to the 2006 Regulations must stand.

30. As regards article  8  ECHR,  we  need  say  no  more  than  given  the
    tribunal's findings made in  relation  to  the  2006  Regulations,  its
    conclusion on the article 8 grounds was inevitable.



Decision

For the reasons given above we find that the  determination  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal does not contain an error on a  point  of  law  such  that  it
ought to be set aside and, consequently, direct that it shall stand.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 9 October 2013


                           -----------------------
[1] Paragraph 6 of the Secretary of State's grounds.
[2] Paragraph 8 of the Secretary of State's grounds.

