

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 January 2016                       |On 15 March 2016                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rui Barbosa
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:         Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

For the respondent:        Mr M Mukulu of Counsel, instructed by RBS
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
   decision to remove him to Portugal, his  country  of  origin,  under  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).   The
   claimant is a citizen of Portugal and thus an EEA citizen.

2.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  permanent
   residence in the United Kingdom by 2008, but  by  reason  of  his  prison
   sentence, contended that the  'imperative  grounds'  protection  was  not
   available to this appellant because he could not show 10 years' residence
   in accordance with the Regulations, immediately preceding the decision of
   the respondent to make a deportation order on 28 May 2015.

Background

3. The claimant came to the United Kingdom with his  mother  in  1999,  aged
   about 7.  She had left Portugal and travelled first to Spain, where  they
   spent about 5 years, and then travelled on to  the  United  Kingdom.  The
   claimant does not recall, but his mother  does,  that  they  returned  to
   Portugal for a time before making the journey to the United Kingdom.

4. The claimant's father, and his step-father, were abusive to him  and  his
   mother.  The claimant's principal language now is English.  He claims not
   to speak Portuguese. He is dyslexic and has never  learned  to  read  and
   write in Portuguese.   He has very little ability to read  and  write  in
   English either.

5. In 2000, when he was  9  years  old,  the  claimant  was  diagnosed  with
   Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). He  has  also  developed
   trichotillomania, which  causes  him  to  pull  out  his  hair.   He  has
   contracted Hepatitis B. While  in  prison,  the  claimant  was  monitored
   hourly because he is known to have thoughts of self-harm, although  there
   is no evidence that he has acted upon them.

6. The claimant's history after coming to the United Kingdom was an  unhappy
   one: his relationship with his mother was difficult, because of  her  own
   difficulties, including  her  difficulties  with  his  step-father.   The
   claimant was a looked-after child who lived in various care  homes.  Much
   of the documentary evidence to establish whether  he  was  in  education,
   where he was living, and what he was doing, and in particular, whether he
   remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  during  this  period,  is  no  longer
   available.

7. By 2007, his criminal history began and he was excluded from school.   He
   became a Kids Company client. He received a caution in early  2007,  when
   he was 15.  In August 2007, he was convicted of  destroying  or  damaging
   property and battery, and received a Referral Order.  In  November  2007,
   he was convicted of having an offensive weapon in  a  public  place,  and
   breach of his Referral Order.  He was made the subject of  a  Supervision
   Order. In March  2008,  the  claimant  was  convicted  of  breaching  his
   Supervision Order.

8. In January 2009, when he was 16 years old, the claimant was convicted  of
   common assault and sentenced to a community punishment  and  a  Community
   Rehabilitation Order.  He was using drugs.  In October 2009, the claimant
   was convicted of robbery and sentenced to a Community Order. In September
   2010,  he  was  convicted  of  failure  to  comply  with  his   Community
   Rehabilitation Order.  That was his last juvenile offence.

9. The claimant's adult offending began in March 2011 with a conviction  for
   breach of his Youth Rehabilitation Order.  In June 2011, he was convicted
   of travelling on the railway without payment of the fare, and also  on  a
   separate occasion, of handling stolen goods.  In November  2011,  he  was
   convicted of possession of a controlled drug (cannabis).  He  spent  time
   at Feltham Young Offenders Institution (Feltham YOI).

10. In November 2012, now age 19, he was convicted of  burglary  and  theft,
   and received a  suspended  sentence.  In  March  2013,  age  20,  he  was
   convicted of  breach  of  a  non-molestation  order  and  harassment,  in
   relation to his then partner.  He  was  still  being  supported  by  Kids
   Company, but by now was living in a chaotic personal situation.

11. On 30 July 2014 the  claimant  was  convicted  of  the  index  offences,
   comprising 4 counts of domestic burglary and theft,  and  two  additional
   counts, one of making false representations for gain, and one of  failure
   to comply with 3 suspended sentences (at a time when  he  stated  he  was
   homeless). The claimant's account is that  all  of  these  offences  were
   committed to fundamental his escalating drug use.  He  was  sentenced  at
   Southwark Crown Court on 17 September 2014 to  30  months'  imprisonment,
   credit being given for an early guilty plea.

12. On 28 May 2015, the respondent made the decision  to  deport  him  under
   the Regulations.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant began  using  drugs  age
   9, just 2 years after arriving in the United Kingdom, and that he  became
   a looked-after child when he was 14, because his  step-father,  like  his
   natural father, was hitting the claimant and beating his mother.  He  had
   visited Portugal only once in 16 years, for a brief holiday.   He  has  a
   grandmother there, but she is old and lives in a care home.

14.  His  maternal  uncle  is  still   based   in   Portugal   but   travels
   internationally: the uncle is away from Portugal so often that  he  rents
   properties when he returns  there.   There  was  no  guarantee  that  his
   maternal uncle would be prepared to assist an  estranged  nephew  with  a
   troubled past.   The claimant does not know him.

15. At the hearing in October 2015, the claimant's mother said that she  was
   prepared to offer him a home  when  he  is  released  until  he  can  get
   accommodation of his own. I noted that at the end of the hearing when his
   mother spoke to the claimant  who  was  in  the  dock,  the  conversation
   between them was in Portuguese.

16. The claimant claimed to have converted to Islam which  had  brought  him
   peace, but the First-tier Tribunal found that no evidence to support  the
   conversion had been provided.   He said he had a partner, but no  partner
   attended the hearing and there was no supporting  evidence  from  such  a
   person before the First-tier Tribunal.

17. The claimant's evidence was that, since going to prison, he had  stopped
   using drugs and was taking courses with a view to obtaining employment on
   release.

18. The First-tier Tribunal considered  the  claimant's  offending  history,
   and an OASys report dated 1 June 2015.  It found that  the  claimant  was
   entitled to the highest level of protection from removal under Regulation
   21(4) (the 'imperative grounds' protection level) because he had  accrued
   10 years' residence in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
   Regulations before the decision to deport him in May 2015.  The  claimant
   had been in the United Kingdom for 10 years by 2009, 6 years  before  the
   decision to deport.

19. The First-tier Tribunal then reviewed the  decisions  of  the  Court  of
   Justice of the European Union in  Land  Baden-Wurttemburg  v  Tsakouridis
   (European citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-145/09,  PI  v  Oberburgermeisterin
   der Stadt Remscheid [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC), Essa v  Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1 and MC (Essa principles recast)
   Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520 (IAC), directing itself that it should  assess
   the relative prospects of  rehabilitation  in  Portugal  and  the  United
   Kingdom.  It concluded that the prospects  were  greater  in  the  United
   Kingdom because of the support from his  mother,  partner,  and  offender
   supervisor.  The Kids Company support was no longer available because the
   charity had closed down. The  claimant  had  mental  health  and  housing
   support, and his mother had now offered to accommodate him.

20. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  'imperative  grounds'  standard
   was not met and that deportation of the claimant  to  Portugal  would  be
   unlawful.  The appeal was allowed under the Regulations and no  anonymity
   direction was made.

Permission to appeal

21. The  Secretary  of  State  appealed.  She  argued  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had misdirected itself  in  applying  Regulation  21(4)  to  the
   claimant's circumstances and in particular in failing properly  to  apply
   the decisions of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Land Baden-
   Wurttemburg v Tsakouridis (European citizenship)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09
   and in Secretary of State for the Home Department v MG (Judgment  of  the
   Court) [2014] EUECJ C-400/12.

22. The Secretary of State contended that the claimant was entitled only  to
   the  intermediate  'serious  grounds'  protection   level   provided   by
   Regulation 21(3) and not the 'imperative  grounds'  level  of  protection
   applied by the First-tier Tribunal because he could not  show  10  years'
   residence in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations,
   immediately before the decision to deport in May 2015. She relied  on  MG
   to support that as the correct approach.

23. The Secretary of State challenged the First-tier Tribunal's approach  to
   Regulation 21(5), having regard to the OASys report which said  that  the
   claimant presented a high risk  of  reoffending  and  a  medium  risk  of
   serious harm if he did reoffend. She  argued  that  there  was  not  much
   evidence of rehabilitation in this case, and that the judge  should  have
   found that the appellant did present a genuine, present and  sufficiently
   serious risk to the fundamental interests of society  such  that  removal
   would be lawful.

24. In relation to the comparative prospects of rehabilitation  in  Portugal
   and the United Kingdom, she relied upon Secretary of State for  the  Home
   Department v Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145, arguing that Portugal as  a
   European Union  Member  State  must  be  considered  to  have  comparable
   rehabilitative provisions to those in the United Kingdom and that even if
   no rehabilitation support  were  available,  that  of  itself  would  not
   normally render deportation disproportionate.  The greater  the  risk  of
   reoffending, the greater the justification for removal  of  the  claimant
   from the United Kingdom.

25. Permission to appeal was granted on the  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   had arguably erred in law in the application of Tsakouridis  and  MG,  in
   not considering that the claimant's imprisonment and offending broke  his
   continuous residence in the United Kingdom, and by failing adequately  to
   address the issue of  the  claimant's  integration  into  United  Kingdom
   society.

Rule 24 Reply

26. The  claimant  submitted  a  Rule  24  Reply.   After  setting  out  the
   procedural history, the claimant at paragraph 6 relied on Tsakouridis and
   noted that the First-tier Tribunal had had regard to his non-existent, or
   at best 'anaemic' connection with Portugal (at [29] in  particular);  his
   residence in the United Kingdom  since  the  age  of  6;  the  claimant's
   inability to speak or read Portuguese and the acceptance that English  is
   his first language; and his acquisition of permanent residence status  in
   the United Kingdom. All of those factors were relevant to the Tsakouridis
   analysis.  The First-tier Tribunal had not overlooked that decision.

27. In relation to the decision of the Court of Justice that the  10  years'
   residence has to be calculated back from  the  date  of  the  deportation
   decision, the claimant argued that the Court of Justice's  decision  must
   be read in the light of Tsakouridis, and that  if  it  is,  the  asserted
   ground becomes unarguable.

28. Regarding rehabilitation, the claimant  contended  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal found that the 'imperative grounds were not made out'  and  that
   the decision should be read as a whole, with particular reference to [33]
   and [23], which should be read together.  On that basis he contended that
   the First-tier Tribunal did not misdirect itself as claimed.

29. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

30. For the Secretary of State, Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of  appeal
   and the  erroneous  failure  to  count  backwards  from  the  deportation
   decision when assessing whether the 'serious grounds' or the  'imperative
   grounds' test should be applied.  He asked me to set aside the First-tier
   Tribunal and remake the decision.

31. At the hearing, Mr Mukulu for the claimant accepted that the wrong  test
   had been applied and that,  having  regard  to  the  Court  of  Justice's
   decision in MG, the claimant was not entitled to the 'imperative grounds'
   level of protection in Regulation 21(4), but only to the middle  'serious
   grounds' level in Regulation 21(3).  He  contended,  however,  that  such
   error was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal and that the First-tier
   Tribunal had given  serious  consideration  to  the  right  of  permanent
   residence acquired by the claimant.

32. The claimant had an uncle who lived in Portugal, he speaks but does  not
   write Portuguese, and he has been in the United Kingdom now for 16 years.
    That was a significant period of residence  and  the  claimant  had  not
   begun offending immediately he left secondary school.  The  threshold  of
   protection for Regulation 21(3) was  high  and  the  Tribunal  could  not
   ignore the period before expulsion was ordered.

33. The claimant had lived in a chaotic situation  throughout  his  time  in
   the United Kingdom.  He spent time in care  and  was  supported  by  Kids
   Company before going to prison.  He had integrated  into  United  Kingdom
   society 'in a different manner' while he was in care  and  could  not  be
   regarded as being on the fringes of society.   The  claimant  would  rely
   upon Essa at [29] and also the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  again  at
   [29].  Mr Mukulu asked me to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

34. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

35. There is now no dispute about the  level  of  protection  applicable  to
   this claimant.  It is that provided by Regulation  21(3)  not  Regulation
   21(4) and accordingly there is an  error  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
   decision.  The decision in Tsakouridis on which the claimant relies is no
   longer relevant since it goes to the calculation of  the  10-year  period
   for 'imperative grounds' protection and that is no longer in  issue.   As
   Mr Mukulu recognised, MG is determinative of that  question  against  the
   claimant.

36. The difference in the two standards is sufficiently  great  that  it  is
   plainly material to the outcome of the appeal. I must therefore  consider
   whether I can remake the decision without the need for a further hearing.
    I have concluded that it would  be  inappropriate  to  do  so  and  that
   further findings of fact may be required, having regard to  the  test  in
   Regulation 21(3).

37. I therefore set aside the decision, which will be remade in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

DECISION

38. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision will be  remade  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

Date:         3 March 2016              Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




