
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00752/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th March 2019                    |On 10th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     E S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant's appeal against deportation under the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2016 was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Law on 10 May
    2018.

2.   The Respondent appealed and Upper Tribunal Judge  Pitt  set  aside  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  decision  in  relation  to  the   assessment   of
    proportionality at paragraph 30  onwards.  Her  decision  is  dated  15
    November 2018 and sets out the Appellant's history  and  background  to
    this appeal.

3.   In summary, the Appellant is a Czech national  born  in  January  1972.
    The Appellant has seventeen convictions  for  twenty  offences  in  the
    Czech Republic between 1988 and  2009.  On  29  February  2009  he  was
    convicted of aiding and abetting robbery and  received  a  sentence  of
    four years' imprisonment.  He came to the UK  after  his  release  from
    prison in January 2013 and continued to commit offences. He received  a
    caution for possession of  a  controlled  drug,  a  caution  for  going
    equipped for theft and shoplifting, and he  was  convicted  of  driving
    whilst disqualified and using a vehicle without insurance  and  ordered
    to pay a fine. On 20 June 2017 he  was  convicted  of  handling  stolen
    goods for which he received a twelve months' community  order.  He  was
    served with notice of liability to deportation on 4 September 2017.

4.   The relevant law is Regulation 27 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016  which
    states:

         'Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security  and
         public health

         27. - (1)     In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an
                   EEA decision taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,
                   public security or public health.

              ...

              (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
                   United  Kingdom  include  restricting  rights   otherwise
                   conferred by these Regulations in order  to  protect  the
                   fundamental interests of society, and  where  a  relevant
                   decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or  public
                   security it must also be taken  in  accordance  with  the
                   following principles-

                   (a) the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                       proportionality;

                   (b)  the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                       personal conduct of the person concerned;

                   (c) the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                       genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                       affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of
                       society, taking into account  past  conduct  of  the
                       person and that the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                       imminent;

                   (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                       which relate to considerations of general prevention
                       do not justify the decision;

                   (e) a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                       themselves justify the decision;

                   (f) the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                       even  in  the  absence  of   a   previous   criminal
                       conviction, provided the grounds are specific to the
                       person.'

5.   When assessing proportionality account must be taken of the age of  the
    person, state of health, family and economic situation  and  length  of
    residence, social and cultural integration and links to the country.

6.   The Appellant came to the UK in 2013 and first came  to  the  attention
    of the authorities in November 2013 when he received a caution. He  has
    been working for some time in local  restaurants  in  Skegness.  He  is
    married to a Czech national and they have two children.  The  Appellant
    attends church in Skegness and one of his children is attending school.
    The Appellant is now 47 years of age having spent the first 40 years of
    his life in the Czech Republic and therefore he has cultural  links  to
    his country of origin. The Appellant's partner is also from  the  Czech
    Republic and they have children born in the UK in  2016  and  in  2013.
    There were two other children in their care  born  to  the  Appellant's
    stepdaughter. It is clear from the evidence that social  services  were
    involved until 2017 with the children as the family were destitute.

7.   The facts relevant  to  the  assessment  under  Regulation  27  are  as
    follows: The Appellant has lived the majority of his life in the  Czech
    Republic having come to the UK in 2013. He has  an  extensive  criminal
    record having seventeen convictions prior to  coming  to  the  UK,  one
    including a sentence of imprisonment for four years, and having several
    cautions and  two  minor  convictions  since  coming  to  the  UK.  The
    Appellant's wife and  children  for  whom  he  is  responsible  in  his
    household are  all  Czech  citizens  and  could  return  to  the  Czech
    Republic.

8.   There was evidence in the preserved findings from  Reverend  Middleton,
    who attended and gave oral evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    that  the  Appellant  was  a  reformed  character  and  his  period  of
    imprisonment in Morton Hall prior to  deportation  had  been  a  wakeup
    call.  Notwithstanding, the First-tier Tribunal  judge's  finding  that
    the Appellant was a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to
    one of the fundamental interests of society was preserved. The  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had achieved a significant degree of  social
    integration by having worked  in  the  UK  and  particularly  from  the
    strength of his association with the  Storehouse  Church  and  numerous
    letters from members of the congregation was not preserved.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant was  the  centre
    of a family unit of seven people including four children none  of  whom
    have any basis for remaining in the UK if the  Appellant  was  deported
    since there was no evidence that any  of  them  are  exercising  Treaty
    rights.

10.  I find that the Appellant is not sufficiently integrated  into  the  UK
    given that he has continued to reoffend. His family have  no  right  to
    reside in the UK and there was no reason to believe that  remaining  in
    the UK will assist his rehabilitation.  The  Appellant's  very  serious
    offences in the past and the  continued  offending  do  not  support  a
    finding that the Appellant's rehabilitation was more likely in  the  UK
    than in the Czech Republic.

11.  Having regard to paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 the Appellant is a  genuine,
    present and  sufficiently  serious  threat.  There  was  no  additional
    evidence before me, the Appellant having failed to submit  any  further
    evidence or to  attend  the  hearing,  to  take  into  account  in  the
    proportionality assessment.

12.  The Appellant has a long history  of  offending  including  dishonesty,
    possession and supply of drugs, and robbery. He has continued to offend
    whilst in the  UK.  He  can  speak  English,  has  a  history  of  some
    employment and the support of community members. There was insufficient
    evidence before me to show that the Appellant  would  be  discriminated
    against  as  a  gypsy.  Notwithstanding  the  evidence  from   Reverend
    Middleton that he has had 'a wakeup call' the  Appellant's  deportation
    was proportionate taking into  account  all  the  facts  of  the  case.
    Accordingly, I find that the Appellant's deportation is justified under
    Regulation 27(5) and I dismiss his appeal against deportation.

Notice of decision

The  Appellant's  appeal  against  deportation  is   dismissed   under   the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 8 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
