
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
DA/00264/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                  |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 20th September 2018            |      On 18th October 2018        |
|                                        |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MR GENADJIS AGAFONOVS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kempton allowing an appeal by Mr
      Genadjis Agafonovs (hereinafter referred to as "the claimant") against
      deportation under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2016.

   2. The claimant was born on 12 October 1970 and is a citizen of Latvia.
      He came to the UK in November 2008 and was joined by his wife.  The
      couple have one son together, born in 2010.  The claimant's wife has a
      child aged 17 from a previous relationship.

   3. The claimant's most recent conviction is dated 15th September 2017 and
      was for threatening or abusive behaviour and breach of a condition not
      to approach a particular person, namely his wife.  The claimant was
      sentenced to imprisonment for six months and after he served his
      sentence he was transferred to immigration detention, where he
      remains.

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant has
      neither permanent residence under the EEA Regulations nor residence of
      ten years' duration.  The Judge was not, however, satisfied that
      claimant is a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the
      public in the UK to justify deportation.

   5. The Secretary of State was given permission to appeal primarily on the
      basis that the judge arguably failed to give sufficiently clear and
      cogent reasons as to why the public interest in the deportation of the
      claimant was not made out.

   6. At the hearing before us Mrs O'Brien addressed us on the Secretary of
      State's grounds of appeal.  She submitted that the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal had not properly engaged with the claimant's past
      offending.  The judge had disregarded past offences and minimised the
      most recent offences.  She did not apply the considerations in
      Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations and did not engage with any
      prospects of rehabilitation.  The judge did not properly consider the
      public interest and the protection of the public.

   7. For the claimant Mr Winter referred us to his section 24 response.
      This maintained that any alleged errors of law in the judge's decision
      amounted to no more than a disagreement with her findings.  The judge
      was entitled to find that the Secretary of State had taken a
      disproportionate view of the claimant's earliest conviction, which was
      a conviction in 1998 for robbery committed in Russia.  The judge was
      entitled to take into account the background to the offences and, in
      particular, the claimant's concern to maintain contact with his son.
      The judge explained in clear terms why the claimant won his appeal.
      Extensive reasons were not required where the decision as a whole made
      sense having regard to the material accepted.  The findings made were
      reasonably open to the judge and there was no misdirection of law.
      The judge explained why the Russian conviction was not sufficient to
      justify deportation.  The judge took into account the domestic
      violence, the limited evidence regarding the best interests of the
      child and accepted that the claimant had not established permanent
      residence.

Error of law

   8. In our view the decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      contains a number of errors, although Mr Winter may have some
      justification in arguing not all of these are material.  At paragraph
      25, in particular, the judge sets out several reasons for finding that
      the claimant is not a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
      to justify his deportation.  One of these, to which the Secretary of
      State drew attention in the application for leave to appeal, is that
      the claimant's offences in the UK "are matters which have evolved
      generally in a domestic setting primarily through alcohol intake and a
      break down in the relationship between him and his partner."

   9. As the Secretary of State pointed out, the claimant's criminal record
      specifies certain offences as subject to a domestic abuse aggravator
      or a child aggravator.  While at paragraph 25 the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal states that she does not seek to minimise these offences
      that appears to be precisely what she has done.  Indeed, although she
      records at paragraph 2 of her decision that the claimant was sentenced
      to 6 months' imprisonment in October 2017, she omitted to take account
      of a sentence of 80 days' imprisonment imposed in December 2016.
      Furthermore the judge appears to have taken no account of the number
      of occasions on which the claimant has been found guilty of breaching
      a court order. In 2012 the claimant was convicted of two counts of
      failing to comply with conditions of bail.  In 2016 he was again
      convicted of failing to comply with conditions of bail.  In 2017 he
      was convicted of failing to comply with a condition not to approach
      his former partner.

  10. In our view the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard
      to the repeated conduct of the claimant in breaching court orders.
      The nearest the judge comes to commenting on this is to state at
      paragraph 23 that since he has been detained the claimant appears not
      to have breached the order to refrain from contacting his ex-partner.
      This hardly seems to us grounds for disregarding the claimant's
      previous breaches of court orders.  In relation to this conduct of the
      claimant the judge erred in law by failing to have regard to relevant
      considerations and failing to give adequate reasons.

  11. The Secretary of State further maintained that the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal erred in her approach to the claimant's 1998 conviction
      for robbery in Russia.  At paragraph 25 the judge stated that the
      claimant "has tholed his assize in connection with the Russian robbery
      charge."  She then stated that he has not committed any such offences
      again and that in the UK his conviction would be regarded as spent.

  12. Before us Mr Winter acknowledged that a prison sentence exceeding 9
      years would not be regarded as spent under the Rehabilitation of
      Offenders Act.  The judge erred in stating that it would.  While the
      claimant has not again been convicted of robbery he does have a record
      in the UK of conduct involving violence.  The judge does not
      adequately explain why the claimant's violent conduct in the UK is to
      be differentiated from his violent conduct in Russia.  To attempt to
      do so by referring to the claimant's violent conduct in the UK as
      occurring "in a domestic setting" and arising from alcohol intake is
      simply not adequate, particularly when the judge also disregarded the
      claimant's breaches of bail conditions.

  13. The judge also fell into error by referring to the claimant having
      "tholed his assize" on the Russian robbery charge.  Not only was the
      claimant charged with robbery he was convicted.  Any reference, if
      that is what was intended, to the claimant not being subject to double
      jeopardy in respect of this charge is not only incorrect but
      irrelevant.

  14. We conclude that owing to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal having
      made errors of law arising from inadequate reasoning and disregarding
      relevant matters her decision should be set aside and re-made.

Re-making the decision

  15. We informed the parties that the decision was to be set aside and that
      we intended it should be re-made.  Mr Winter suggested that the
      claimant, who was not present at the hearing, should have an
      opportunity to give oral evidence before the decision was re-made.  It
      was pointed out to Mr Winter that no application had been made for
      oral evidence to be heard.  We were not informed of any significant
      issue on which evidence was available which was not already before us.

  16. Mr Winter addressed us on how the decision should be re-made.  He
      submitted that there had been no repetition of the serious offence of
      robbery of which the claimant was convicted in 1998.  The offence was
      not sufficient on its own to justify deportation.  The claimant has
      been in employment in the UK and has a child here.  He had attempted
      to obtain treatment for alcoholism and was taking anti-depressants.

  17. In this appeal it is for the Secretary of State to show that the
      personal conduct of the claimant represents a genuine, present and
      sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
      of society, taking into account past conduct of the person and that
      the threat does not need to be imminent, in terms of regulation 27 of
      the EEA Regulations.  The fundamental interests of society are defined
      in Schedule 1 and include protecting the public and combating the
      effects of persistent offending (particularly in relation to offences,
      which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the
      requirements of regulation 27).  Where an EEA national has received a
      custodial sentence the longer the sentence, or the more numerous the
      convictions, the greater the likelihood that the individual's presence
      in the UK represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
      threat affecting the fundamental interests of society.

  18. Further requirements of regulation 27 state that the deportation
      decision must comply with the principle of proportionality and must be
      based exclusively on the personal conduct of the person concerned.  A
      person's previous criminal convictions will not in themselves justify
      the decision.  Account must be taken of considerations such as age,
      state of health, family and economic situation, length of residence in
      the UK, social and cultural integration into the UK, and the extent of
      the person's links with his country of origin.

  19. We note that the claimant has neither permanent residence in the UK
      nor ten years' residence.  Reference has already been made to the
      various crimes or offences the claimant has committed, starting in
      Russia with the crime of robbery for which he was sentenced in 1998 to
      imprisonment for just over nine years.  Since his arrival in the UK in
      2008 he has offended on a number of occasions, starting with the
      offences of which he was convicted in 2012.  These included offences
      involving domestic violence and breach of bail conditions.  Further
      offences were committed in 2016 and 2017 involving domestic abuse and
      breach of bail conditions.  In December 2016 the claimant was
      sentenced to 80 days' imprisonment for threatening or abusive
      behaviour.  Similar offences in 2017, including breach of a
      restriction order imposed by a court, led to a sentence of
      imprisonment of six months.

  20. The claimant has exhibited a pattern of violent conduct and disregard
      of court orders.  It is not a mitigating factor that his offences in
      the UK appear to have taken place in his home and to have been
      directed against his partner.  The claimant's offences show a
      persistent readiness to resort to violence, arguably rendered even
      more serious by being directed against the safety of a member of his
      family in her own home.

  21. The claimant is of Latvian origin and has spent a comparatively small
      proportion of his life in the UK.  The claimant has a child in the UK
      but, as the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recognised, there is a
      lack of evidence relating to his child's best interests.  The child
      lives with his mother, who is also of Latvian origin and from whom the
      claimant is estranged.  Indeed the claimant is subject to a
      restriction order preventing him for contacting her.  While in prison
      and in detention the claimant has endeavoured to keep in touch with
      his child by weekly or fortnightly telephone calls.  Contact with the
      child by telephone could continue after the claimant is deported.  The
      claimant has had some employment in the UK but this does not seem to
      have been continuous.  There is little evidence of cultural and social
      integration in the UK.

  22. The question of whether there are reasonable prospects of
      rehabilitation is an important consideration in relation to
      proportionality, in terms of MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal
      [2015] UKUT 00520.

  23. The claimant has blamed alcohol abuse for his readiness to resort to
      violence.  He maintained in his evidence to the First-tier Tribunal
      that he was seeking help from a social worker in relation to this.
      There was, however, no evidence from the social worker and no medical
      evidence.  The claimant maintained that he had undertaken a
      rehabilitation programme but this is not wholly supported by
      documentary evidence.  A letter dated 28th August 2018 from HMP
      Addiewell indicates that the claimant was referred for alcohol
      counselling but failed to attend the last of four counselling
      sessions.  He did not attend an alcohol awareness course he was
      offered and did not attend an appointment with the NHS addictions team
      at the prison.  The First-tier Tribunal had before it a certificate
      showing that he had done some vocational training earlier this year
      while in immigration detention.  Although the claimant appears to have
      been concerned to maintain contact with his son, there is little, if
      any, evidence of any reasonable prospects of rehabilitation were the
      appellant to remain in the UK.

  24. Having regard, in particular, to the claimant's persistent offending
      we are satisfied that the claimant's personal conduct represents a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
      fundamental interests of society.  The decision to deport him is
      proportionate, having regard to all the relevant circumstances.

Conclusions

  25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  26. The decision is set aside.

  27. We re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Anonymity

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a direction for anonymity.  We
have not been asked to make such a direction and we are not satisfied that
it would be in the interests of justice to do so.


Fee award (N.B. This is not part of the decision.)

No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award can be made.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
dated 12th October 2018






