
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00525/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 February 2014                             |On 27 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     M E
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Melvin
For the Respondent:    Mr P Jorro

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference the parties are referred  to  hereafter  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal so that M E is the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The appellant appealed the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order dated 1 March 2013 and the appeal was  heard
    by a panel.  In a determination promulgated on  15  November  2013  the
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds under Article  3  ECHR.   An
    anonymity direction was made because the  case  raises  the  issues  of
    possible detriment to the appellant were he eventually to find  himself
    returned to his country of nationality.  Although I was  not  addressed
    on the matter of anonymity I see no reason to depart from the  previous
    direction such that anonymity for this appellant continues.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal the decision.  On a  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal it was found arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal may have made an error of law in failing to give adequate
    reasons for its findings on material  matters.   That  in  turn  raises
    arguable issues as to whether the panel was entitled in  law  to  reach
    the conclusions that it did for the reasons given.  The grounds further
    raise  arguable  issues  as  to  procedural  fairness   that   in   the
    circumstances persuaded the Upper Tribunal Judge that all  the  grounds
    may be argued.

 4. Although not setting out the entire appellant's immigration history  it
    is apparent that his previous claims for asylum had  been  rejected  as
    had his claim under Article 8 ECHR.  The panel at paragraph  9  of  the
    determination recorded that at the hearing the  nature  of  the  issues
    changed substantially.  Counsel on behalf of the appellant did not seek
    to rely on Article 8 but in the light of an expert report from Sheri  J
    Laizer "author and Middle East specialist" counsel argued  that  a  new
    issue that had never been considered was now raised.   This  issue  was
    the significance of the appellant's conviction as a matter relevant  to
    his risk on return combined with his previously accepted membership  of
    HADEP.  Those factors, it was submitted, would give rise to a real risk
    of treatment contrary to Article  3  and,  in  particular,  torture  on
    return  to  Turkey.    The  appeal  proceeded  thereafter  by  way   of
    submissions solely on the basis of the Article 3 claim.

 5. It is argued that the respondent should have been given the opportunity
    to review her decision in light of the new issue raised.  The  findings
    of the report were not before the respondent when the decision was made
    and, whilst the Tribunal is entitled to consider  evidence  at  appeal,
    given the severity of the appellant's criminality it  would  have  been
    "in the interests of equity" to allow the respondent the opportunity to
    consider whether her decision may have constituted a breach  under  the
    ECHR in light of the new evidence produced.

 6. I note that there was no request  for  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
    respondent the opportunity to consider her position again regarding the
    Article 3  issue.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  therefore  that  the
    respondent's representative was not taken by surprise as  she  did  not
    deem it appropriate or necessary to seek an adjournment.

 7. I would need a great deal of persuasion by way of cogent argument  that
    the panel should have raised the matter of an adjournment  of  its  own
    volition.  This is not a case that so obviously required an adjournment
    in all the circumstances.  The respondent was properly represented  and
    the representative would have been entirely familiar,  or  should  have
    been entirely familiar, with all the history of this appellant and  his
    background  circumstances.   Furthermore,  one  course  open   to   the
    respondent would have been for the  decision  appealed  against  to  be
    withdrawn.

 8. The panel found the expert report very persuasive  in  showing  a  real
    risk to the appellant of treatment contrary to Article 3 if he were  to
    be returned to Turkey.  The representative for the  respondent  in  her
    submissions as recorded at paragraph 12 of the determination took issue
    with many of the matters raised in the report. Nothing revealed in  the
    determination shows that there was a total inequality of representation
    such that is suggestive of unfairness to either party  and  so  I  find
    that there is nothing in the procedural unfairness point that has  been
    raised.

 9. The panel was referred to and considered the country guidance  case  of
    IK (Turkey) CG [2004] UKIAT 312, the unreported  determination  of  the
    IAT in the case of Eris determined in 2004, and the expert evidence  of
    Sheri J Laizer.  As to  the  unreported  determination  permission  was
    granted in accordance  with  the  Practice  Direction  for  considering
    citation of unreported determinations and was found by the panel to  be
    of assistance. The reason given  was  that  the  respondent  sought  to
    attack the veracity and weight  of  the  expert  evidence  of  Sheri  J
    Laizer.  The case of Eris  had  a  similar  factual  scenario  and  the
    decision cited expert evidence from Dr Mark Galeotti  who  is  said  in
    that determination to be a highly respected expert whose expertise  was
    not challenged at that time.

10. As to the manner  in  which  the  panel  considered  the  evidence  and
    reasoned its findings and conclusions the submissions of the respondent
    both in the grounds seeking permission to appeal and in submissions  by
    Mr Melvin before me amount to little more or less than argument.   This
    is a very thorough determination.   The  panel  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant's offence  was  very  serious  (he  received  a  long  prison
    sentence) and the panel  was  entitled  to  rely  heavily  on  Sheri  J
    Laizer's report supported as it is by the  (albeit  now  somewhat  old)
    evidence of Dr Galeotti in the case of  Eris.   The  panel  found  that
    there was a consensus  between  expert  and  objective  material  which
    indicated that the Turkish authorities  would  be  well  aware  of  the
    appellant's background and involvement in organised crime in the UK and
    his conviction for drug  trafficking.   They  give  their  reasons  for
    coming to that conclusion which are wholly rational  and  available  to
    them on the evidence.

11. In all the circumstances I can find no material error  of  law  by  the
    panel either in  its approach or its conclusions.

Decision

12. The decision of the panel that the appeal is allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds under Article 3 therefore stands.

13. The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal continues under
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  for  the
    reason given in paragraph 2 above.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
