
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11th February 2020                |On 3rd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ALLAN DONOVAN ANEGBELE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Marziano, of Counsel, instructed by Weskin
                    Associates Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of France born in 1996. He arrived  in  the
       UK with his parents aged 2 years. His appeal against the decision  to
       deport him under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 as  a  result
       of his having committed criminal offences was allowed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hoffman in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  9th
       October 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  on
       27th November 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the   claimant's
       integration had not been broken  given  his  15  convictions  for  32
       offences and the escalating  severity  of  his  offending,  his  gang
       involvement and the periods of time that he had spent in prison.

Submissions - Error of Law

    3. The Secretary of State argues in summary in the  grounds  of  appeal,
       skeleton argument, and  refined in the oral submissions of Mr  Clarke
       ( who specifically did not rely upon the domestic case law of Binbuga
       (Turkey)  v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551  and  Bossade  (ss   117A-D
       interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT IAC cited in  the  grounds)
       as follows. The finding of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant
       has imperative protection due to having been in the UK for  a  period
       of 10 years prior to his first incarceration errs in law because  his
       integrative links have been broken  by  his  criminal  behaviour  and
       imprisonment during the ten year  period  immediately  prior  to  the
       decision to expel him.

    4.  It  is  found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the   claimant's
       integrative links have been weakened because it is found he has  gang
       affiliations; continues to use drugs; is at high risk of  reoffending
       and a medium risk of harm; fails to  understand  the  impact  of  his
       offending; and  is  disrespectful  of  the  British  justice  system,
       relying particularly on the OASys report.  It  is  concluded  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal however that his period  of  residence  outweighs
       this  and  so  he  still  has  imperative  protection   because   his
       integrative links have not been broken.

    5. The Secretary of State argues that this approach  fails  to  properly
       apply the decision of the Court of Justice of the European  Union  in
       SSHD  v Vomero C424/16, dated 17th April 2018, because  the  findings
       with regard to the nature of his offending, the circumstances of  his
       offending, his behaviour in prison ought to have negatively  informed
       the decision with respect to integration and they did  not;  and  the
       length of residence and  period  of  residence  prior  to  commencing
       offending ought not to have been  treated  as  determinative  of  the
       integrative links remaining, but they were so treated.  It is  argued
       that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal paint a picture only  of
       persistent criminality  interrupting  and  breaking  the  integrative
       links of this claimant. There is no evidence set out of any  positive
       links to the UK, even the account of his schooling is simply  of  him
       being expelled for having a knife. It is argued that  ultimately  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore perverse.

    6. In a rule 24  notice  and  oral  submissions  from  Mr  Marziano,  in
       summary, the claimant argues  as  follows.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
       found that he had accrued 10 years continuous  residence  in  the  UK
       prior to his first period of  imprisonment  in  2013,  based  on  his
       father's work and his attendance at school, see paragraph 49  of  the
       decision. It was also found that he had no ties with France  bar  his
       nationality and he could not speak the language at  paragraph  51  of
       the decision. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  his  integrating
       links with the UK had been disrupted but not broken at paragraph  27,
       and so he could only be deported if there were shown to be imperative
       grounds  of  public  security.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found,  at
       paragraph 53 of the decision, that although his conduct in the UK was
       appalling, there  were  no  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
       justifying his deportation and thus his appeal succeeded.

    7. The only question in the appeal is whether it was properly found that
       he had those integrative links  with  the  UK  given  his  length  of
       residence and conduct. The key relevant  cases  are,  SSHD  v  Vomero
       [2018] EUECJ C424/16, SSHD v MG (Portugal) [2014] EUECJ C-400/12  and
       Tsakouridis (European Citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-145/09.

    8. MG (Portugal) specifically holds that the fact of having been in  the
       UK for 10 years prior to imprisonment may be a consideration relevant
       to whether integrative links have been broken. However, it  is  clear
       that the relevant ten year period  is  the  10  years  prior  to  the
       expulsion  decision and whether the person was  genuinely  integrated
       in the host member state during that  period,  see  Tsakouridis,  but
       this case also makes it clear  at  paragraph  33  that  the  test  of
       whether integrative  links  are  maintained  is  largely  focused  on
       residence in the host member state and  whether  there  are  absences
       from the host member state. Although there may be other  factors  the
       Directive is silent on what  they  may  be,  although  Article  28(1)
       suggests that age, length of residence and ties  to  the  country  of
       origin may be useful.

    9. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal  therefore  made  a  lawful
       decision with respect to the retention of integrative links as it was
       highly relevant to take into account the fact that the  claimant  had
       been in the UK since the age of 2 years and lived  here  ever  since;
       that he had no ties to France and that he had  ten  years  continuous
       residence prior to his first period of  imprisonment.  It  was  clear
       that the decision was made in the knowledge  that  the  claimant  had
       escalating serious offending, that there was a likelihood he had been
       involved with a gang and that the OASys report stated that he  had  a
       high risk of non-violent reoffending and a medium risk of harm to the
       public. Following Tsakouridis however, who was  himself  a  convicted
       drug dealer,  the  decisive  criterion  in  deciding  if  someone  is
       integrated is the period of residence in the host member state.

   10. With respect to  Vomero , it is  argued  that  all  it  does  is  add
       further detail about the other matters  that  might  be  relevant  to
       breaking integration in the context of criminal sentences but it does
       not affect the overriding importance of length of residence and  lack
       of absences from the host state in assessing whether the claimant had
       maintained his integrative links with the UK. Mr Maziano argued  that
       there was a danger that the highest level of protection  would  never
       be applicable if this were not the case. He further pointed out  that
       the appellant in Vomero had come to the UK as an  adult,  making  the
       other possible factors breaking his integration more relevant.

   11. Mr Maziano accepted that there was no challenge in a cross appeal  or
       in the rule 24 notice to the lack of any positive  findings  of  fact
       with respect to the claimant's time in the UK prior to  his  criminal
       record commencing. He accepted therefore that there would be no  need
       for any further hearing given the findings of the First-tier Tribunal
       as if  I  found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  the
       interpretation of integrative links in the  way  argued  for  by  the
       Secretary of  State  he  accepted  that  the  appeal  would  fall  be
       dismissed.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   12. The First-tier Tribunal sets out a detailed analysis of the  evidence
       on  the  claimant's  likelihood  of  committing  further   crime   at
       paragraphs 36 to 44 starting from the point of the OASys  report  and
       including all other evidence on the issue. It is found,  in  summary,
       that on the balance of probabilities the claimant was  involved  with
       gangs,  and  that  there  was  nothing  which  displaced  the   OASys
       conclusion that the claimant posed a high risk of reoffending  and  a
       medium risk of harm if allowed to remain in the UK.

   13. When considering the claimant's residence at paragraph 45  to  49  of
       the decision it is clearly correctly  understood  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that the ten year period is counted back from  the  date  of
       the removal decision (November 2018). It is clear that  the  claimant
       had been in the UK for this period of time, and was detained on  four
       occasions as a result of his criminal behaviour.  It  is  found  that
       these periods of custody interrupted his continuous residence. It  is
       then noted that the evidence shows that the  claimant  had  residence
       for a period of ten years prior to the  claimant's  first  period  of
       imprisonment,  as  this  was  relevant  to   deciding   whether   the
       integrative links with the UK had been broken by way  of  an  overall
       assessment, applying MG (Portugal).

   14. At paragraphs 50 to 54 the First-tier Tribunal applies the  facts  of
       this case to the key issue: whether  the  integrative  links  of  the
       claimant are broken.  In  concluding  that  the  claimant  still  has
       integrative links with the UK significant weight  is  placed  on  the
       fact that the claimant has lived in the UK since  he  was  two  years
       old; that he had no ties with France and could not speak  the  French
       language; and that he had ten years continuous residence before being
       imprisoned. On this basis and despite the fact that it was  found  he
       had achieved little with his studies or work, had a poor relationship
       with his family and that no partner or friends had given evidence  on
       his behalf it  was  found  he  was  entitled  to  imperative  grounds
       protection against deportation and that his offending  did  not  meet
       this high threshold.

   15. It is clear that a detailed consideration of the case of Vomero  must
       inform my consideration of the question as to whether the  First-tier
       Tribunal has reached  an  irrational  conclusion  that  the  claimant
       maintains integrative links.

   16. As a preliminary matter it is of relevance that Vomero finds, relying
       on Onuekwere C-378/12, that "integration, which is a precondition  of
       the acquisition of the right of  permanent  residence  laid  down  in
       Article 16(1) of Directive 2004/38, is based not only on  territorial
       and temporal factors but also on qualitative  elements,  relating  to
       the level of integration in the host Member State". I find that  this
       statement is supportive of the fact that it was right for the  First-
       tier Tribunal to have found that the claimant started from a position
       of integration in the UK despite the lack of  any  positive  findings
       with regard to his pre-imprisonment period of  residence  in  the  UK
       because it is accepted by  all  that  he  had  acquired  a  right  of
       permanent residence.

   17. In Vomero the Court of Justice of the European Union places  specific
       reliance on the case of Tsakouridis which is found at paragraph 45 to
       mean that an expulsion decision must: "take account in particular  of
       considerations such as how long the individual  has  resided  on  its
       territory, his or her age,  state  of  health,  family  and  economic
       situation, social and cultural integration into the host Member State
       and the extent of his or her links with the country  of  origin".  At
       paragraph 64 of Vomero the Court again relies  upon  Tsakouridis  and
       states that: "the fact remains that the decisive  criterion  for  the
       grant of the enhanced protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a)  of
       Directive 2004/38 is whether  the  Union  citizen  with  a  right  of
       permanent residence in the host Member State, within the  meaning  of
       Article 16 and Article 28(2) of that Directive, has, as  required  by
       Article 28(3), resided in the Member State for the 10 years preceding
       the expulsion decision". At paragraphs 67 and 68 it is noted that the
       Directive is silent  on  "the  circumstances  which  are  capable  of
       interrupting the period of 10 years' residence for  the  purposes  of
       the acquisition of the right to that enhanced protection",  but  that
       Tsakouridis has held that what is needed is an  "overall  assessment"
       of the person's situation at the time of the expulsion decision.  The
       Court in Vomero at paragraph 69 finds  that  the  national  authority
       must consider in particular the duration and nature of  any  absences
       from the host state. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has properly
       reflected this approach in its decision by  giving  very  significant
       weight in its decision making to the ten year period of residence and
       lack of  absences  from  the  UK,  whilst  carrying  out  an  overall
       assessment of the claimant's situation.

   18. At  paragraph  70  of  Vomero  the  court  considers  the  impact  of
       imprisonment  and  finds  that  whilst  in   principle   periods   of
       incarceration interrupt the continuity  of  residence  an  assessment
       must be made as to  whether  imprisonment  breaks  integrative  links
       previously forged, and thus periods of imprisonment must  be  put  in
       the context of all other relevant factors including residence  for  a
       period of 10 years prior to imprisonment. At paragraph 71  the  Court
       makes the point that particularly in the circumstances of someone who
       has  resided  for  ten  years   prior   to   commencing   criminality
       imprisonment  cannot  be  seen   as   "automatically   breaking   the
       integrative links" as that would "deprive the provision  of  much  of
       its practical effect, since an expulsion measure will most  often  be
       adopted precisely because of the conduct of the person concerned that
       led to his conviction and  detention."  If  a  person  is  "genuinely
       rooted in  the  society  of  that  State"  then  it's  unlikely  that
       integrative links are broken by imprisonment, although the nature  of
       the offence and behaviour of the person in prison are  relevant,  see
       paragraphs 72 to 74. Again, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  has
       followed the guidance set out in  Vomero.   I  find  that  given  the
       starting  position  of  integration  that  the  grant  of   permanent
       residence gives the claimant, along  with  his  ten  year  period  of
       residence in the UK prior to any imprisonment, his lack  of  absences
       from the host state and lack of any contact with France that  it  was
       within the range of rational options open to the First-tier  Tribunal
       to conclude that ultimately these factors favoured a finding  of  the
       claimant's integrative links to the UK not having  been  broken  even
       given the fact  that  the  overall  holistic  assessment  produced  a
       considerable number of negative findings relating  to  the  offending
       and the claimant's behaviour in prison.




  Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal
       of the claimant on EU grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 18th February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

