
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00674/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2013                             |On 6 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ABDUL RAUF KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr R. Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Osmans
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The claimant was born in Pakistan on 1 August 1970.  He  first  arrived
    in the United Kingdom in August 2001, on a visit visa.  He was  granted
    further visit visas over the ensuing years and in November 2008 applied
    for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  refugee  from  Pakistan,  who
    subsequently was granted British citizenship.   She  and  the  claimant
    have three British citizen children, born in 2001, 2004 and 2006.

2.   Where the claimant's 2008 application for leave to remain as  a  spouse
    was refused, it appears that he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until 2 April 2012 on the basis of his wife's depressive illness
    and to enable him to care for the children.

The claimant's crimes

3.   On 25 November 2011  the  claimant  was  convicted,  following  a  late
    "guilty" plea, at Oxford Crown Court of communicating false information
    with intent.  He was sentenced to three years' imprisonment.   This  is
    what the sentencing judge said to the claimant:-

         "JUDGE KING:  Stand up, please, Abdul Rauf Khan.  Let me explain to
             you the gravity of what you have done.  All this began because
             you had fallen out with some work colleagues.  Thereafter  you
             have  sent  seventy-three  false  letters,  eleven  of   which
             contained clear threats that bombs would explode in  different
             places.  When the first letter that you sent to many different
             organisations did not have the desired effect,  you  increased
             the degree of fraudulence and  threat  behind  those  letters,
             culminating in the false bomb threats.


             This is the harm of what you have done.   First  of  all,  you
             accused some persons who were totally innocent of any kind  of
             bomb threat in the most grave allegations.  We all  know  that
             we are living in an age where there  are  genuine  reasons  to
             have concerns as to our security through terrorist action, and
             you must have known by the nature of the information  you  put
             in the letters that the finger  would  be  firmly  pointed  to
             persons who had originally come from the  Asian  subcontinent,
             thereby wickedly maligning them and increasing the  reason  to
             have a false fear as to any form of bomb terrorist.  You  have
             involved the security services in a vast amount  of  work,  in
             detecting, first of all, whether it  was  true  or  not,  and,
             secondly,  identifying  and  arresting  you.    Those   scarce
             resources should have been properly directed to where the real
             threat was and not your fraudulent and threatening activities.


             You have also involved a number of organisations in having  to
             increase the degree to which  they  are  put  to  expense  and
             effort in  reducing  the  terrorist  threat,  and  the  public
             generally have been put in further fear  for  no  good  reason
             through your actions.  You sent bomb  threat  letters  to  the
             American Embassy, to two Intercontinental Airlines  and  to  a
             number of different police forces.  People who do the kind  of
             thing that you are doing  must  learn  that  they  face  grave
             consequences  when  detected,  to  deter   others   from   the
             stupidity, folly and harm that they are doing, and  to  punish
             you for what you have done.


             I take into account to a minor degree the  depressive  illness
             from which you have suffered, I take into account that you are
             otherwise of good character and I give  you  credit  for  your
             guilty plea, but I should point out to you  it  was  a  guilty
             plea at a late stage,  when  you  knew  the  strength  of  the
             evidence against you, you had put forward a false  story  that
             had already been detected and you were awaiting  trial  within
             the next seven days.  Considering your case, therefore, in the
             light of other regrettably similar cases and apportioning  the
             guilt that you are responsible for, the sentence upon you is a
             sentence of three years' imprisonment."


Deportation

4.   On 15 March 2013 the Secretary of State made  a  deportation  order  in
    respect of the claimant, pursuant to section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007.  In the accompanying decision, the Secretary of State  stated  as
    follows in respect of the claimant's  relationship  with  each  of  his
    children:-

         "It is noted that on your release from custody you returned to  the
         family home and currently reside with [Child].   However  you  were
         incarcerated  from  November  2011  to  March  2013,  a  period  of
         approximately 16 months.  During  this  time  [Child]  has  had  no
         contact with you, as you and your wife decided not to inform her of
         your circumstances.  This has led to [Child] being cared for solely
         by her  mother  with  no  support  from  social  services.   It  is
         therefore considered that whilst there  may  be  some  interference
         with your family life with your [Child] if  you  were  deported  to
         Pakistan, [Child] could remain under the sole care of her mother in
         the event of your deportation.... Such a  course  of  action  would
         allow [Child] to remain in the UK with  her  mother  and  cause  no
         interference with her rights and privileges as  a  British  citizen
         such as access to the National Health Service and the UK  education
         system.  Additionally, your wife could arrange  for  her  and  your
         children to visit you in Pakistan should she wish to do so."


The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The claimant appealed against the making of the deportation  order  and
    on 12 June 2013 his appeal was heard  at  Hatton  Cross  by  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Eldridge and  Mr  S  S  Pursey).   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 19  June  2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal.  The Secretary of State applied  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  determination  and  the
    application was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 11 July 2013.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the claimant and his  wife.
     The wife claimed to suffer from migraine, severe depression and memory
    loss as well as a heart condition: "she can undertake no hard work  and
    had been told she needed to relax"  [27].   She  said  that  "she  took
    medication both for her depression  and  migraine  and  showed  us  two
    different sorts of tablets".  She had  been  given  "medicine  for  her
    heart but now if she was in pain she was told to take  paracetamol  and
    to relax" [30].  Her evidence was that:-

         "She was unfit to work and her husband was not  working.   She  was
         receiving housing benefit and employment support allowance  because
         the doctor had said she was unfit.  Her  heart  condition  had  not
         been diagnosed and they kept doing tests.  Her family had a history
         of heart problems."


7.   Despite all this:-

         "28. In cross-examination she said that her husband had lived  here
             with them as permanently as his visa had allowed.  When he was
             in detention she took the  children  to  school  but  had  not
             always done so.  Now her  husband  did  sometimes.   A  friend
             helps sometimes but mostly her husband did now  he  was  home.
             She had managed with great difficulty when her husband was  in
             prison."


8.   At [48] the Tribunal found as follows:-

         "48. The appellant is not the sole carer  of  any  of  these  three
             children but as we explain  below  we  find  he  does  play  a
             prominent role in their care.  We accept that he was  spending
             as much time with them in this  country  as  his  visas  would
             permit in the years before he gained  discretionary  leave  to
             remain in 2008 and that since he  gained  that  leave  he  has
             lived with them as an active father except when he has been in
             detention.


         49.  We can understand the issue taken by the respondent concerning
             the  lack  of  up-to-date  evidence  of  Mrs  Khan's   medical
             conditions.  We note, however, that  the  Secretary  of  State
             must have been satisfied that her conditions were serious when
             she granted discretionary leave to the appellant for a  period
             of four years to help look after her and more particularly the
             children.   Neither  she  nor  her   husband   was   seriously
             challenged that her depressive illness continued and we saw no
             reason  to  doubt  the  assertion  that  her  health  had  not
             significantly improved in recent years.


         50.  We accept, of course, that for a period of 12 months  she  has
             had to cope with the children alone, whilst her husband was in
             custody.  Additionally, for the remaining six  months  of  his
             detention, he has not been able to be present full-time in the
             house.  Even in the latter months of his term of  imprisonment
             it would seem that he was only spending six  or  seven  nights
             each month at home on release.


         51.  There is relatively little in either bundle of documents  that
             assist us  with  the  progress  and  lives  of  the  children.
             Towards the end of the appellant's bundle there are  a  number
             of reports from school but none of  these  covers  the  period
             after about June 2011.  Up to that date they tend to show that
             the children reported upon were progressing satisfactorily  at
             school and attending regularly.


         52.  There is a little about the  health  problems  that  Mrs  Khan
             experiences and most of the documentation provided is at least
             four years  old,  save  for  documents  from  2011  concerning
             investigations with the gastroenterology Unit.


         53.  A letter from Dr Raju, dated 12 January 2012 states,  however,
             that she suffers from a number of medical conditions  and  was
             referred to hospital to see a consultant cardiologist as  well
             as for gastroenterological problems.  It also states that  she
             has seen a neurologist and declares  that  she  is  unable  to
             work.  The doctor states  that  her  husband  (the  appellant)
             'works and looks after her and their children as  well'.   The
             same letter also refers to the desirability of  him  remaining
             permanently in the country.  A further letter  from  the  same
             doctor, written on 16 April  2013,  makes  many  of  the  same
             points and states 'I was informed that Fouiza could not do any
             house work at all and it is her husband... who works  for  the
             family, who does all the house work and is the one  who  looks
             after the children'.  We have to say that the author  is  only
             repeating the assertions of Mrs Khan and we do not  understand
             how the household was kept going whilst  her  husband  was  in
             detention if she could do no housework and could not care  for
             the children.


         54.  We did not accept that Mrs Khan was incapable of looking after
             the children at all.  She had managed  to  do  so  during  the
             appellant's detention and have done so  alone.   Nevertheless,
             having regard to the previous decision taken by the  Secretary
             of State, such medical evidence as was available  to  and  the
             oral evidence given before us, we were of  the  opinion  that,
             whilst it was not shown there  were  any  positive  issues  as
             regards safeguarding, these three  children  would  be  better
             cared for on a day-to-day basis if their  father  is  able  to
             play the active role he has done since 2008,  except  when  in
             detention, and did as often  as  he  could  before  that.   We
             consider that their lives may be materially easier if there is
             an income coming into the house from paid employment.  This is
             highly unlikely to come from Mrs Khan, whether her husband  is
             in the UK or not.  We do not  under-estimate  that  there  are
             difficulties with the caring role he has to play  but  he  has
             worked before and may well be able to do so again, around  the
             responsibilities he  has  to  the  children.   If  he  cannot,
             because he is removed, there is an  increased  burden  on  the
             State.  We have no doubt that their best interests lie in  his
             remaining in this country.  With a mother who has  significant
             health issues, their welfare would be promoted if their father
             is allowed to remain here."


9.   At [59] the Tribunal noted some comments by the  appellant's  probation
    officer in the letter of 3 May 2013, concerning a  visit  made  to  the
    home of the claimant and his  wife.   The  panel  considered  that  the
    probation officer "re-affirms the account of the  appellant  having  'a
    huge responsibility for the care of the children as well as his  wife'.
    She comments on the benefits for the children's  mental  and  emotional
    wellbeing in the appellant being able to remain in the home".

10.  The Secretary of State's case  is,  in  essence,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for its decision to allow  the
    claimant's appeal against deportation and that it also failed  to  have
    proper regard to the public interest in deportation.  I have considered
    carefully the submissions of Mr Ahmed on behalf  of  the  claimant.   I
    have, however, concluded that the Secretary of  State's  criticisms  of
    the determination are entirely justified and that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.  My reasons are as follows.

The Tribunal's errors of law

11.   The Tribunal's findings regarding the position of the  mother  are,  I
    consider, deeply flawed.  The Tribunal has failed to have any regard at
    all  to  the  significant  matter  that  the  claimant's  family  life,
    including the birth of children, appears to have been  forged  when  he
    was only intermittently present in the United Kingdom, as indicated  in
    the immigration  history  set  out  above  and  also  at  [48]  of  the
    Tribunal's determination.  At [49] the Tribunal chose to  speculate  as
    to the precise reasons underlying the Secretary of State's decision  to
    grant the applicant discretionary leave, based on the condition of  the
    wife, when we do not know the details of what the  Secretary  of  State
    was told at the time.

12.    Overall, the importance attached by the Tribunal  to  the  claimant's
    position as carer for the children sits badly with the  Tribunal's  own
    findings at [52] to [54], concerning  the  problematic  nature  of  the
    evidence concerning the wife, as well as the striking evidence recorded
    at [28], which indicated that the  wife  was  able  to  cope  with  the
    children, with what was plainly only modest outside assistance,  whilst
    the claimant was in prison, for well over a year.

13.  At [59] the Tribunal mischaracterised the  evidence  of  the  probation
    officer.  The purpose of the probation officer's visit  to  the  family
    was to decide whether, for the purposes of the  claimant's  release  on
    licence, he should remain at home living with his family.  It is  plain
    from the short letter that the probation officer based  her  conclusion
    on what she was told by the claimant and  his  wife,  as  well  as  the
    letter from the GP (which the Tribunal  at  [53]  rightly  regarded  as
    problematic).  The probation officer's  conclusions,  that  "there  are
    valid reasons why Mr Khan should remain at home living with his family,
    mainly  to  support  their   mental   and   emotional   wellbeing"   is
    misinterpreted by the Tribunal at [59] as a comment entirely about  the
    mental and emotional wellbeing of the children.  Plainly, it was not.

14.  The probation officer recorded the claimant's "focus" as being "to  get
    back to work  and  to  support  his  family".   This  chimes  with  the
    observations of the Tribunal at [54] of the determination; but I  agree
    with Mr Wilding's submission that this paragraph of  the  determination
    is an instance of what he characterised as the  Tribunal's  search  for
    reasons  not  to  deport  the  appellant.   The  Tribunal   was   there
    speculating on the achievement of an idealised  future,  in  which  the
    claimant was, in some unspecified way, able to work, so as  to  support
    the family, whilst continuing to be the children's "principal carer".

15.   The  reference  to  "principal  carer"   occurs   at   [65]   of   the
    determination, where the Tribunal described the claimant's position  in
    that regard  as  "relatively  unusual  circumstances.   Seldom  is  the
    appellant a carer to the degree this appellant is..." For  anyone  with
    experience  of  this  jurisdiction,  that  is  a   frankly   remarkable
    conclusion, which is, in any event, unreasoned.

16.  There are, thus, significant errors in  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    the Article 8 position of the claimant,  his  wife  and  the  children.
    But, even had there not been such errors, the First-tier Tribunal  also
    fell into legal error in mischaracterising the  nature  of  the  public
    interest,  weighing  in  favour  of  deportation.   At  [61]   of   the
    determination we find this:-

         "We have given strong  regard  to  the  principles  concerning  the
         deterrence of the appellant  and  others  from  committing  further
         offences and the  issues  of  public  condemnation  and  confidence
         stated (sic).  We have  set  them  against  our  finding  that  the
         appellant presents a low risk of re-offending or serious  harm  and
         that he has made good progress in prison and on release."


     The Tribunal's balancing of public condemnation  against  risk  of  re-
    offending is unsanctioned by any legislation or case law.   I  consider
    that it led the Tribunal into serious  error,  in  giving  insufficient
    regard to the public policy of deporting foreign criminals, within  the
    meaning of the 2007 Act, whether or not they pose significant  risk  of
    re-offending.

17.  In so finding, I have had regard to the  fact  that  Tribunal  at  [63]
    specifically noted the then recent judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
    SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and that at [64]  the  Tribunal
    recognised "a strong interest in his  removal",  as  a  result  of  the
    campaign of bomb threats undertaken by the claimant.  Nevertheless, the
    error at [61], together with the other problems I have identified, lead
    me to conclude that the Secretary of State's criticism of [64]  of  the
    determination is more than a disagreement as to  outcome  but,  rather,
    identifies an error of approach.

18.  Indeed, the  First-tier  Tribunal's  referencing  of  SS  (Nigeria)  is
    exiguous.  There is no consideration at all of Laws LJ's findings that,
    where foreign criminals under the 2007 Act rely on the  best  interests
    of a child having British citizenship:

         "48. ... insufficient attention has been paid to the weight  to  be
             attached, in virtue of its origin in  primary  legislation  to
             the policy of deporting foreign criminals.  In Sanade  the  UT
             observed "[t]he more serious the offending the stronger is the
             case for deportation" (paragraph 48).  With respect that is no
             doubt right; but it applies as readily to  a  case  where  the
             offender is not subject to automatic deportation under s.32 of
             2007 Act and his  removal  is  at  the  Secretary  of  State's
             discretion. In Strasbourg, within the Uner/Maslov criteria  we
             find a comparable reference to "the nature and seriousness  of
             the offence committed by the applicant".


         49.  These references say nothing  about  the  policy's  origin  in
             primary legislation.  The policy's source, however, is  as  we
             have seen one of the drivers of the breadth  of  the  decision
             maker's margin of discretion when the proportionality  of  its
             application in the particular case has been considered..."


19.  Having examined various  observations  in  other  cases,  including  AM
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1634, Laws LJ held :-

         "With great respect there is here no acknowledgment  of  the  free-
         standing importance of the legislative source of the  policy  as  a
         driver of the  decision  maker's  margin  of  discretion  when  the
         proportionality of its application in the particular case has  been
         considered" [51].


    Also relevant is the following:-


         "[53]    ...... Clearly, Parliament in the 2007  Act  has  attached
             very great weight to the policy as a well-justified imperative
             for the protection of the public and to reflect  the  public's
             proper condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley LJ was with
             respect right to state that  '  in  the  case  of  a  'foreign
             criminal' the Act  places  in  the  proportionality  scales  a
             markedly greater weight than in other cases'.


         [54] ....the more  pressing  the  public  interest  in  removal  or
             deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if
             it is to prevail.  The pressing nature of the public  interest
             here is vividly informed by  the  fact  that  by  Parliament's
             express declaration the public  interest  is  injured  if  the
             criminal's deportation is not effected.  Such a  result  could
             in my judgment only  be  justified  by  a  very  strong  claim
             indeed." [my emphasis].


20.  Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal has, I find, erred  in  law,  both
    in  mischaracterising  the  nature  of  the  factors  weighing  on  the
    claimant's side of the balance and in misunderstanding and undervaluing
    those factors relating  to  the  public  interest  in  deportation,  as
    articulated by Parliament in the 2007 Act.  I therefore set  aside  the
    determination and re-make the decision in the appeal.

Re-making the decision in the claimant's appeal

21.  When I canvassed with the representatives on 12 August the issue of re-
    making the decision, Mr Ahmed indicated that he saw  no  need  to  call
    fresh oral  evidence.   I  have  therefore  approached  the  matter  by
    reference to the oral evidence given to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    accept as an accurate record the description of that  evidence  in  the
    determination.  I have also had regard to the documentary materials  in
    the bundle of written evidence that was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and which is also before me.

22.  Whilst I accept that, at the present time, the  claimant  may  well  be
    playing a significant role as carer of the children,  the  unchallenged
    evidence indicates that, albeit with alleged difficulty, the claimant's
    wife coped alone, with  some  unspecified  assistance  from  a  friend,
    during the significant period  of  the  claimant's  imprisonment.   The
    evidence does not disclose any deterioration in  the  wife's  condition
    since the claimant's period of imprisonment, such as to suggest a  risk
    that the wife may be unable to    cope  if  the  claimant  were  to  be
    deported.  In any event, I take  judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that,
    should  the  assistance  of  the  local  authority   social   services'
    department be required, appropriate support would be forthcoming.

23.  I acknowledge, as did the First-tier Tribunal, that deportation of  the
    claimant removes  for  the  foreseeable  future  the  prospect  of  the
    claimant's being able to support his  family  by  means  of  employment
    undertaken in the United Kingdom.  However, in enacting the  2007  Act,
    Parliament must be taken to have given primacy to the public policy  in
    removing foreign criminals, such as the claimant,  notwithstanding  any
    consequent harm to the public purse.  One looks in vain in that Act for
    any indication to the contrary.

24.  I note that, besides the supposed role of the  claimant  as  "principal
    carer",  the  Tribunal  found  that,  on  a  more  general  level,  the
    children's best interests would be served by  having  him  remain  with
    them in the United Kingdom. I fully accept that, as a matter of  common
    sense, this is where their best interests lie, albeit that  the  matter
    finds no detailed evidential support (see my findings  above  regarding
    the letter from the probation officer).   The  best  interests  of  the
    children are, I also accept, "a primary consideration", in the sense of
    being, in the  words  of  Laws  LJ,  a  consideration  of  "substantial
    importance". The children's interests are not,  however,  "the  primary
    considerations for us", as the First-tier Tribunal thought [47].

25.    Having established all this, one must return to the  observations  of
    the sentencing judge, set out above.  The claimant's behaviour, over  a
    significant period, was profoundly serious.   This  was  so,  not  only
    because of the  alarm  that  would  have  been  caused  to  the  actual
    recipients of the claimant's bomb threats but also  by  reason  of  his
    attempt to accuse others of the crimes he had committed. Of the highest
    importance was  the  "vast  amount  of  work"  occasioned  to  security
    services, in investigating and otherwise dealing with the threats.  The
    resources of those services are plainly finite  and  what  His  Honour,
    Judge King had to say about them is, with respect, not only  right  but
    also a matter of great significance for  the  purposes  of  determining
    where the balance should be struck in the present appeal.

26.  Having regard to all the relevant evidence and reiterating that I  have
    given very significant weight to the best interests of the children,  I
    conclude that the nature of the claimant's crimes is  so  great  as  to
    outweigh not only the best interests  of  the  children  but  also  the
    Article 8 interests of  the  claimant  and  his  wife,  such  that  the
    claimant's appeal against the  deportation  order  must  be  dismissed.
    Family life, in the sense in which  it  is  being  currently  conducted
    (albeit not as it has always been) will  be  effectively  fractured  by
    deportation.  But  that  is,  in  all  the  circumstances,   the   only
    proportionate response.  To find otherwise  on  these  facts  would,  I
    consider, be to disregard Parliament's policy and the public  interest,
    as articulated in the 2007 Act.

Decision

27.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law.
    I set that  determination  aside  and  substitute  for  it  a  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal.




                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

