
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
DA/00496/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 March 2018                            |On 13 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                           mr emanuel olaf gomiak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kainth promulgated on 17 November  2017  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 21 July  2017
    to deport him from the United Kingdom.  The  appeal  in  this  case  is
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016
    specifically Regulations 23(6)(b) and 27.

 2. The appellant was, although this was an appeal  certified  pursuant  to
    Regulation 33, present at the date of the  hearing  but  we  understand
    from material supplied to the court that he was removed from the United
    Kingdom on 10 January 2018.  He is not present in the  United  Kingdom.
    There have been no additional materials supplied  by  him  and  we  are
    satisfied from the file that due notice of the time, date and venue  of
    the hearing was supplied to the appellant in accordance with the  Rules
    by service on him at the last address provided  to  him.   In  all  the
    circumstances, and bearing in mind that it is the appellant who  brings
    this appeal, we are satisfied that we  can  act  in  the  interests  of
    justice in proceeding with this decision.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Poland who arrived in the United  Kingdom
    relatively recently, in it appears 2014.  His case is that he came here
    to start a new life given  that  prior  to  that  his  wife  and  young
    daughter aged 4 tragically died in a car accident in Poland.  He states
    that as a result he  became  addicted  to  amphetamines,  cannabis  and
    alcohol which he abused.  He later purchased a gun through a friend  to
    take his own life but, having decided not to do so,  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom to start a new life.

 4. There appears to be no dispute as to his offending  history  which,  in
    light of the assertion of a recent descent into drug use, is surprising
    in that he appears to have been convicted of driving whilst  under  the
    influence of drink or drugs in 2003, in Poland.

 5. Further offences occurred in Poland and finally, on 14  February  2014,
    he was convicted of possessing a firearm without a certificate.   Since
    his arrival in the United Kingdom he has been convicted of a number  of
    relatively minor offences  mainly  by  way  of  shoplifting,  which  he
    explains in his grounds of appeal as being due to his need to feed  his
    drug habit.  The Secretary of State took the view  that  the  appellant
    did, in light of the threat that he presents, represent a  genuine  and
    sufficiently serious threat to public interest, that affecting  one  of
    the fundamental interests of society through his persistent  offending.



 6. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 1 November  2017  and
    the judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant.   The  judge  directed
    himself at [23] that the matter fell to be decided in  accordance  with
    the EEA Regulations and in light of the relevant case law  set  out  at
    [25] and [26].  The judge found that the appellant  had  an  unenviable
    history of offending, had continued to offend and  concluded  that  the
    potential of reoffending remained such that  he  presented  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious to justify deportation on the  grounds
    of  public  policy.   The  judge  then  also  took  into  account   the
    possibility of drug and alcohol rehabilitation,  the  position  of  the
    appellant's claimed partner who had not been present at the hearing and
    also considered Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights at
    [34] to [45].

 7. The appellant's grounds of challenge fall into two distinct categories.
     First, is that his position and that of his family was not taken  into
    account;  and, second, that the judge had failed properly to assess the
    risk of reoffending.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  on  12  January  2018  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison stating that it is an arguable error  of
    law that:

         "The  Judge  has  misdirected  himself  in  not   considering   the
         Appellant's full circumstances in relation to his  previous  family
         life, his health and his other facts and  circumstances  under  the
         2016 Regulations and under Article 8 of the ECHR."

 9. We pause at this point to consider  that  the  judge  should  not  have
    considered Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  in  light  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Amirteymour v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    353 upholding the decision of that  name  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    contrary to the express observation in the refusal letter that the sole
    ground of appeal in this case was that the removal was in breach of the
    EU treaties.

10. Turning to the first ground, it is averred by the  appellant  that  his
    wife and daughter had died as said before; second, that  he  drinks  to
    forget the loss of his wife and daughter and  that  if  he  returns  to
    Poland his life will be  miserable  and  he  will  undergo  significant
    hardship;  third, that he engages in criminal activity  to  manage  his
    drug money and that he  drinks  to  forget  and  is  unable  to  access
    rehabilitation, and fourth, that if he returns to Poland,  it  will  be
    difficult for him to start again, especially as he has no family.

11. We consider, having had regard to the decision that the judge has  very
    clearly taken into account all of these matters  as can  be  seen  from
    paragraphs [14] to [17] and also in the assessment at  paragraphs  [35]
    to [42] onwards albeit that these are mentioned specifically in respect
    of Article 8.

12. Further, it is not immediately apparent that the circumstances  of  the
    deaths of the appellant's wife and child,  tragic  although  they  are,
    were matters which go to proportionality, the judge having  found  that
    the appellant did meet  the  trigger  of  there  being  a  genuine  and
    sufficiently serious threat of his reoffending.  There is, we consider,
    no basis for the challenge on that ground;  the judge very clearly took
    into account all  the  evidence  put  before  him  before  reaching  an
    adequately reasoned and sustainable conclusion.

13. Finally, turning to the second  ground,   that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to assess the risk of reoffending. We conclude that the  judge
    did consider the risk properly.  The judge sets out very  properly  the
    history of reoffending and the fact at paragraph 27 that the  appellant
    had failed to comply with orders of the court made to him, that he  was
    convicted of further counts of shoplifting whilst he was subject  to  a
    community order and acknowledged that he had been addicted  to  alcohol
    and illicit substances.  That indeed is the explanation put forward for
    the appellant's offending behaviour  and  there  is,  we  consider,  no
    reasonable  prospect  of  the  appellant  doing  anything  other   than
    continuing to reoffend on the basis that he has uncontrolled  drug  and
    alcohol problem.

14. In the circumstances  the  judge  was  also  entitled  to  consider  at
    paragraph [33] that there was a lack of any evidence of  rehabilitative
    work being taken and that he had not taken any rehabilitative  courses.



15. Accordingly, for these reasons we are satisfied that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was one which was clearly open  to  the  judge,
    was clearly and sustainably reasoned and did not involve the making  of
    an error of law.  We therefore uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and we uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6 April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul












