

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00063/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 27 April 2017                   |On 12 May 2017                          |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr Neville Franz Delcardo Whyte
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C. M. Fielden, Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I annex to this determination the reasons why I considered  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had made an error of law in  its  decision  and  why  the
    decision had to  be  re-made.  I  shall  refer  to  Mr  Whyte  as  'the
    appellant', as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 11 May  1984.  He
    entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 30 July  2001  when  he  was
    just 17 years old. He was granted one month's leave  to  enter.  On  13
    August 2001 he submitted  an  application  to  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student. It was refused on 19 October 2001 and his unsuccessful  appeal
    was dismissed on 2 January 2003. This  had,  of  course  permitted  the
    appellant to remain in the United  Kingdom  while  the  appeal  process
    continued but he did so with no underlying right to  remain.  The  fact
    that he applied for student leave so soon after his  arrival  (some  14
    days later) strongly suggests that he  was  never  a  genuine  visitor.
    Nevertheless, the conclusion of his appeal in January  2003  ended  any
    period of lawful presence and thereafter he has remained without leave.
    As we shall later see, he remained in the  United  Kingdom  and  worked
    unlawfully.

 3. Ms Kowacka is a Polish citizen who was born on 25 February 1987. She is
    30 years old. She entered the United Kingdom, she told me,  on  9  June
    2006, aged 19. She met the appellant, then aged 23, in  July  2006  and
    they entered into a relationship which resulted in the birth of [N]  on
    [ ] 2007.  [N] is now aged 9.

 4. It may appear that the determination loses sight of  [N]  but  that  is
    only because the evidential and legal implications of her presence have
    proved  complex.   She  remains  the  primary  consideration  of   this
    determination.  This is not a mechanistic invocation of s.  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  under  which  both  the
    Secretary of State and the Tribunal are placed under  a  duty  to  make
    arrangements for ensuring that  immigration,  asylum,  and  nationality
    functions are discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children in the  United  Kingdom.   Rather,  [N]
    becomes  the  driving  force  behind  the  appellant's   arguments   on
    proportionality.  For the reasons that follow,  neither  the  appellant
    nor Ms Kowacka can lay claim to a compelling case that the  appellant's
    removal is disproportionate.  Instead, it is [N] who becomes the  focus
    of the proportionality exercise; after all, she is the innocent  victim
    of these events and whilst her best interests  are  not  the  only  or,
    indeed, the paramount consideration, they remain in the forefront of my
    mind.

 5. According to  paragraph  5  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  ('the  determination'),  Ms  Kowacka  had   told   the
    authorities in the course of the appellant's earlier application for  a
    residence card that the relationship had not subsisted  since  [N]  was
    born in 2007. The same is recorded in the decision letters.  Ms Kowacka
    made no express denial  of  what  she  is  alleged  to  have  told  the
    authorities either in her statement or in her evidence.  The couple may
    well have kept in touch.  I am not satisfied they were living together.
      There  was  apparently  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  cohabitation.
    However, it seems probable that the appellant was visited by Ms Kowacka
    and [N] while he was in prison. It appears  he  joined  her  after  his
    release from prison on 18 December 2013.  I am, however satisfied  that
    the couple married on 30 May 2014 and, since that time, have enjoyed  a
    genuine and durable relationship with each other. [N] has,  of  course,
    been part of the household.

 6. On 3 July 2012 the appellant was convicted of an  offence  of  wounding
    with intent to do grievous bodily harm, the event having taken place on
    22 February 2012. He was sentenced to  3  years'  imprisonment  and  an
    additional four months' imprisonment for an associated  offence  of  an
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm. Pursuant to s. 32(5) of the  UK
    Borders Act 2007 the appellant was  subject  to  automatic  deportation
    subject to the exceptions contained within s. 33 of the 2007  Act  and,
    in particular, that his removal would violate his human rights.

 7. A deportation order was signed against the appellant on 14 June 2013 on
    which reliance was placed by the Secretary of State on paragraphs  398,
    399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules to the  effect  that  deportation
    was lawful. The appellant lodged an appeal against that decision on  10
    July 2013 which was scheduled to be heard  on  30  September  2013  but
    adjourned in order to permit the appellant to make an application based
    upon what he claimed was his durable relationship with Ms  Kowacka.  In
    due course, on 22 October 2013 such  an  application  was  indeed  made
    based upon his being an unmarried partner of a Union citizen exercising
    Treaty rights. That application was refused on 29  November  2013.   It
    was presumably at this stage that Ms Kowacka told the authorities  that
    the relationship had not subsisted since [N] was  born  in  2007.   The
    refusal was not challenged by the appellant by way of an onward  appeal
    or in judicial review proceedings.

 8. The substantive hearing against the  appellant's  deportation  decision
    was still outstanding. That decision was adjourned until 24 June  2014.
    At the hearing the appellant presented a marriage  certificate  showing
    that on 13 May 2014, a month  before,  the  appellant  had  married  Ms
    Kowacka. The appeal was, accordingly, adjourned to permit the Secretary
    of State to reconsider the case in light of his  marriage.  Thereafter,
    the appeal moved away from a deportation appeal to which the  appellant
    had responded by raising its human rights claim and had moved into  the
    territory of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (2006 No 1003).  From then  on,  the  appeal  had  these  two  separate
    strands within it; the EEA appeal and the deportation appeal.

 9. The decision made by the Secretary of State on 18 June 2013 was limited
    to a consideration of the appellant's human rights claim following  the
    application of the automatic deportation provisions in  the  2007  Act.
    The decision recorded that [N] was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    consideration was given to the deportation of a  parent  of  a  British
    child, see page 5 of 14 of the 18 June 2013 decision letter.

10.  Later, a further decision was made on 26 January 2016.   This  is  the
    formal decision by the respondent under the 2006 Regulations,  the  EEA
    decision. A subsequent decision was made on  4  March  2016  apparently
    resolving the same issue. Nothing turns on how these two decisions came
    to be made. In paragraph 13 of the 26 January  2016  decision,  [N]  is
    recorded as being of British Polish and Jamaican citizenship. The  same
    is recorded in paragraph 13 of the March  2016  decision.  Accordingly,
    the consideration of the appellant's human rights and  his  EEA  rights
    were viewed through the prism of [N] as a British child.

11. I raised my concerns with the parties at the error of law hearing.  The
    appellant's case was  being  advanced  on  the  basis  that  he  had  a
    permanent right of residence based upon his relationship with  a  Union
    citizen who also enjoyed such  a  right.  If  Ms  Kowacka  had  settled
    status, [N] born in the United Kingdom would have derived  her  British
    nationality through her mother's status. This  would  suggest  that  Ms
    Kowacka did, indeed, enjoy a right to permanent residence.  However,  I
    was not content to find Ms  Kowacka's  status  established  by  a  bare
    inference. In particular, I could not fathom  how  [N],  born  in  June
    2007, could derive her British citizenship from the settled  status  of
    her mother's permanent right of residence  when  Ms  Kowacka  had  only
    arrived in the United Kingdom in the course of the  previous  June.  I,
    therefore, made a direction following the hearing on 21  December  2016
    in the following terms:

         "Mr Whyte ('the  appellant')  is  to  file  and  serve  a  skeleton
         argument setting out the circumstances that give rise to his wife's
         right to remain in the United Kingdom.  Insofar as those rights are
         derived from her status as an EEA national, those rights are to  be
         explained.  The skeleton argument is to set out the  basis  of  the
         appellant's rights under EU law, if any, derived from (i) those  of
         his wife and (ii) those of his  daughter.   Finally,  the  skeleton
         argument is to set out all  relevant  statutory  provisions  relied
         upon,  or  relevant,  directly  or  indirectly,   including   those
         contained within the Immigration Rules. The skeleton argument is to
         be  served  and  filed  within  21  days  from  receipt  of   these
         directions."


    I also directed that the Secretary of State was to  file  and  serve  a
    response, if so advised, 21 days thereafter. The appeal was to  be  set
    down for a resumed hearing on the First Available Date after  24  March
    2017.


12. It was in these circumstances that the appeal  came  before  me  on  27
    April 2017.

13. There had been no compliance with my directions by the appellant.   The
    case was opened by Ms Fielden on  the  basis  that  she  had  not  been
    instructed to draft the skeleton argument that was to  be  produced  in
    January 2017.  I was served with a  skeleton  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing but it did  not  address  my  directions.   In  particular,  my
    concerns over the status of Ms Kowacka and [N] were not addressed.   Ms
    Fielden raised the prospect of seeking an adjournment.  I permitted her
    between 11.00 and 11.30 to take  further  instructions.   In  order  to
    attempt to retrieve the situation, Mr Whitwell very reluctantly  agreed
    to make the concession  that  Ms  Kowacka  had  a  permanent  right  of
    residence, inferred from [N]'s status as a United Kingdom citizen.

14. The appellant gave evidence followed by Ms Kowacka.   Her  evidence-in-
    chief and in cross-examination did not touch on the subject or her,  or
    her daughter's, immigration status.  In the course of  my  questions  I
    asked the question which had been hanging in the  air  since  December,
    namely, how did [N] acquire British nationality?  Ms Kowacka  responded
    that [N] was not  a  British  citizen.   Nor  did  she  enjoy  Jamaican
    nationality.  She was Polish.

15. The three witness statements from the appellant,  Ms  Kowacka  and  the
    appellant's maternal aunt make no  direct  reference  to  [N]  being  a
    Polish citizen, although identifying the nationality, in each case,  of
    the deponent.  I have considered whether this was a mere oversight.

16. I am satisfied that, had my directions been complied with,  this  would
    have forced the draftsman of the skeleton argument  to  make  enquiries
    about the nationality of [N].  The purpose of the  answers  I  required
    had been explained in detail in my reasons for finding the error  on  a
    point of law, annexed to this determination.  This is no room  for  any
    misunderstanding.

17.  The   respondent's   error   (whether   derived   from   inadvertence,
    misinformation  or  negligence)  must  have  been  well-known  to   the
    appellant.  Its significance as a factor in favour of  the  appellant's
    case cannot have been overlooked.  It  is  central  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's thinking; see,  for  example,  the  opening  words  of
    paragraph 14 of the determination:

         "It is accepted that his daughter is a British citizen because  she
         was born in the United Kingdom to a person who had legal  residence
         here."

         (As a matter of law, the latter does not flow from the former.)


18. It may well be that the appellant felt that he  had  no  obligation  to
    disabuse the respondent of her mistake but he must have known it was  a
    mistake, a mistake repeated in the three decision letters and  repeated
    again in the determination.  In the field of  litigation,  perhaps,  he
    felt that the respondent's mistake was fair game as long as he  avoided
    the lie direct.  I make no finding whether the draftsman of the witness
    statements avoided telling a truth that may have seemed adverse to  his
    client's interests but a professional's duty of candour goes beyond the
    lie direct.  I absolve Ms Fielden from all blame.  It was apparent that
    she was as surprised as me with the development.

19. This was  a  regrettable  event.   It  required  all  of  the  previous
    decisions  to  be  re-cast.   In  the  event,  however,   it   is   not
    determinative because, as I shall demonstrate, the appeal was bound  to
    fail for quite different reasons.

20. First, it is plain to me that the appellant never acquired a  permanent
    right of residence, nor could he as a matter of law.

21. Even assuming that the appellant and Ms Kowacka were able to  establish
    a relationship from the birth of [N] in June 2007,  the  appellant  was
    arrested on 22 February 2012  and  was,  apparently  detained.  He  was
    described as having spent 130 days in custody by 3 July  2012  when  he
    was convicted and sentenced. He  could  not,  therefore,  establish  an
    appropriate  five-year  period  of  residence  between  June  2007  and
    February 2012.

22. However, we know that his application for a residence card failed.  One
    of the reasons attributed for its failure was the appellant's inability
    to produce persuasive  evidence  that  the  relationship  existed.  The
    second was Ms Kowacka's telling the authorities that  the  relationship
    had not subsisted since her child was born in 2007.

23. Furthermore, she told me in evidence;

         "It was hard to prove we were living together. We  were  unable  to
         find accommodation for the three of us to live together."

24. The appellant was in prison from 22 February 2012 to 18  December  2013
    (determination, paragraph 18).  As Onuekwere v UK [2014] EUECJ C-378/12
    (16 January 2014) makes clear, the period spent in prison prevents  the
    acquisition of rights derived from residence in the United Kingdom.

25. Even if the appellant has been cohabiting  with  Ms  Kowacka  since  18
    December 2013 and even if Ms Kowacka has been exercising Treaty  rights
    during this period, the time is  insufficient  for  him  to  acquire  a
    permanent right of residence. The couple were only married  on  13  May
    2014 at which time he fell within the definition  of  a  family  member
    pursuant to reg. 7 (1) (a) of the 2006 Regulations. It does not  assist
    the appellant to establish that he was an  extended  family  member  in
    accordance with reg. 8 (5) that he was in a durable  relationship  with
    Ms Kowacka.

26. Furthermore, Ms Kowacka has not herself established she was  exercising
    Treaty rights during the relevant period. She gave  evidence  that  she
    was working part-time and not necessarily continuously.  She  described
    herself as a  student  but  has  failed  to  produce  the  evidence  of
    insurance required in order to be  a  qualified  person  as  a  student
    pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  reg.  4(1)(d)(ii)  of   the   2006
    Regulations.  No written material was adduced sufficient  to  establish
    she was exercising Treaty  rights.   She  produced  a  photocopy  of  a
    document which, if valid, establishes her registration  but  this  does
    not amount to an acknowledgment of a permanent right of residence.

27. A permanent right of residence arises in accordance with reg.  15(1)(b)
    in the following circumstances,

         "A family member of an EEA national  who  is  not  himself  an  EEA
         national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national in accordance with  these  regulations  for  a  continuous
         period of five years."

28. The appellant has only  been  a  'family  member'  of  Ms  Kowacka  (as
    defined) since their marriage on 30 May 2014. Even if he has resided in
    the United Kingdom pursuant to a durable relationship  with  her,  (and
    therefore in accordance with the Regulations) the relationship can only
    have commenced upon his  release  from  prison  on  18  December  2013.
    Accordingly he does not qualify as a person  entitled  to  a  permanent
    right of residence.

29. The immediate impact of this finding is in relation to the  limitations
    imposed upon the removal of those individuals entitled to benefit  from
    their status as EEA nationals or a family member of one. Removal of  an
    EEA national or a family member of one is permitted under reg. 19(3) in
    accordance with regulation 21.

30. Regulation 21 provides:

         '(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.

         ...

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.'


    The appellant does not benefit from this second  level  of  protection.
    Instead, he benefits only to the extent that removal must be  justified
    in his case on public policy grounds.  This  also  required  it  to  be
    established:



         '(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct of the person concerned must
             represent a genuine, present and

             sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
             interests of society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
             which relate to considerations of

             general prevention do not justify the decision;

             (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision.'


31. Much time had been spent  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  analysing  the
    appellant's account of the events of 22 February 2012.  It is enough to
    consider (i) the offence; (ii) the sentence and  (iii)  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks. The principal offence  was  wounding  with  intent  to
    cause grievous bodily harm. Nothing more. Nothing  less.  The  sentence
    for this offence was three years imprisonment. Neither more, nor  less.
    The sentencing remarks went as follows:


         "You are a young man, a young father, who has never been in trouble
         before, has never been arrested before and it is a tragedy that you
         are in this court to be sentenced for a very serious offence ... So
         far  as  categorisation  of  this  offence  under  the   sentencing
         Guidelines, I take into account what has been said by the Crown  as
         to the level of injury for this category, and unpleasant though  it
         was, happily there was no damage to [the victim's] tendons. It  was
         a single blow. It was delivered  in  a  situation  which  has  been
         rumbling for months between neighbours and it is a great shame that
         the residents of each flat could not have behaved  in  a  different
         way. What has not been advanced in mitigation, which I  consider  a
         very important part of the mitigation, this incident  started  when
         [your neighbour] banged on the door and  engaged  your  partner  in
         what was undoubtedly some form of violence. I do not consider  that
         there is a significant degree of  premeditation,  though  obviously
         there is a degree of weapon being used. Against  that,  looking  at
         the guidelines, the factors reducing the seriousness, there  is  an
         impeccable character, the fact that it was a single blow, exemplary
         conduct life [sic], as witnessed by Mr Hepburn who gave evidence on
         your behalf, and the fact that this was an isolated incident ...  I
         will keep the sentence as low as I can."


32. In an immigration appeal, a judge should be wary of  going  behind  the
    offence, the sentence and the judge's remarks. The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge recorded the incident in paragraph 21 in these terms,


         "... The appellant said he ran to help his wife  and  picked  up  a
         knife in the kitchen. The man was trying to get into the house  and
         the neighbour's mother was trying to stop the man  coming  in.  The
         appellant came out with the  knife  and  pushed  the  man  and  the
         neighbour's mother out of the house. He said  he  made  no  contact
         with the man but the neighbour's mother had been standing in  front
         of him and he pushed her and the man to the wall. He  said  it  all
         happened in seconds and his partner  pulled  him  back  inside  the
         house. He had not struck a blow but the man had a cut on  his  hand
         and the mother had two cuts in her back."


33. It is apparent from the judge's sentencing remarks (and I do not intend
    to diminish the effect of the mitigating circumstances) that the victim
    of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm was 'the man'. On
    the account given by the appellant to  the  judge,  the  appellant  was
    entirely guiltless of any offence, were the account given to the  judge
    to have been true. His account was tested by a jury.  His  account  was
    rejected.

34. Although in paragraph 33 of the determination, the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge quoted the passages to which I have referred above, she  comments
    that the appellant did not  seek  to  play  down  the  gravity  of  the
    offence. I emphatically disagree  with  that  characterisation  of  his
    approach to the offending. He did indeed seek to play down the offence.
    On his account, no offence took place and the jury got it wrong. In  my
    judgment she was over persuaded by the appellant's  account  saying  in
    paragraph 33


         "His reaction was more than the law allows ..."


35. On any view, that is not  a  proper  classification  of  wounding  with
    intent to cause grievous bodily harm.

36. A proper assessment of the offence (albeit a single offence) skews both
    the seriousness of the offending but, more important still,  skews  the
    judicial assessment of the appellant's attitude towards the  offending.
    In the NOMS1 report, following an interview with the  appellant  on  15
    May 2013 (a full 15 months after the offence), its  compiler  expressed
    the risk of serious harm as medium. The following comments were made:


         "Index Offence appears to have been uncharacteristic.  No  previous
         convictions. Insists offence  committed  in  self-defence  although
         this is not accepted by Court."


37. Hence, a few  months  before  his  release,  the  appellant  was  still
    maintaining that he was innocent.

38. Ms Fielden commenced her submissions by stating that she  was  hampered
    by the respondent's refusal to provide the OASys report, the report was
    produced to her by her own solicitors. The  OASys  report  is  not  the
    property of the Secretary of State.  A considerable amount of time  was
    spent studying the report.  It  is  noted  that  Ms  Kowacka  was  also
    involved in the February 2012 incident but only  received  a  community
    sentence thereby  marking  a  distinct  gulf  between  the  appellant's
    actions and those of his wife.

39. On page 11 of 52  of  the  OASys  report,  the  appellant's  employment
    history is described. He told his interviewer that he went to work in a
    school kitchen as a chef for approximately 12 months before  moving  on
    to TNT Mail Company as a mail sorter. He was employed  there  for  four
    years before working in the construction business as a labourer  for  a
    further six years. It was during this employment that he was  arrested.
    He later described his work at 5.2 to 5.6 as earning around �300 a week
    as a labourer in the construction business,  adding  that  he  and  his
    partner managed well financially prior to his arrest. He confirmed that
    he had no debts and had some savings.

40. This description of his working life is at  odds  with  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's understanding of the position recorded in paragraph 31


         "He has not worked as he has not been allowed to ..."


41. I do not think that we should be surprised that a person who  has  been
    in the United Kingdom illegally since 2002  or  thereabouts  has  found
    work for himself in order to make ends meet,  even  if  such  work  was
    illegal. Nevertheless,  it  is  another  instance  of  the  appellant's
    selectivity about events and his careful  manipulation  of  history  in
    order to place him in as good a  light  as  possible.  It  is  also  an
    example of how the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  influenced  by  this
    process.  The appellant told one account of his past when it suited him
    to do so (that is, saying  he  did  not  work  in  the  context  of  an
    immigration appeal when he knew that working was not allowed under  the
    Immigration Rules); yet telling another account in the context  of  the
    OASys report when  a  history  of  a  hard-working  individual  without
    financial worries better suited the image he wished to create.

42. In the report, the appellant stated that he had been with  his  partner
    for approximately 7 years (which I do not accept) and that  she  visits
    him every week and that they maintain contact  by  telephone  (which  I
    accept).  In  the  section  entitled  'Thinking  and  Behaviour',   the
    appellant provided a much more thoughtful and  responsible  account  of
    his actions.  The passage reads:

         "[The appellant] acknowledges  that  his  actions  specifically  on
         getting the meat cleaver from the kitchen was an impulsive move. He
         describes being scared, angry and confused when  he  saw  the  male
         victim with a knife and did  not  think  twice  about  getting  the
         cleaver in order to defend himself and use it to make threats. [The
         appellant] stated that in general he was quite a passive person who
         does not have a problem with anger or temper as a whole. However he
         accepted that his behaviour was different on the day in question.
         ... [The appellant] added that he did think of the consequences  of
         his behaviour to an extent as he stated that it was  his  intention
         to use the meat cleaver as a threat but  not  to  use  it  to  harm
         anyone. To his credit, [the appellant] accepted  that  this  was  a
         lapse in his thinking behaviour and agreed that this  was  an  area
         that needed addressing."

43. Given what I have already  said  about  the  appellant's  awareness  of
    saying what he knows people want to hear, I am sure the appellant  knew
    that the compiler of the OASys  report  was  eager  to  hear  that  the
    incident was 'a lapse in his thinking behaviour and  agreed  that  this
    was an area that needed addressing'.  Indeed, it fed neatly  into  page
    44 of the report where in answer to  the  question:  How  much  is  the
    offender motivated to address offending?, the response is

         "Very motivated."


         (Precisely the result that most benefitted the appellant.)


44. The OASys report records that by  April  2013,  the  appellant  enjoyed
    enhanced status and that his behaviour and conduct while in custody had
    been good. As we saw above, he acknowledged that  he  was  required  to
    address his offending behaviour through appropriate offending behaviour
    courses and stated that  he  was  more  than  willing  to  do  so.  The
    assessment of risk is summarised in section 10, page 37 of 52  onwards.
    The risk is described as a risk to the general public. It was  said  to
    be a risk by way of the threat or use of violence and at  its  greatest
    when either he or his partner were  threatened  or  under  attack.  The
    threat existed but might be combated or reduced by completing offending
    behaviour courses. The appellant has the  potential  to  cause  serious
    harm but it is unlikely unless there  is  a  change  in  circumstances.
    Using these methods  of  assessment,  the  applicant  was  assessed  as
    representing a medium risk to the  public  when  in  the  community.  A
    medium risk of serious harm is  described  as  in  circumstances  where
    there are identifiable indicators of serious harm.

45. Hence, there is an important correlation between the  established  risk
    of harm and  its  antidote,  offending  behaviour  courses.   The  work
    indicated to increase the offender's motivation was a Victim  Awareness
    course and an Assertiveness and Decision Making course. He was referred
    to the Victim Awareness programme. Although he produced  a  certificate
    that he had successfully attended the Assertiveness and Decision Making
    course, there was no similar certificate relating to Victim  Awareness.
    Whatever the appellant's profession  that  he  was  very  motivated  to
    complete this, it has not, as far as I am aware, materialised.  If  so,
    the appellant has again pulled the wool over the report writer's  eyes.



46. Ms Fielden relied  upon  a  submission  that  the  appellant  does  not
    represent a genuine present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. This was a single  offence
    committed in  the  context  of  a  neighbour  dispute  which  had  been
    developing over a number of months  and  which  was  initiated  by  his
    neighbours who were about to be evicted  as  a  result  of  their  poor
    behaviour.  There has been no further  offending.  These  are  powerful
    considerations. However, the evidence identifies two separate areas  of
    legitimate concern. First, the appellant's defence (which amounted to a
    justification for his conduct) was  rejected  by  the  jury.   This  is
    reflected  in  the  lengthy  prison  sentence.  Second,  the  appellant
    continued to maintain this defence well after the  original  conviction
    and throughout the course of the appeal process. Insofar as  the  judge
    did not identify his evidence as being a contradiction (in which  event
    I would have expected her to have made  an  express  finding  that  the
    account was rejected), the judge was misled.  Although,  in  the  OASys
    report, the appellant was much more realistic about his offending, I am
    not  satisfied  that  this  is   genuine,   given   his   track-record.
    Accordingly, I find that the appellant is capable of presenting  events
    (or indeed permitting events to be presented by others) in a way  which
    is most convenient to him regardless of whether it is the truth.

47. I can identify a variety of instances where the  appellant's  claim  is
    not supported by the evidence. First, there has  been  no  evidence  to
    explain Ms Kowacka's assertion made prior to his imprisonment that  the
    relationship had not subsisted since the birth of [N].  Secondly, I  am
    satisfied that the appellant worked unlawfully (albeit  unsurprisingly)
    and was content that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  made  aware
    of it. Third, the appellant undoubtedly  knew  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was in error in treating [N] as a British citizen. Fourth,  I  am
    satisfied that he would like the Tribunal to believe that what happened
    in the incident on 22 February 2012  was  benign,  notwithstanding  the
    plain and obvious fact of his conviction and sentence.  Fifth,  he  has
    provided a favourable gloss on his efforts  to  address  his  offending
    without submitting the evidence that he was sufficiently  motivated  to
    do so by completing a victim's awareness course.

48. Inevitably, these considerations feature in the assessment of the  risk
    that he poses. I find the appellant poses a risk sufficient to meet the
    criteria for his  removal  notwithstanding  his  marriage  to  a  Union
    citizen. This finding is made even if it is established that Ms Kowacka
    is exercising Treaty rights. The OASys report describes him as a medium
    risk in the event of the circumstances identified.

49. The decision must be a proportionate one.  As reg. 21  requires  it  is
    based exclusively on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  appellant.   His
    conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting a fundamental  interest  of  society  and  considerations  of
    general prevention do not  enter  into  the  decision  making  process.
    Amongst relevant factors is the appellant's immigration history and the
    absence of a substantive right to remain as a spouse or  in  any  other
    capacity known to the Immigration Rules.  For the reasons I have given,
    notwithstanding the presence of his Polish wife  and  daughter  in  the
    United Kingdom, it is proportionate to remove the appellant.

50. This is an  appeal  which,  as  I  have  said,  contains  two  separate
    elements. The interplay between  these  two  elements  has  now  to  be
    addressed.

51. As with the EU decision, the Article 8 decision must be  proportionate.
    Furthermore, since the Court of  Justice  endorses  the  ECHR  and  has
    developed its own parallel code on human rights, it is difficult to see
    that a fissure is likely to develop between proportionality  under  the
    Regulations and proportionality under Article  8.   As  proportionality
    requires all material factors to be taken into account, the  fact  that
    there is the deportation appeal  must  be  a  relevant  factor  in  the
    proportionality balance in the EU appeal.   Similarly,  proportionality
    under Article 8 must be capable of taking into account  the  fact  that
    the appellant has rights under EU law.  Even the  potential  difference
    between EU law which  prevents  considerations  of  general  prevention
    justifying the decision whereas deterrence might  properly  enter  into
    consideration in a human rights claim may be more illusory rather  than
    real.  Under either regime, it cannot  be  proportionate  (or,  indeed,
    just) for an individual to suffer more severely merely pour  encourager
    les autres or to deter others if it is isolated  from  the  appellant's
    own conduct.

52. Any other conclusion might lead to  a  different  outcome  between  the
    proportionality  balance  taking  in  pursuit  of  an  appeal   against
    deportation   engaging   broad   Article   8   considerations   and   a
    proportionality balance conducted using the  factors  identified  under
    the EEA Regulations. Whilst it is easy to see that,  on  the  basis  of
    different facts, a result  might  be  proportionate  in  one  case  and
    disproportionate in another, it is difficult to see how,  on  the  same
    facts, it would be proportionate to remove the  appellant  pursuant  to
    regulation 19 but not in a deportation appeal.

53. In Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 00329 (IAC),  the
    Upper Tribunal properly spoke of the  EEA  Regulations  being  a  self-
    contained set of legal  rules.   The  Tribunal  noted  the  differences
    between them, including the difference I have identified,  namely,  the
    difference between the two legal regimes in expulsion  and  deportation
    cases.  Whereas Article 8 jurisprudence  permits  decision-makers  when
    weighing matters on the public interest side  of  the  scales  to  have
    regard to matters of general  prevention  or  deterrence;  in  the  EEA
    context, reg.  21(5)(d) material which  relate  to  'considerations  of
    general prevention do  not  justify  the  decision.'   The  distinction
    between EEA rights and  Article  8  ECHR  cases  is  laid  out  in  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions:

         "2.6.1   The Immigration Rules and Part 5A of the 2002 Act do  not
         apply directly to EEA nationals. However, Article 8 applies equally
         to everyone, regardless of nationality, and to consider  Article  8
         claims  from  EEA  nationals  differently,  either  more  or   less
         generously than claims from non-EEA  nationals,  would  breach  the
         common law principle of fairness.  Therefore, decisions in relation
         to EEA nationals must be taken consistently with Parliament's  view
         of the public interest as set out in primary legislation."

54. The Tribunal summarised its conclusions as requiring a  decision  maker
    in relation to ss.117A-D in the context of EEA removal decisions:


         (i) First, to decide if a person  satisfies  requirements  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  In  this
         context ss.117A-D has no application;
         (ii) Second, where a person has raised Article 8 as  a  ground  of
         appeal, ss.117A-D applies.


55. Whilst the Upper Tribunal in Badewa spoke of the approach to  adopt  in
    cases such as these,  it  envisaged  that  there  should  rarely  be  a
    different outcome.

56. Where a court or tribunal is required to determine whether  a  decision
    made under the  Immigration  Acts  breaches  a  person's  rights  under
    Article 8, in cases concerning the deportation  of  foreign  criminals,
    the court or tribunal must have regard to the considerations set out in
    s. 117B and s. 117C. The latter provides:


         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         ...

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


    At the same time as those provisions entered into force amendments were
    made to the applicable immigration rules.  These  do  not  have  direct
    effect in EU cases.  They built on previous amendments  made  in  2012.
    Those had sought to emphasise  the  strength  of  the  public  interest
    regarding the desirability of deportation of foreign criminals and also
    to secure a consistency of approach.  Rules 398, 399 and 399A in  their
    amended form provide as follows:



         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 ... and

             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in  the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (c)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
             UK without the person who is to be deported; or

             (d)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

57. Paragraph 399A has no relevance to the present case since the appellant
    has not been lawfully present in the United Kingdom  for  most  of  his
    life.

58. In  MM (Uganda) & Anor v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Rev 1) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 (20 April 2016) the Court of Appeal decided
    that the level of criminal offending is clearly  material  in  deciding
    whether it is unduly harsh to separate a child from his parent and  its
    omission  inevitably  skews  the  proportionality  balance.  Were   the
    consideration to be directed exclusively towards the child, the  public
    interest in removing  those  who  commit  criminal  offences  would  be
    emasculated to the extent that no distinction could be made  between  a
    minor offender and a serious offender.

59. It is to be recalled (see, above, paragraph 7) that  the  Secretary  of
    State has already considered the effect of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A
    when she was dealing with the deportation appeal at a time  when  there
    was no EEA element and the couple were not married.  She had  concluded
    that deportation was lawful.  That conclusion was not challenged.

60. The consideration is not directed exclusively towards the child and the
    public interest in removing those who commit  criminal  offences  is  a
    permissible factor to be taken into account  when  considering  whether
    the effect of the appellant's deportation on the partner or child would
    be unduly harsh or whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
    remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

61. Given the level of criminal offending,  the  risk  that  the  appellant
    poses and the public interest in removing an individual who have failed
    to establish a right to remain under EU law or  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, it is not unduly harsh for [N] to be separated from her  father.
    I appreciate that this determination has travelled a long way since, in
    paragraph 5, above, I directed my mind to s. 55 of the 2009 Act but its
    influence has pervaded it.  My reasons for reaching the conclusion that
    removal is a proportionate response under Article 8  coalesce  with  my
    reasons for reaching the same conclusion is relation to reg. 21.  I see
    no discernible difference between the two  distinct  processes  and  no
    reasons justifying a different outcome.

DECISION


 1. I allow the appeal of the Secretary of State.

 2. The Judge made no error on a point of law and the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination of the appeal is set aside.

 3. I substitute a determination dismissing Mr Whyte's appeal under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and under Article
    8 on all the grounds advanced.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                  9 May 2017





                                  Appendix

                     DECISION ON FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart promulgated on 10 October 2016 in which she
    allowed the twin appeals put forward by the respondent Mr Neville Franz
    Delcardo Whyte.  For the sake of continuity I shall refer to  Mr  Whyte
    as the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 11 May  1984  and
    his appeal was conducted under the umbrella of  Regulation  26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (2006  No  1003).
    It arose because the Secretary of State had on 15 May 2015  refused  to
    issue him with a residence card as an acknowledgement of his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as the husband or as a partner of  an  EEA
    national who was herself exercising Treaty rights.   The  judge  raised
    the issue of whether the spouse was exercising Treaty rights  but  then
    thereafter refers in the course of the determination to  the  appellant
    being a partner of an EEA national.

 3. I find it difficult to see that there was any  consideration  given  to
    the status of his wife.  We know Miss Kowacka  is  a  Polish  national.
    The appellant married her on 13 May 2014, by which time  the  appellant
    had committed the offences for which he was subject  to  a  deportation
    order.  Having only enjoyed the benefits under  the  Regulations  since
    May 2014, barely 2� years before, he could not himself have acquired  a
    permanent right of residence in accordance with reg. 15(1)(b).   Hence,
    at best he had acquired the lowest level of protection against  removal
    of the three levels set out in reg. 21, that is, on grounds  of  public
    policy or public security (public health not being in issue).

 4. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was advanced very  much
    on the basis of the appellant being a  person  entitled  to  levels  of
    protection from his status as  being  married  to  a  Polish  national.
    Marriage is not enough.  Unfortunately I do not consider that the judge
    properly went into the status of the partner.  It may well be that  the
    partner had a permanent right of residence.  I believe that probably to
    be the  case.   She  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006.   She
    subsequently gave birth to their daughter  and  the  daughter  has  got
    Polish, Jamaican and importantly British citizenship.  It seems  to  me
    that this could only have arisen because the mother was settled in  the
    United Kingdom.  Their daughter derived  Polish  nationality  from  her
    mother, Jamaican nationality from  her  father,  but  could  only  have
    derived British nationality by  reason  of  her  birth  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a result of the mother being either  a  British  citizen  or
    settled in the United Kingdom.  For that reason I think it is  probable
    that she had a permanent right of residence.

 5. I am not satisfied for our purposes that it is  necessary  to  consider
    whether she had been in the United Kingdom for a period  in  excess  of
    ten years.  If she arrived  in  2006  and  the  decision  was  made  in
    relation to the appellant in January 2016 then it is a moot point as to
    whether she had been in the country for ten  years  and  attracted  the
    higher protection but it is not  of  course  her  protection  which  is
    significant in this case: it is the protection that is afforded to  her
    husband Mr Whyte.  The third level of protection  ('imperative  grounds
    of public security' is not available to  appellant  as,  in  accordance
    with reg. 21(4) is confined to an EEA national.  He is not required  to
    work in order to qualify as a spouse.  All that is required in his case
    is that he is married to somebody who is a person who has status in the
    United Kingdom by reason of her presence.

 6. The curious part of  the  decision  is  that  in  paragraph  35  headed
    'Refusal  to  Issue  a  Residence  Card',  the  Judge  considered   the
    appellant's conviction.  She  considered  that  it  demonstrated  'very
    serious behaviour'.  She also  considered  the  personal  circumstances
    pursuant to Regulation 21(6) and the strong family and social ties with
    the United Kingdom but nowhere does she deal with the issue as  to  the
    residence card save that she allows the appeal, thereby  entitling  the
    appellant to a residence card without actually dealing with  the  basis
    upon which it was to be granted.

 7. But there are perhaps other and rather  more  difficult  matters  which
    require the case to be reviewed.

 8. The Judge sets out by reference  to  Essa  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1718  the
    requirements of the decision maker to consider deportation in the light
    of a variety of factors.  In paragraph 13 she  records  that  there  is
    consideration of Zambrano - Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011]
    EUECJ C-34/09 - with regard to the EU citizen child and the Immigration
    Rules and s. 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002.
     Whilst not applying directly, the Rules were used as a guide  for  the
    consideration of his Article 8 claim. Paragraphs 398  to  399A  of  the
    Rules and s. 117C reflected parliament's view that the public  interest
    requires the deportation of those sentenced to less than four years but
    at  least  twelve  months'  imprisonment  unless   the   exception   to
    deportation is met or unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above  those  described  in  the  exceptions  to  deportation.
    However, and unfortunately, the judge does not then go on  to  consider
    whether those principles which were considered in Essa were  applicable
    in  the  appellant's  case.     Indeed  it  appears  to  be  only   the
    appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  considerations   which   are
    afforded prominence under Regulation 21(6) where  the  judge  sets  out
    those personal circumstances in paragraph 37.

 9. There is a further problem that arises.  It arises in relation  to  the
    assessment of  risk  that  is  posed.   It  is  quite  clear  that  the
    circumstances of this offending were and remain  crucial  to  a  proper
    consideration of this matter.  It is a single offence.   It  arises  in
    very extraordinary circumstances.   There  is  no  doubt  that  it  was
    prompted by the victim knocking upon the door of the appellant's house.
     The Judge asked the appellant to explain what happened.  In the course
    of the appellant's evidence, the Judge recorded that in paragraph 21 of
    the determination

         "[The appellant] said it all happened in seconds  and  his  partner
         called him back inside the house.  He had not struck a blow but the
         man had a cut on his hand and the mother had two cuts in her  back.
         The police arrived within five minutes".

10. That, on its face, was a description of  the  offence  which  does  not
    tally with the offence for which he was  convicted.   The  offence  for
    which the appellant received a sentence of  three  years'  imprisonment
    was one count of wounding with intent to do grievous  bodily  harm  and
    one count of common assault.  One can assume that common assault refers
    to the cuts on the finger but as far as the offence of grievous  bodily
    harm is concerned, the sentence of three years imprisonment belies  the
    appellant's own description of what occurred.  It would have been  much
    better for the Judge not to have engaged in a consideration of what the
    appellant's version of events was and to have confined herself  to  the
    sentencing remarks.  She does  set  out  those  sentencing  remarks  at
    paragraph 33 and makes  the  important  point  that  the  incident  was
    started  by  the  victim  who  banged  on  the  door  and  engaged  the
    appellant's partner in what was obviously some  form  of  violence.   I
    entirely accept that this is a proper way of looking at this  stage  of
    events.  Nevertheless the  offence  was  wounding  with  intent  to  do
    grievous bodily harm and was of such gravity as to demand a sentence of
    three years' imprisonment.  That cannot be overlooked.  It was  a  very
    serious offence.  Was it committed on the mother, who appears  to  have
    suffered the most serious injuries?

11. Having said that, these matters have to be looked at in  context.   The
    risk of reoffending and the risk posed to society at large have  to  be
    set in the context of the facts.

12. The reports that were provided suggested that there was a low  risk  of
    reoffending but, were there to be any such reoffending, there would  be
    a medium risk of harm.  Those were matters which the judge was required
    to take into account.

13. In summary, it comes down to this.  First, it  was  essential  for  the
    judge to consider the effect of the wife's status as  an  EEA  national
    who had been in the United Kingdom since 2006 and  then  to  go  on  to
    consider the appellant's status derived from that  of  his  wife.   The
    fact that their  child,  who  was  then  9  years  old,  holds  British
    nationality  as  well  as  Polish  and  Jamaican  nationality,  thereby
    indicating that she had a settled status in the  form  of  a  permanent
    right of residence, would affect the status of the  applicant  but  his
    rights based on marriage could only have been acquired since 2014.

14. As importantly, perhaps more importantly, the judge  did  not  consider
    whether or not there was any relationship to the case and s. 117 of the
    2002 Act as inserted by the 2014 Act and the impact upon the  appellant
    of  paragraphs  398  to  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  those
    circumstances I consider there was an error of law.  The  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be  set  aside  permitting  the
    matter to be remade.

