
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00239/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                        |On 05 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            Damion Anthony wilson
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Claire instructed by Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter was remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court  of  Appeal
    following a hearing in April of this year, the judgment being  reported
    at [2018] EWCA Civ 797.  At paragraph 36 of its decision the  Court  of
    Appeal allowed the Secretary of State's appeal and remitted the  matter
    to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   There had been an application for  an  adjournment  before  us  on  the
    basis that the appellant had  not  received  the  respondent's  bundle,
    having been  directed  to  resubmit  all  the  previous  evidence.   In
    directions the Tribunal had required the Secretary of State to  explain
    his position.

3.   We heard submissions from both representatives, both of  whom  were  of
    the view that in light of what had been said by the Court of Appeal  it
    would be appropriate for  the  matter  to  be  sent  back  for  a  full
    rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   Upon consideration we agree.  It is clear  from  paragraph  29  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in
    applying the considerations constituting the public interest,  for  the
    reasons given by the  court.   Bearing  in  mind  that  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision was in 2014, it seems clear that there will have to be
    a  significant  fact-finding  exercise  before  the   matter   can   be
    reconsidered in the context of the correct legal test.  Accordingly, we
    allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent that the matter  is
    sent back for rehearing at Taylor House before a judge other than Judge
    Elliman.

5.   We further direct:-

    (1)  The Home Office is to serve its bundle on the  appellant  and  the
         First-tier Tribunal no later than fourteen days from  the  date  of
         these directions before us.


    (2)  The Home Office is also directed to serve the  appellant's  bundle
         from the First-tier hearing on the appellant and  the  Tribunal  no
         later than fourteen days from the date of these directions.


    (3)  As regards the costs issue raised by Mr Claire, any submissions he
         wishes to make in regard to costs are  to  be  sent  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal no later  than  fourteen  days  from  the  date  of  these
         directions.  The Secretary of State if he  wishes  to  respond  has
         seven days to do so from the date of that deadline.


    (4)  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date:   24th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
