
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                    |
|Prepared 5 October 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              TUAN QUANG NGUYEN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Hudson
Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration Judge Finch and Ms J  A  Endersby)
    who in a determination  promulgated  on  29  August  2014  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
    15 January 2014to make a deportation order.  The decision followed from
    a conviction of the appellant on 3 May 2005 of conspiracy to  cultivate
    a class C drug.

2.   The relevant factual details  in  this  case  are  that  the  appellant
    entered Britain illegally in August 2003 and applied for asylum.   That
    application was refused on 10 January 2004 and his appeal was dismissed
    in July that year.  He was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  for
    two years on 3 May 2005.  After serving his sentence the appellant  did
    not leave Britain .  In August  2012  he  made  an  application  for  a
    residence card as a carer of a British citizen child.  The  appellant's
    partner originally came from Vietnam in  2002  but  is  now  a  British
    citizen.  They have two children who are British citizens.

3.   The Tribunal set out their findings and conclusions  in  paragraphs  12
    onwards of the determination.  Reference is made to paragraph 398(b) of
    the Rules and to paragraphs 399 and 399A.  It was stated that paragraph
    399A did not apply.  It appears to be the case that the  tribunal  also
    considered  that paragraph  399(b)  did  not  apply.   It  does  appear
    however that the Tribunal considered the appellant's deportation to  be
    unlawful because the appellant's wife would not be able "to provide Cam
    and Vu if the appellant was  deported  and  therefore  his  deportation
    would be unlawful".  It is not quite clear what the Tribunal  meant  in
    that sentence.  The Tribunal went on to consider the  judgment  in  the
    House of Lords in  ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2011] UKSC 4 and then discussed at some length  the  issue
    of the best interests  of  the  children  before  concluding  that  the
    respondent had not established that the appellant's  deportation  would
    amount to a proportionate breach of his rights under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  They therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

4.   The grounds of appeal claimed that the determination  of  the  Tribunal
    did not contain a properly structured approach under of  the  Rules  or
    state what exceptional factors might have  indicated  that  deportation
    would be disproportionate.  Moreover the Tribunal had  not  taken  into
    account the public interest in  the  deportation  of  someone  who  had
    committed a serious offence.  Finally  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    Tribunal had  ignored  the  provisions  of  Section  117A-117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which had come into  force
    on the day of the hearing.

5.   Judge of the Upper Tribunal Grubb granted permission on those grounds.

6.   At the beginning of the hearing Mr Khan quite correctly  conceded  that
    there was an error of law in the fact that the Tribunal had ignored the
    provisions of Section 117A-D of the 2002 Act.

7.   Mr Avery submitted that the Tribunal had erred in their  assessment  of
    the provisions of the  rules   and  indeed  that  there  was  no  clear
    framework in the determination as to how they had considered the rights
    of the appellant within the context of the Rules.   He  further  argued
    that they had misunderstood the concept of the best  interests  of  the
    children and that they did not appear to appreciate that  the  relevant
    test  was  not  whether  or  not  the  appellant's  wife   would   have
    difficulties in bringing up the children on her own but whether or  not
    the decision was proportionate taking into account the  rights  of  the
    children. Mr Avery relied on the determination of the Tribunal  in  KMO
    (section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC).

8.   Mr Khan submitted that the findings of fact made by the  Tribunal  were
    fully sustainable and that it would be appropriate for  me  to  re-make
    the decision and again allow the appeal on the basis of those  findings
    of fact.

Discussion

9.   As accepted by Mr Khan there was a clear material error of law  in  the
    determination of the Tribunal who had ignored the provisions of Section
    117A-D of the 2002 Act.  On that basis alone it would be appropriate to
    set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  However  there
    are further material errors.  The determination is unstructured and  it
    is really not clear whether or not the Tribunal have allowed the appeal
    under the Rules or on some exceptional basis.  They  have  not  in  any
    event pointed out any exceptional reasons  as  to  why  this  appellant
    should not be deported or why  his deportation  and  have  ignored  the
    public interest in the deportation of a convicted criminal, indeed, one
    who had never had leave to be in Britain.  While I note  that  Mr  Khan
    pointed out that the appellant had not committed any  further  offences
    since 2005 and was a reformed character that really is not the relevant
    substantive test.

10.  I find therefore there are material errors of law in the  determination
    of the Tribunal and  there  set  aside  the  decision.   Furthermore  I
    consider that the terms of the Senior President's  Tribunal's  Practice
    Directions are met and that it is appropriate that this  appeal  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that further findings of fact
    can be made.

Notice of Decision

11.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Directions

(1)  This appeal will proceed to a hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Taylor House.

(2)  A Vietnamese interpreter is required.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

