

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00517/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 18th June 2014                             |on 20th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             BRUCE DOUGLAS COOK
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Bruce Short,
Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This determination refers to parties as they were in the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    2. The SSHD appeals against the determination by a panel of the  First-
       tier Tribunal comprising Judge Dennis and Dr Winstanley, promulgated
       on 3rd September  2013,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against
       deportation to South Africa under the Immigration Rules and on human
       rights grounds


    3. The SSHD's grounds of appeal are  framed  on  a  misreading  of  the
       determination.  They take it that the appeal was dismissed under the
       Immigration Rules, and allowed only under Article 8.  There  are  no
       grounds which go to any error in  the  appeal  having  been  allowed
       under the Rules.  Mr Mullen did his best  to  persuade  me  that  an
       attack on the outcome under the Rules  could  be  derived  from  the
       grounds, but they are based on a misconception and give no scope for
       such an attack.


    4. For what it is worth, and as I observed at the hearing, the  panel's
       conclusion at paragraph 21 that  the  Appellant  had  not  shown  "a
       particular disregard for the law" in terms of  paragraph  398(c)  of
       the Rules seems highly debatable.  I am also doubtful of the panel's
       reading of paragraph 399 as to  whether  the  condition  that  there
       should be no other family member able to care for the child  in  the
       UK applies only to a child who has lived in the UK continuously  for
       seven years, and not to a child who is a British citizen.  There are
       no grounds of appeal raising those points.  Again  for  what  it  is
       worth, I suspect that the panel has tended to "reason back" from its
       conclusion in favour of the appellant,  trying  to  accommodate  the
       facts of his case within the scope of the Rules.


    5. The panel also allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Mr
       Mullen suggested that this was unnecessary, because once  an  appeal
       had succeeded within the Rules there is no need to look outside, and
       Article 8 is for almost all purposes  now  incorporated  within  the
       Rules.  That may be so, but  a  Tribunal  is  required  to  reach  a
       decision on all grounds of appeal properly before it, and it is good
       practice to give reasons for alternative outcomes, even if in  short
       form, when an appeal has succeeded otherwise.


    6. The Article 8 outcome was plainly within the scope of the panel, and
       the grounds do not show that it is affected by  any  error  of  law.
       Although he has been a persistent criminal  nuisance  the  Appellant
       has been in the UK since 1997 when he  was  aged  17,  has  all  his
       family roots and connections here,  has  no  ongoing  connection  to
       South Africa, has three children in  the  UK  with  whom  he  has  a
       relationship, and they are at least reasons to entertain hopes  that
       he will refrain from further criminal conduct and fulfil a  parental
       role to his children.  (It can only be hoped that the panel has  not
       been over-optimistic in these matters, and if the appellant did  not
       realise previously that he is liable to deportation, he knows now.)


    7. The SSHD's grounds of appeal do not show error of law in the panel's
       determination either as to the Immigration Rules or as to Article  8
       of the ECHR, and the determination shall stand.

                               [pic]
                                19 June 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

