
                               [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00113/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 September 2019                     | On 11 September 2019              |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FRANCISCO [P]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsey, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Rees, Counsel, instructed by RH Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1.  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (hereafter
         Appellant) appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal Malcolm (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated  on  27
         June 2019, allowed the appeal  of  Mr  [P]  (hereafter  Respondent)
         against the Appellant's decision of  6  February  2019  to  make  a
         deportation order pursuant to the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2016 (The 2016 Regulations).


Background

      2. The Respondent is a national of Portugal, born on 25 February 1988.
         He maintains that he entered the UK on 23  August  2014.  Prior  to
         this he had been living in India. He has never resided in Portugal.
         Upon entering the UK the Respondent resided  with  family  and,  in
         November 2014, commenced working in a warehouse. He was issued with
         an EEA Registration Certificate on 17 August 2015.


      3. On 19 June 2018 the Respondent was convicted of offences concerning
         attempted sexual activity with a female child under 16 and being an
         adult attempting to meet a girl under 16  years  of  age  following
         grooming. On 24 September 2018 he was sentenced  to  15  months  in
         imprisonment,  disqualified  from   working   with   children   and
         vulnerable adults, and became subject to a Sexual  Harm  Prevention
         Order to run for 10 years.

      4. On 5 August 2018  the  Respondent  was  served  with  a  notice  of
         liability to deportation and on 3 October  2018  the  Secretary  of
         State  notified  the  Respondent  that  she  intended  to  make   a
         deportation order against  him  on  grounds  of  public  policy  in
         accordance with Regulation 23(6)(b) and Regulation 27 of  the  2016
         Regulations. On 6 February 2019 the Secretary of State  decided  to
         make a deportation order. The Respondent  exercised  his  right  of
         appeal against this decision pursuant to Regulation 36 of the  2016
         Regulations.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 4  June  2016  the
         Respondent was represented by Mr Rees,  who  also  represented  the
         Respondent before me. The judge was in possession of  a  bundle  of
         documents prepared by the Secretary  of  State  that  included  the
         Sentencing  Judge's  Sentencing  Remarks  and  the  decision  under
         appeal. The bundle of documents prepared by the Respondent's  legal
         representatives included a statement from him, statements from  his
         maternal uncle, maternal aunt and maternal cousins  (all  dated  27
         February 2019), a letter from  his  parents,  a  National  Offender
         Management Service (NOMS) Initial  Single  Sentencing  Plan  (ISSP)
         review dated 6 March 2019, an OASys Assessment dated 13  May  2019,
         some medical documents relating to the Respondent's vascular  veins
         medical condition,  and  a  range  of  documents  relating  to  his
         employment in the UK and that of  his  family  members.  The  judge
         heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Respondent  given  via  a   Hindi
         interpreter, and oral evidence from the Respondent's maternal uncle
         and maternal cousin.


      6. Having summarised the submissions  from  both  representatives  the
         judge set out his findings. At [122] the judge  accepted  that  the
         Respondent's family resident in the UK were keen to assist  him  in
         his rehabilitation. The judge did not regard  their  evidence  that
         they would ensure that the Respondent had no access to computers or
         phones as  indicating  that  they  were  concerned  that  he  would
         reoffend but more as a precautionary measure to ensure he  was  not
         placed in the position where he could possibly reoffend. The  judge
         noted the family were shocked at the commission of the offences and
         considered that this was out of character for the Respondent.

      7. At [128] the judge stated that the threat identified in  Regulation
         27(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations did not need to  be  imminent  but
         had to represent genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
         taking into account the past  conduct  of  the  person.  The  judge
         stated,

         Albeit that the risk of reoffending has been categorised as low the
         risk of harm is medium and taking into account the past conduct  of
         the [Respondent], I consider that his conduct does meet the test of
         a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat.  I  accept
         however that this is mitigated by the  professional  support  which
         has been put in place and the support which he has from his family.

      8. The judge then went on to consider the requirements  of  Regulation
         27(6) of the 2016 Regulations. At [131] the judge  noted  that  the
         Respondent had never lived in  Portugal,  that  he  had  no  family
         members there, but he was not familiar with the language and had no
         knowledge whatsoever of life in that country. At  [132]  the  judge
         stated,


             The [Respondent] has very limited knowledge of English and has
             not integrated into life into the UK however, the links  which
             the [Respondent] has with the country of  origin  have  to  be
             considered and it is clear from the evidence in this case that
             the [Respondent] has no links whatsoever with the  country  to
             which the [Appellant] seeks to return him.


      9. At [133] the judge acknowledged the health  issues  raised  by  the
         Respondent but noted the absence of any  detailed  information  and
         consequently placed no particular emphasis on his health. At  [134]
         the judge stated,

             The [Respondent], since coming  to  the  UK,  has  lived  with
             family and whilst there was  some  evidence  that  his  family
             would continue to support him  in  Portugal  the  [Respondent]
             clearly requires the support of his family in the UK if he  is
             to continue with his rehabilitation.

     10. At [135] the judge stated,


             I consider that to return the [Respondent] to  Portugal  would
             cast him adrift in a  country  with  which  he  has  no  links
             whatsoever. The [Respondent] has not integrated into  life  in
             the UK and I consider that he would face extreme  difficulties
             in establishing a life for himself  in  Portugal  which  is  a
             country that he has never visited, as suggested by Mr Rees, he
             would have no friends, no support and his employment prospects
             would be poor.


     11. The judge, at [136], concluded that, although  the  Respondent  did
         represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat,  his
         lack of ties with Portugal led to a finding  that  his  deportation
         would be disproportionate. The appeal was allowed.




The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The written grounds of appeal contend that the judge failed to give
         adequate  reasons   why   the   deportation   decision   would   be
         disproportionate. The grounds focus on the Respondent's age at  the
         date of the judge's decision (31 years old) and the judge's finding
         that  the  Respondent  spoke  only  limited  English  and  had  not
         integrated into life in the UK, and  question  why  the  Respondent
         would need looking after by his family. The written  grounds  focus
         on the Respondent's claimed medical needs  even  though  the  judge
         placed no particular emphasis on his  health.  The  fact  that  the
         Respondent does not speak Portuguese  did  not  preclude  him  from
         finding employment and his  family  were  willing  to  continue  to
         support him in  Portugal.  The  grounds  note  the  length  of  the
         Respondent's residence in the UK  and  conclude  that  the  judge's
         decision was perverse.


     13. At the 'error of law' hearing Mr  Lindsey  relied  on  the  written
         grounds but refocused the  attack  on  the  judge's  decision  with
         reference to the issue of rehabilitation.  Although  rehabilitation
         had not been mentioned anywhere in the grounds Mr Lindsey submitted
         that it had been sufficiently pleaded by reference to the challenge
         to the judge's proportionality assessment. In reliance  on  SSHD  v
         Dumliauskas & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145 Mr Lindsey submitted that the
         judge placed unlawful weight  on  the  issue  of  the  Respondent's
         rehabilitation given that the Respondent  did  not  have  permanent
         residence and was not integrated into life in the UK. The  question
         of rehabilitation was said to have been an "essential plank" of the
         judge's reasoning. Had the error of law not been made the judge may
         well  have  reached  a  different  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
         proportionality of the Appellant's decision.

     14. Mr Rees accepted that the judge's decision could have been  clearer
         and submitted that the judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the
         Respondent's   conduct   constituted   a   genuine,   present   and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society. Mr Rees emphasised the judge's  finding  that
         the Respondent had never lived in Portugal and had no knowledge  of
         the Portuguese language or life in  that  country.  The  judge  was
         entitled to find that the Respondent would have no support  at  all
         and would be cast adrift. Mr Rees indicated that, although  he  had
         drawn the judge's attention to the decision  in  Essa,  R  (On  the
         Application Of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration & Asylum  Chamber)  &
         Anor [2012] EWCA Civ 1718, he did not  cite  Dumliauskas.  Mr  Rees
         submitted that the support provided by the Respondent's  family  in
         the UK meant that any threat posed by him  was  minimised  and  the
         Respondent  would  also  be  subject  to  heavy  supervision  as  a
         consequence of the Crown Court's order.

     15. I reserved my decision.




Discussion

Error of law

     16. The written grounds of appeal did not expressly  contend  that  the
         judge erred in his legal approach to the issue  of  rehabilitation.
         The  grant  of  permission   similarly   made   no   reference   to
         rehabilitation. The party appealing a decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  is  required  to  clearly  identify  all  the  bases   of
         challenge. It is inappropriate to criticise a judge's decision on a
         different basis from that upon  which  permission  was  sought  and
         granted. Mr Lindsey submits  that  the  written  grounds  were,  in
         general  terms,  a  challenge  to   the   judge's   proportionality
         assessment and that the  issue  of  rehabilitation  was  a  central
         element of that assessment. I am persuaded, albeit by the narrowest
         of margins, that the written grounds can be construed as a  general
         challenge to the judge's proportionality finding and that this does
         include the issue of rehabilitation. The Secretary of State  should
         however ensure that any future challenge to a decision of the First-
         tier  Tribunal  clearly  particularises  the  specific  grounds  of
         challenge.


     17. In Dumliauskas the Court of Appeal considered the Upper  Tribunal's
         approach to rehabilitation in Vasconcelos [2013]  UKUT  378  (IAC),
         which concerned a Portuguese national  convicted  of  burglary  and
         theft offences during riots in  Manchester.  At  paragraph  80  the
         Upper Tribunal stated, in relation to Mr Vasconcelos,

             His future  prospects  of  rehabilitation  are  uncertain  and
             whatever they are cannot be a weighty factor  in  the  balance
             given the absence of integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
             residence.

     18. At [44] Sir Stanley Burnton, giving the judgement of the  Court  in
         Dumliauskas, expressed his  agreement  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         approach. Then at [54] Sir Stanley Burnton explained,


             Lastly, in agreement with what was said by the Upper  Tribunal
             in Vasconcelos, I do not consider  that  in  the  case  of  an
             offender with no  permanent  right  of  residence  substantial
             weight should be given to rehabilitation.  I  appreciate  that
             all Member States have an interest  in  reducing  criminality,
             and that deportation merely exports the offender, leaving  him
             free  to  offend  elsewhere.  However,  the  whole  point   of
             deportation is to  remove  from  this  country  someone  whose
             offending renders him a risk  to  the  public.  The  Directive
             recognises that the more serious the risk of reoffending,  and
             the offences that he may commit,  the  greater  the  right  to
             interfere with the right of residence. Article  28.3  requires
             the most serious risk,  i.e.  "imperative  grounds  of  public
             security", if a Union citizen has resided in the  host  Member
             State for the previous 10 years. Such  grounds  will  normally
             indicate a  greater  risk  of  offending  in  the  country  of
             nationality or elsewhere in the Union.  In  other  words,  the
             greater the risk of reoffending,  the  greater  the  right  to
             deport.
     19. Headnote 10 of MC (Essa principles  recast)  Portugal  [2015]  UKUT
         00520 (IAC), which considered the decision in Dumliauskas, reads,


             In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
             residence, the future prospects of  integration  cannot  be  a
             weighty factor (Dumliauskas [44] and  [54]).  Even  when  such
             prospects have significant weight they are not a  trump  card,
             as what the Directive and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is
             a wide-ranging holistic assessment. Both  recognise  that  the
             more serious the risk of reoffending, and the offences that  a
             person may commit, the greater the right to interfere with the
             right of residence (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54]).


     20.  It  is  apparent  from  the  cases  referred  to  above  that,  in
         circumstances where a person is not integrated into the UK and does
         not have a right of permanent residence, the  future  prospects  of
         integration cannot be a weighty factor.


     21. The judge found, with good reason,  that  the  Respondent  was  not
         integrated in the UK. The Respondent had lived in the UK for  under
         5 years and could speak only limited English. The evidence from the
         Respondent, his maternal uncle and maternal cousin, referred to his
         need to remain in the UK to ensure his  rehabilitation  (see  [41],
         [42], [63] and [71]). In  his  submissions  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge Mr Rees submitted that the issue  to  determine  was
         whether the Respondent was rehabilitated when the process of  being
         rehabilitated (see [91] and [114]).

     22. The judge made brief reference at [122]  to  the  keenness  of  the
         Respondent's uncle and cousin to support him in his  rehabilitation
         and indicated at [134] that the Respondent  "clearly  requires  the
         support of his family in the UK if  he  is  to  continue  with  his
         rehabilitation." The judge made no reference to either  Dumliauskas
         or MC (Portugal).

     23. It is apparent from the foregoing that the judge did  consider  the
         issue of rehabilitation to  be  a  factor  in  his  proportionality
         assessment under Regulation 27(6) of  the  2016  Regulations.  Both
         Dumliauskas and MC (Portugal) indicate that rehabilitation, in  the
         Respondent's particular circumstances, cannot be a  weighty  factor
         as he does not have permanent residence and is  not  integrated  in
         the UK. Whilst the judge would be entitled to attach some weight to
         the  issue  of  rehabilitation,  this  is  not  apparent  from  his
         decision. In the absence of any  reference  to  Dumliauskas  or  MC
         (Portugal) and given the  emphasis  placed  by  the  judge  on  the
         Respondent's rehabilitation, I am satisfied that the judge erred in
         law by considering the Respondent's  rehabilitation  as  a  weighty
         factor.

     24. Mr Rees invited me to set aside the whole of the  judge's  findings
         including the finding that the Respondent was  a  genuine,  present
         and sufficiently serious fact to society.  Although  this  approach
         was opposed by Mr Lindsey I consider it appropriate  to  set  aside
         the whole of the judge's  decision.  The  judge  gave  no  adequate
         reasons for his conclusion that the Respondent's  conduct  met  the
         test of a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  other
         than by vague reference to his past conduct (see [128]). I  proceed
         to remake the decision having regard to  the  bundles  provided  by
         both parties that were before the First-tier Tribunal and the  oral
         evidence given  by  the  Respondent  and  the  Respondent's  family
         members to the First-tier Tribunal judge.

Remaking the decision

     25. Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations is headed,  'Decisions  taken
         on grounds of public policy, public security  and  public  health'.
         Regulations 27(5) & (6) read,


             (5) The public policy and public security requirements of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

             (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
         proportionality;
             (b)    the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;
             (c)    the personal conduct of the person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;
             (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;
             (e)    a person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;
             (f)    the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.

             (6)    Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of
             public policy and public security  in  relation  to  a  person
             ("P") who is resident in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision
             maker must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,
             state of health, family  and  economic  situation  of  P,  P's
             length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.

     26. Paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations reads,


             Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.

     27. Paragraph 5 of the schedule 1 indicates that removal of someone who
         can provide substantial evidence that  they  do  not  constitute  a
         threat is less likely to be proportionate. Paragraph 7 of  Schedule
         1  identifies  various  fundamental  interests  of  society.  These
         include  maintaining  public   order,   preventing   social   harm,
         protecting the public and acting in the best interests of children.
         I have taken account of all these factors when determining both the
         fundamental interests of society in this particular  case  and  the
         nature of the threat posed by the Respondent.


     28. The Respondent has been convicted of a serious offence. He had been
         in conversations on social media with  individuals  who  identified
         themselves as 12-year-old girls and  had  arranged  to  meet  these
         individuals for sexual activity following  Internet  grooming.  The
         Respondent had in fact made contact with a network who pretended to
         be two different 12-year-old girls in order to  catch  paedophiles.
         The fact that there were no actual girls does not detract from  the
         gravity of his offending, as reflected in a custodial  sentence  of
         15 months imprisonment in respect of 4 different counts.

     29. The Respondent has no other convictions and  there  is  nothing  to
         indicate that he has engaged in any criminality in  India.  In  his
         statement  the  Respondent   accepted   that   his   actions   were
         inappropriate and accepted  his  culpability.  He  claims  to  have
         complied with the police throughout the investigation and there  is
         nothing in the face of the papers to suggest otherwise. I note that
         although the Respondent pled Not Guilty in the  Magistrate's  Court
         it was accepted by the Sentencing Judge that this was  "effectively
         lawyer-led" and that the Respondent did receive credit for his plea
         of guilty.


     30. In determining whether the Respondent represents a genuine, present
         and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental
         interests of society I take account of the Sexual  Harm  Prevention
         Order that will run for 10 years. The strict terms  of  this  Order
         mean that the Respondent can only use an  Internet  enabled  device
         having notified the Public Protection Unit, which may install  Risk
         Management Software, he cannot delete his Internet history  or  use
         any App that destroys messages or any program  that  may  anonymise
         his identity or prevent a search  of  his  Internet  activity.  The
         Respondent  is  prohibited  from  working  with   children   and/or
         vulnerable adults and is prohibited from  having  contact  with  or
         communicating via the Internet with any child or young  person  who
         is known or believed to be under the age of 16 or residing  in  any
         dwelling with such a person unless he has the express permission of
         the child's parent/guardian who  is  aware  of  his  offences.  Any
         breach of  the  Order  could  result  in  a  sentence  of  5  years
         imprisonment.

     31. In considering whether  the  Respondent  poses,  in  particular,  a
         'present' threat I  have  read  the  offence  description  and  the
         Sentencing Remarks in detail. I note  in  particular  view  of  the
         Sentencing Judge that "... No future offending is likely." The NOMS
         ISSP review dated 5 March 2019 summarised the programmes undertaken
         by the Respondent during his detention including a Victim Awareness
         programme and  found  that  the  Respondent  was  at  low  risk  of
         reoffending but that if he did reoffend the Risk of Harm level  was
         medium. The OASys report dated  13  May  2019  indicated  that  the
         Respondent was at low risk of  reoffending  but  that  he  posed  a
         medium risk of serious harm to children in the community should  he
         reoffend.

     32. The Respondent has the support network consisting of  his  maternal
         uncle and his maternal aunt and their families, who  are  aware  of
         the nature of the Respondent's convictions.  He  will  be  residing
         with his maternal aunt and  will  therefore  be  under  her  direct
         supervision.  Both  the  Respondent's  maternal  aunt   and   uncle
         indicated that they would continue to support him  in  the  future.
         Both the  aunt  and  uncle  indicated  that  they  would  not  make
         available any computer/laptops to the Respondent and that he  would
         only be able to make phone calls in their presence.

     33. Whilst I am mindful of the medium risk of harm to children posed by
         the Respondent should he reoffend and the nature of  his  offending
         and the length of his sentence, I am satisfied  that  he  does  not
         pose a 'present' threat. I  reach  this  conclusion  based  on  the
         Probation Service assessments of the Respondent posing only  a  low
         danger  of  reoffending,  the  strict  terms  of  the  Sexual  Harm
         Prevention Order, and the supervision  and  support  that  will  be
         provided by the Respondent's family in the UK. I consequently  find
         that public policy does not require the Respondent's deportation as
         he does not pose a present threat to the fundamental  interests  of
         society.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.
I remake the decision,  allowing  Mr  [P]'s  appeal  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


D.Blum                                  4 September 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
