
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00402/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport   |Determination Promulgated          |
|On 13 November 2014                |On 27 November 2014                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ADRIAN WOJTOWICJ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:        Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
Respondent:   Not in attendance and unrepresented.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal originates in a decision made on behalf  of  the  Secretary
    for the Home Department (hereinafter the  "Secretary  of  State"),  the
    Appellant herein, dated 14 February 2014,  whereby  it  was  determined
    that the Respondent, a national of Poland now aged 27 years, should  be
    deported. The Respondent  appealed,  successfully,  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the "FtT"). The Secretary of State appeals, with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK

 2. In making her decision, the Secretary of State purported to  act  under
    regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations") which provides:

         "Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has been  admitted
         to, or acquired a right to reside  in,  the  United  Kingdom  under
         these Regulations  may  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  if
         ......................


             (b)  .... the Secretary of State has decided that his  removal
                  is justified on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                  security or public health in  accordance  with  regulation
                  21."

    In passing, neither of paragraphs  (4)  or  (5)  of  regulation  19  is
    engaged in this case.  Within the discrete regime of regulation  21,  a
    "relevant decision" means "an EEA decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health".  By regulation 21(4),
    where the EEA national concerned has resided in the United Kingdom  for
    a continuous period of at least 10 years prior to the relevant decision
    or is under the age of 18,  an  expulsion  decision  may  not  be  made
    "except on imperative grounds of  public  security".   Accordingly,  in
    this sphere, there is a category of EEA nationals,  with  two  separate
    types of membership, in respect of  whom  the  threshold  condition  of
    "imperative grounds of public policy" must be satisfied.

 3. There is a second category of EEA nationals  who  are  not  members  of
    either of the two groups belonging to the  first  category.   In  their
    case, by virtue of regulation 21(5), the  expulsion  decision  must  be
    taken on (mere) "grounds of public  policy  or  public  security":  the
    "imperative" requirement does  not  apply.   In  all  cases,  expulsion
    decisions must be taken in accordance with the following principles:

         "(a)   the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
         proportionality;


          b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct
             of the person concerned;


          c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one
             of the fundamental interests of society;

          d) matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do  not  justify
             the decision;

          e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
             justify the decision."
    See regulation 21(5).  In addition, per regulation 21(6):


         "......  The decision maker must  take  account  of  considerations
         such as the age, state of health, family and economic situation  of
         the person, the person's length of residence in the United Kingdom,
         the person's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with  his  country  of
         origin."

    In the present case, the assessment made was that the  Respondent  does
    not belong to the "imperative grounds  of  public  security"  category.
    Thus the decision was based on  the  lower  threshold  of  intervention
    applicable to the second category.

THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S DECISION

 4.  It  is  clear  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  that   the
    precipitating factor was the Respondent's conviction, on indictment, on
    28 November 2012, in respect of two counts of unlawful wounding,  which
    generated a commensurate  sentence  of  30  months  imprisonment.   The
    decision also draws  attention  to  the  Respondent's  criminal  record
    generally. During the period May 2005 to December  2012,  he  has  been
    convicted of three offences against the person, four  offences  against
    property, six offences of theft and kindred crimes, two public disorder
    offences and thirty miscellaneous other  offences,  including  repeated
    offences of breaching the requirements of a community order and failing
    to surrender to custody.

 5. The Secretary of State's decision analyses the Respondent's criminality
    and reasons in the following way:

      a) there was an established pattern of repeated acquisitive  offending
         within a relatively short period of time,  undeterred  by  previous
         convictions and sentences imposed, indicating a lack of regard  for
         the law, a lack of remorse and  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the
         Respondent's offending behaviour on others;


      b) there has been an escalation in the seriousness of the Respondent's
         criminality;

      c) alcohol consumption has been a factor in some of  the  Respondent's
         offending and the assessment  has  been  made  that  his  continued
         consumption of alcohol will increase the risk of his re-offending;

      d) drug ingestion was a factor in the Respondent's robbery  conviction
         in 2005;

      e) the assessment has been made that  the  Respondent's  thinking  and
         behaviour skills, problem solving skills and temper  control,  with
         associated impulsivity and aggressive  and  controlling  behaviour,
         are all factors giving cause for concern; and

      f) the Respondent's offending indicates  that  he  has  acted  without
         giving any consideration to the consequences  of  his  conduct  and
         that  he  has  the  potential   to   act   violently,   unprovoked,
         particularly when under the influence of alcohol.

    Based on the above  assessments  and  reasoning,  the  decision  letter
    continues:


         "All the above evidence indicates that you have a propensity to re-
         offend and that you represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat to the public to justify your deportation on grounds
         of public policy."

     This is a classic illustration of an evaluative judgement.

 6. The decision then examines the other factors which must compulsorily be
    considered and evaluated under regulation  21.   I  summarise  this  as
    follows:

       i) The Respondent is considered to be in good health.


      ii) The information provided does not demonstrate  that  he  has  been
          exercising Treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  does  not
          establish that he has acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence
          pursuant to a period of five years continuous residence.  Further,
          and in any event, any continuous residence he may have accrued has
          been fractured by his successive terms of imprisonment.

     iii) The Respondent's parents are divorced, his mother residing in  the
          United  Kingdom  and  his  father,  together  with  certain  other
          relatives, in Poland.

      iv) Having undertaken a brick laying  course  while  in  custody,  the
          Respondent will be able to utilise this skill upon his  return  to
          Poland and this, in turn, will facilitate his readjustment to life
          there.

       v) Given that the Respondent lived in Poland from birth until  around
          the age of 16 years,  his  claim  regarding  loss  of  his  Polish
          language skills is not considered  credible.   In  any  event,  if
          necessary, he will be able to  undertake  language  courses  there
          upon his return.

      vi) Noting  that  the  Respondent  has,  while  in  prison,  completed
          programmes  of   drug   awareness,   alcohol   awareness,   stress
          management, understanding conflict resolution and  others,  it  is
          acknowledged that while these "could possibly reduce the  risk  of
          re-offending  in  the  future",  it  is  not  necessary  for   the
          Respondent's rehabilitation that he remain in the United Kingdom.

     vii) It was clear that the Respondent's English partner had been unable
          to prevent him offending and re-offending.


 7. The decision then considers Article  8  ECHR  and  section  55  of  the
    Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  (the  "2009  Act").
    Consideration is given in particular  to  the  relationship  which  the
    Respondent has had with a partner for some  six  years,  the  partner's
    child who is now seven years old and the  younger  child  of  whom  the
    Respondent is the father, now  aged  two  years.   Evidence  of  police
    visits to  the  family  home  triggered  by  the  Respondent's  alcohol
    consumption, together with evidence that his partner, in 2012, informed
    the social worker that their relationship was at an end is  considered.
    The following is then stated:

         "If [the partner] wishes to maintain a relationship with  you,  she
         can continue this via modern means of communication and via  visits
         to Poland ......


         [A report] received from the [G] social services states that  there
         had been several incidents of domestic violence  which  took  place
         between your partner and yourself, dating back  to  2007  and  that
         [the older child] was a witness to or heard  the  majority  of  the
         incidents. As a result, the Offender Manager has assessed that  you
         pose a high risk of harm to [the older child] .......


         Taking into consideration the nature of your  serious  crime,  your
         extensive history of behaviour and  the  risk  you  pose  to  [this
         child] it is not considered that  your  deportation  would  have  a
         significant impact on [her] day to day life and that contact  could
         be maintained via modern methods of communication and via visits to
         Poland."

    The  same  assessment  is  made  in  respect  of  the   second   child.
    Furthermore, it is noted that the primary carer  of  both  children  is
    their mother.

THE FtT'S DECISION

 8. In its determination, the FtT recorded:

         "[The partner] has told the Appellant that she will be prepared  to
         accompany him to Poland if he is deported but the Appellant and his
         whole immediate family wish to be allowed to remain living together
         in the UK."

    It was noted that none of the other three family members has any links-
    linguistic, cultural or otherwise -  with  Poland.   Referring  to  his
    evidence at the hearing, the determination states:


         "About his offending generally the Appellant stated that he did not
         know why he has committed those offences but that every time he was
         under the  influence  of  alcohol  he  seemed  to  commit  criminal
         offences.  The Appellant emphasised at length that he  has  learned
         by his mistakes."

    Reference is then made to the  various  courses  which  the  Respondent
    completed in prison.  This prompts the following finding:


         "We find that in the context of the Appellant's offending from 2004
         ......... [his] behaviour (albeit) in prison shows  an  encouraging
         and consistent commitment to change."

     The second identifiable finding is the following:

         "We consider that [the Appellant's offending  prior  to  the  index
         offence] ..... can be accurately described as relatively low level,
         boorish, nuisance type offending."

         The third discernible finding is expressed thus:

         "There is now some evidence that his most recent sentence may  well
         have had a most welcome and desirable effect upon the Appellant."

    This is followed by a recitation of evidence, but no further  findings.
    Next, there is a finding that  the  partner  had  to  incur  loans  for
    subsistence purposes during the Respondent's  incarceration  and  that,
    when employed, the Respondent is a hard working person.

 9. The  determination  then  rehearses  the  soi-disant  Maslov  criteria,
    considering each  in  turn.   It  also  notes  the  assessment  of  the
    sentencing Judge and that of the Respondent's Offender  Manager,  which
    was that the Respondent -

         "... poses a high risk of harm to the public and  known  associates
         ....  [and] ...  poses a medium risk of reoffending."

         The key passage in the determination is the following:

         "....  We find that the interference [with Article 8 rights] is not
         in accordance with the law  and does not have legitimate  aims  due
         to  our  finding  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  is  not   in
         accordance with regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations; we find that
         the decision does not comply with the principle of  proportionality
         for all the reasons set out above and below."

              [Emphasis supplied]

         The FtT allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations and Article  8
ECHR.

APPEAL TO THIS TRIBUNAL

10. The main contentions advanced in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal were the following:

    (i)  The FtT "have failed to make findings  as  to  the  principles  in
         Regulation 21(5), nor have they given reasons pertaining to why the
         Appellant is not a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
         ....."

    (ii) "....  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society and the [FtT]  were materially misdirected  in  failing  to
         address this ....."

    (iii)    " ...... the [FtT] have outlined that the Appellant's  partner
         ......  would be prepared to accompany him to Poland  if  deported.
         It is submitted that the best interests  of  the  children  can  be
         provided for in the care of their family unit in Poland."

    Permission to appeal was granted on  the  grounds  that  the  FtT  had,
    arguably, failed to engage adequately with the principles enshrined  in
    regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations, had failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for the principal conclusion (which I  have  rehearsed  in  [9]
    above) and had given inappropriate weight  to  the  Appellant's  family
    life.

11.  I  refer  particularly  to  the  crucial  passage  in  [36]   of   the
    determination, reproduced in [9]  above.   This  yields  the  following
    analysis.  There are no reasons set out "below".   As  regards  reasons
    set out "above", I have, following careful  examination,  rehearsed  in
    [8] above the three findings properly identifiable in the text  of  the
    determination.  Duly analysed, these reduce to  two  findings,  as  the
    first and third are in essence the same.

12. The question for this appellate Tribunal is not whether it agrees  with
    the FtT's decision on its merits or whether it would have made the same
    decision.  Rather, this  Tribunal  must  determine  whether  the  FtT's
    decision is legally unsustainable on the basis of any of the  permitted
    grounds of appeal. I conclude, on balance, that the decision of the FtT
    cannot be upheld.  I have already adverted  to  the  "reasons  set  out
    above and below" issue.  Particular attention must be  focused  on  how
    the FtT dealt with the index offence  viz  the  most  recent  one,  the
    commentary of the sentencing Judge and the  reoffending  assessment  of
    the professional concerned.  Properly analysed, I consider that the FtT
    failed to address these key parts of the  evidence,  adequately  or  at
    all.  It was not enough for the  Tribunal  to  rehearse  briefly  these
    aspects of the evidence. Rather, it was incumbent on  the  Tribunal  to
    engage with them, to make appropriate findings and to give  sustainable
    reasons.  Furthermore, the necessary identification of  and  engagement
    with the public interest followed by  a  balancing  exercise  are  both
    missing.  I consider that the  determination  fails  in  all  of  these
    respects.

DECISION

13. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated above,  I  conclude  that
    the decision of the FtT is infected by material errors of law.

14. Consequent upon the above:

    (a)  I set aside the determination of the FtT.

     (b) I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing and decision.

     (c) This will be undertaken by a differently constituted panel  of  the
FtT.

     (d) I preserve no findings.



                                                                       [pic]

                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Date:   20 November 2014
