

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00138/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 10 February 2015                           |On 11 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MOHIT GOGNA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S F Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are referred to in the rest of this determination  as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The respondent appeals against a determination by  a  panel  comprising
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J C Grant-Hutchison and Dr  C  J  Winstanley,
    allowing the appellant's appeal against deportation to India.

 3. The grounds are directed against the  finding  in  terms  of  paragraph
    399A(a) of the Immigration Rules that the appellant had "no ties"  with
    India.  Mrs O'Brien submitted that the panel misconstrued that test and
    strayed into deciding the case on the relative strength  of  ties  with
    the UK and with India, which was irrelevant.

 4. On a strict and literal  interpretation  of  the  term  "no  ties"  the
    respondent would have a point.  However, the  authority  to  apply  was
    Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 00060, which the panel cited at paragraph 40.   In
    light of that case the issue whether the appellant  had  no  ties  with
    India required "a rounded  assessment  of  the  facts".   That  is  the
    exercise in which the panel engaged, reaching a conclusion open  to  it
    for the reasons given.

 5. The Rules have been amended  since  this  case  was  decided,  and  the
    current test would be whether there were very significant obstacles  to
    the appellant's  integration  in  India.   He  succeeded  on  a  finely
    balanced issue in these proceedings.  He should not take that  to  mean
    that deportation may  not  be  a  possibility  in  the  future,  if  he
    continues his criminal offending.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



           [pic]


           12 February 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


