
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00041/2013
                                                               DA/00042/2013
                                                               DA/00043/2013
                                                               DA/00045/2013
                                                               DA/00044/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28th October 2013                          |on 16th December 2013        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     MB
                                     NM
                                     WL
                                     SL
                                     KL
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss Rutherford instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Forrester  and
        Mr Getlevog (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  Panel")  who  in  a
        determination  promulgated  on  24th   May   2013   dismissed   the
        Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
        dated 20th December 2012 to deport the first appellant following  a
        criminal  conviction  on  1st  February  2008  and  to  deport  the
        remaining members of his family members 'in line'.



Background


     2. The appellants are all nationals of the DRC and a family unit.  The
        first appellant was born on 31st May 1974,  the  second  appellant,
        his wife, on 22nd January 1981, the third appellant on 26th  August
        2006, the fourth appellant on 19th February  2008  and  the  fourth
        appellant  on  15th  June  2010.  The  third,  fourth,  and   fifth
        appellant's are the sons of the first and second appellant.


     3. The Panel set out the immigration history of the first Appellant in
        paragraphs 2.1 to 2.6 and of his wife in 3.1 to 3.2 which I do  not
        need to repeat.


     4. In relation to the first  Appellant  the  Panel  also  refer  to  a
        previous determination of the 2nd March 2009 dismissing his  asylum
        claim and set out some of the findings made by the  Adjudicator  at
        length in paragraph 9.2  as  they  do  in  respect  of  the  second
        Appellant's claim in 9.9. Their findings commence at  paragraph  11
        and in paragraph 13 state:


              " In relation to the decision to deport both the  Husband  and
   Wife and given               the mandatory terms of section 32 of the  UK
   Borders Act 2007 and the                  Immigration Act  1971  we  find
   that pursuant into those statutory provisions that              both  the
   Husband and Wife are liable to be deported"


     5. The Panel accepted that it was necessary to  deal  with  Article  8
        ECHR and the impact of deportation on the Appellants' collectively.
        They  state  in  paragraph  14  that  they  have   considered   the
        Independent Social Workers report prepared by Christine  Brown  but
        claim that significant parts of the  report  are  premised  on  the
        basis the  first  Appellant  is  to  be  deported  with  the  other
        Appellants remaining in the United Kingdom.


     6. At paragraphs  16  the  Panel  considered  the  provisions  of  the
        Immigration Rules and found that none of the Appellants'  are  able
        to succeed under the same.


     7.   Paragraph   18   contains   something   common   to   deportation
        determinations written by Judge Forrester which is a  discourse  of
        some  nine  pages  in  length  setting  out  case-law  relating  to
        deportation, some of which has been overtaken by further  decisions
        of the European and domestic courts, before leading to  the  Panels
        conclusions under Article 8 ECHR at paragraph 21 which are  in  the
        following terms:


              We do not find that the family's  removal  to  the  DRC  would
   amount  to  a                   disproportionate  interference  with  any
   rights  under  Article  8  nor  could  such               removal  be  an
   exceptional  circumstance.    The   most   important   factor   for   the
   family and children in particular is that they should stay together as  a
   family.             The decisions made by the Husband  and  Wife  in  the
   course of their time in the           UK when they never had any right to
   remain or status here has created the                  situation in which
   they   find   themselves   with   the   Children.   But    nothing    put
   before us or the Immigration Judges who, before us, have  considered  the
   claims              suggests that the Husband or Wife will be at risk  on
   return. The Husband may               well expresses his  contrition  but
   we have borne in mind the gravity of the offence            committed and
   its   impact   upon   the   public   interest   in   stamping   out   the
   commission of offences such as those for which the husband was convicted.




     8. The Panel dismissed the appeal against deportation under  both  the
        Rules and by reference to the Human Rights Act.



Discussion



     9. There was discussion at length during the hearing before the  Upper
        Tribunal in relation to a matter appropriately raised by  Mr  Smart
        relating to the  immigration  decision  under  consideration.   The
        Respondent's records show no deportation order has been made  under
        section 32 UK Borders Act 2007 and in this respect paragraph 13  of
        the determination is wrong.


    10. Mr Smart could find no evidence of there ever having been a  signed
        deportation order so the appeal cannot  be  against  a  refusal  to
        revoke and must therefore relate to the provisions of the 1971  Act
        and the claim that  the  deportation  of  the  first  Appellant  is
        conducive to the public good that  his  family  members  should  be
        deported in line.


    11. Miss Rutherford accepted it was a conducive decision that had  been
        challenged outside the Rules on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   It  was
        also submitted that a different decision could and should have been
        arrived at had the evidence been  properly  considered,  even  when
        taking into account the public interest argument.


    12. If the Panel misunderstood the immigration  decision  under  appeal
        this is a legal error.  There has never been a decision  to  deport
        under the provisions of the UK Borders Act  and  the  statement  in
        paragraph 13 that "given the mandatory terms of section 32 and  the
        Immigration Act 1971 they find that the Husband and Wife are liable
        to be deportation" must be tainted by such error.


    13. Section 3(5) of the 1971 Act gives the Secretary of State power  to
        deport a non British Citizen (a) if he deems it to be conducive  to
        the public good (b) if another  member  of  the  family  is  to  be
        deported and (c) if a court recommends it after  conviction  of  an
        offence punishable by imprisonment.  Section 3(5)(a)  is  reflected
        in paragraph 363 of the Immigration  Rules,  which  states  that  a
        person is liable to deportation where the Secretary of State  deems
        that person's deportation to be conducive to the public good.


    14. The Panel should  have  taken  this  as  their  staring  point  and
        followed the guidance provided in the case of Bah  (EO  (Turkey)  -
        liability to deport) [2012] UKUT 00196(IAC) in which  the  Tribunal
        said that in a deportation appeal not falling within section 32  of
        the UK Borders Act 2007, the sequence of decision  making  set  out
        in EO (deportation appeals: scope and process) Turkey [2007] UKAIT
        62 still applies but the first step is  expanded  as  follows:  (i)
        Consider whether the person is liable to be deported on the grounds
        set out by the Secretary of State. This will normally  involve  the
        judge examining:- (a) Whether the material facts  alleged  by  the
        Secretary of State are accepted and if not whether they  are  made
        out to the civil standard flexibly  applied;  (b)  Whether  on  the
        facts established viewed  as  a  whole  the  conduct  character  or
        associations reach such a level of  seriousness  as  to  justify  a
        decision to deport; (c) In  considering  b)  the  judge  will  take
        account of any lawful policy of the Secretary of State relevant  to
        the exercise of the discretion to deport and whether the discretion
        has been exercised in accordance  with  that  policy;  (d)  If  the
        person is liable to deportation, then the next question to consider
        is  whether  a  human  rights   or   protection   claim   precludes
        deportation. In cases of private or family life, this will  require
        an assessment of the proportionality of the  measures  against  the
        family or private life in question, and a weighing of all  relevant
        factors; (e) If the two previous  steps  are  decided  against  the
        appellant, then the question whether the discretion to  deport  has
        been exercised in accordance with the Immigration Rules  applicable
        is the third step in the process. The present wording of the  rules
        assumes that a person  who  is  liable  to  deportation  and  whose
        deportation would not be contrary to the law and in breach of human
        rights should normally be deported absent exceptional circumstances
        to be assessed in the light of  all  relevant  information  placed
        before the Tribunal.


    15. There is no indication the Panel undertook the  correct  assessment
        although, as the challenge to the determination is limited  to  the
        proportionality assessment conducted by the Panel and  the  failure
        to properly consider section  55  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the
        children outside the Immigration Rules and not the findings that he
        is  liable  to  deportation,  I  find  that   notwithstanding   the
        misdirection in paragraph 13 that the conclusion of the Panel  that
        the first Appellant is liable to be deported, so far as this is the
        answer to the first of the questions posed in Bah, is  correct  and
        is not affected by any material legal error.


    16. The next stage of the assessment that should have been conducted by
        the Panel was to consider whether  a  human  rights  or  protection
        claim precludes deportation. In cases of private  or  family  life,
        this required an assessment of the proportionality of the  measures
        against the family or private life in question, and a  weighing  of
        all relevant factors.


    17. The findings of the Panel that there was no sustainable  protection
        claim is not challenged in the grounds seeking permission to appeal
        is therefore a preserved finding both in relation  to  the  Refugee
        Convention and Article 3 ECHR.


    18. The question to be  considered  therefore  is  whether  a  properly
        conducted proportionality balancing exercise was undertaken by  the
        Panel.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal allege it was  not
        by reference to the failure of the Panel to properly  consider  the
        evidence made available, including the report from Christine Brown,
        and the actual circumstances of the children, and applicability  of
        relevant case law.


    19. I accept Christine Brown's report was considered by  the  Panel  as
        there is a specific reference in paragraph 14 of the  determination
        to the report from which the Panel set out a  number  of  passages.
        The report itself is to be found at section  F,  pages  1-36.   The
        core theme running through the report is that  it  is  not  in  the
        children's best interests for their father to be deported,  as  the
        Panel state,  but  it  is  clear  that  what  is  proposed  is  the
        deportation of the family unit as  a  whole  as  evidenced  by  the
        immigration decisions under appeal and that this is  not  a  family
        splitting case.   It is  a  case  in  which  it  was  necessary  to
        consider whether  the  children's  best  interests  are  served  by
        remaining in the United Kingdom  based  upon  the  ties  they  have
        established to this country and the impact upon them of  having  to
        re-locate and re-establish themselves with  their  parents  in  the
        DRC.


    20. It is noted that the children have formed ties  within  the  United
        Kingdom which is the country in which they were born and  the  only
        environment they have experienced to-date.  Christine  Brown  notes
        that the children remain of an age when they  have  limited  or  no
        understanding of their circumstances but that all three  appear  to
        be thriving and meeting their developmental targets, something  she
        states will be compromised  by  their  removal  to  the  DRC.   The
        children are not of an age when they can state their views but they
        can indicate their wishes through other means and she  states  that
        they should be given careful consideration by those decision-makers
        charged with their future welfare [5.4]


    21. Bearing in mind  her  observations  Christine  Brown  concludes  in
        paragraph 5.6:

              "With this in mind, I believe that  [W],  [S],  and  [K]  have
demonstrated  their                   feelings,   as   far   as   they   are
demonstrably able for their  respective  ages,  regarding              their
life as it is now with their mother and their father in the  United  Kingdom
         unequivocally, through positive body language  and  responses  from
all three              children towards both their  parents  that  evidenced
the   cohesive   nature   of   their              mutually    interdependent
relationships with one another.   Therefore,  the                 children's
perceived views  and  wishes  must  be  central  to  any  decision  made  on
     their behalf, regardless as to  how  these  have  been  expressed  and,
also,                  consideration of  the  safeguards  that  are  now  in
place to ensure as far as possible           their  future  welfare  without
the potentially dangerous disruption of their lives  if              removed
to the DRC without any  of  these  measures  either  being  transferable  or
     maintained."
.
    22. It was accepted by Mr Smart that a  reading  of  the  determination
        demonstrated a lack of attention to detail but  he  submitted  that
        even if proper attention had been given to the  evidence  it  would
        not have made a material difference.


    23. On behalf of  the  Appellant's  Miss  Rutherford  argued  that  the
        consideration in paragraph 21 of Article 8 outside the  Immigration
        Rules was wholly inadequate.


    24. In assessing the  proportionally  was  the  decision  in  the  best
        interests of the children are paramount  concern.  In  Azimi-Moayed
        and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)[2013]
        UKUT 197(IAC) (Blake J) the Tribunal held that (i)  The case law of
        the Upper Tribunal  has  identified  the  following  principles  to
        assist in the determination of appeals where children are  affected
        by the appealed decisions: (a) As a starting point  it  is  in  the
        best interests of children to be with both  their  parents  and  if
        both parents are being removed from the  United  Kingdom  then  the
        starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
        part of their household unless there are reasons to  the  contrary;
        (ii) It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
        stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
        the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
        which they belong; (iii) Lengthy residence in a country other  than
        the state of origin can lead to development of social cultural  and
        educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the
        absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to
        lengthy residence is not clear cut but past  and  present  policies
        have identified seven years as a relevant period; (iv)  Apart  from
        the terms of published policies and rules, the Tribunal notes  that
        seven years from age four is likely to be  more  significant  to  a
        child that the first seven years of life. Very young  children  are
        focussed  on  their  parents  rather  than  their  peers  and   are
        adaptable;  (v)  Short  periods  of  residence,  particularly  ones
        without leave or the reasonable expectation of leave  to  enter  or
        remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to  give
        rise to private  life  deserving  of  respect  in  the  absence  of
        exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the economic well-
        being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.


    25. A reading of the determination  does  not  allow  me  to  find  any
        express reference to these important considerations or  even  allow
        me to infer the findings made  in  relation  to  such  issues.  The
        report of Christine Brown is said to contain  an  analysis  of  the
        lives of the children in the UK at paragraphs 4.1 to 4.12, 4.128 to
        4.20 and 4.29. The child W was also nearly seven years  of  age  at
        the date of the  hearing  and  his  circumstances  required  proper
        analysis. Christine Brown notes that the second Appellant stated to
        her that the children have been integrated into the culture of  the
        United Kingdom and have little or no understanding of their African
        heritage  which  has  been  something  the  first   Appellant   has
        deliberately avoided giving his own dual heritage and problems that
        may occur within the Congolese  community  in  the  United  Kingdom
        [4.5].


    26. I find the assessment of the Article 8 ECHR element of  the  appeal
        inadequate. I find the fact the Panel thought this was an automatic
        deportation appeal, when clearly it is not, may have influenced the
        weight they gave to the balancing exercise. I find the statement in
        paragraph 21 that the decisions made by the Husband and Wife in the
        course of their time in the UK when they never  had  any  right  to
        remain or status here has created the situation in which they  find
        themselves with the Children, may indicate the  Panel  reduced  the
        weight they gave to the best interests of the  children  when  Lady
        Hale in ZH (Tanzania) made it clear that the actions of the parents
        were not a relevant factor when considering the best  interests  of
        the children.


    27. I find the Panel erred in law in relation to  the  Article  8  ECHR
        assessment with specific reference to the  best  interests  of  the
        children. Whilst the result may be the same such a  conclusion  can
        only be safely arrived at when all the evidence has been considered
        with the degree of care required in an appeal of this nature,  that
        of anxious scrutiny, and adequate reasons given for findings made.


    28. I find that as the  Appellants  have  not  had  the  benefit  of  a
        properly considered Article 8  ECHR  claim  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, the  interests  of  justice  require  the  appeal  to  be
        remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Sheldon Court for this to be
        undertaken, especially in light of the fact  it  is  the  lives  of
        children which are being considered and the second appeal  criteria
        being applicable to appeals from the Upper Tribunal.


Decision

    29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the Panel. The following directions shall apply  to
        the future conduct of this appeal:


          i.  The appeal  shall  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   sitting at Sheldon           Court Birmingham to be listed on a  date  to
   be agreed in light of  the                  operational  requirements  of
   that centre. Time estimate 3 hours. To be              heard by  a  panel
   nominated by Resident Judge Renton.


          ii. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal shall be limited to
   consideration           of the Article 8 ECHR ground of appeal, including
   an assessment of                 the best interests of the children,  and
   whether the decision to deport is             proportionate in  light  of
   the findings made.


          iii.    The findings relating to the inability of  the  Appellants
   to substantiate their            claim to be  entitled  to  international
   protection and their inability to  satisfy               the  Immigration
   Rules  shall  be  preserved   findings,   as   shall   their   respective
   immigration history.


           iv.  The  parties  must  file  and  serve  upon  each   other   a
   consolidated, indexed,           and paginated bundle containing all  the
   evidence upon which they intend           to rely no later than  14  days
   before the date of the hearing.  Witness                statements  shall
   stand as the evidence in chief of the maker.


          v.  A Lingala interpreter shall be provided.


          vi. Any application to vary these  directions  shall  be  made  in
   writing to                   Resident Judge Renton at Sheldon Court.


          vii.    Anonymity - The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant
   to rule                 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
   (Procedure) Rules 2005. I             continue that  order  (pursuant  to
   rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper           Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st November 2013












