
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00032/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge mahmood


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Richard Appiah
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach,  who  allowed  the
    appeal of the claimant, a citizen of the Netherlands and  therefore  an
    EEA  citizen.  The  claimant's  appeal  was  against  the  respondent's
    decision to make a deportation order removing him  to  the  Netherlands
    pursuant to Regulation 19(1B)  and  21  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) .

 2. The Secretary of State made a decision to deport  the  claimant  on  15
    July 2013: on 30  July  2013,  a  deportation  order  was  signed.   At
    paragraph  17  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  further   reasons   for
    deportation letter on 11 February 2014, she accepted that the  claimant
    had acquired a permanent right of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She did not consider that there was sufficient evidence to suggest that
    the claimant had properly  addressed  the  reasons  for  his  offending
    behaviour, and that the offence was very serious.

Background

 3. The claimant came to the United Kingdom from the Netherlands.   He  was
    able to show that he had worked here for 5 years  from  December  2009.
    He demonstrated to the  Secretary  of  State  that  he  had  married  a
    naturalised British citizen and had two  children  here.   Family  life
    between the  claimant,  his  wife  and  those  children  was  accepted,
    although his links to four other children in the  United  Kingdom  were
    not.

 4. The claimant came to the attention of the authorities on two occasions:

          a) In November  2007,  the  claimant  was  cautioned  for  common
             assault and destruction or damage to property.

          b) In September 2011, the claimant was  arrested  on  his  return
             from the Netherlands and subjected to  an  x-ray  examination.
             He was found to be in possession of approximately one kilogram
             of a Class A drug, 100% pure cocaine, which he  had  swallowed
             in 99 small containers.  The claimant pleaded guilty, but  the
             offence was sufficiently serious  that  he  still  received  a
             sentence of 5 years imprisonment.

 5. It appears that the claimant undertook various training courses  whilst
    in prison as a result of which he  had  achieved  a  college  induction
    covering health and safety awareness and food safety awareness, a level
    2 food safety certificate,  and  industrial  cleaning  certificate  and
    various other matters of that sort including three credits at  level  1
    on a  course  entitled  employability  and  life  skills.   Before  his
    imprisonment the claimant was  working  as  a  bus  driver  and  it  is
    difficult to see exactly what relevance these new qualifications  might
    have to that career.

 6. A report from the National Offender Management Service (NOMS) indicated
    that the claimant was a low reconviction risk.  The  risk  of  harm  to
    others would be

         "...mainly the fact that [the claimant] would be giving these drugs
         to people. ...This is [the claimant's] first  conviction  therefore
         it is my assessment  that  he  would  be  a  low  risk  of  further
         conviction of the same nature."

First-tier Tribunal decision

 7. In its decision, the First-tier Tribunal found that  having  regard  to
    the gravity of the offence committed but also to  the  claimant's  warm
    and loving family unit who  seek  to  support  him  as  do  his  eldest
    children from his previous relationship and a low risk of  reconviction
    together with his having displayed some insight into  his  offence  and
    accessed educational courses in prison that  the  claimant  was  not  a
    sufficiently serious, genuine and present  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society. The claimant came to the United Kingdom on a date
    which remains unclear, but which the First-tier Judge found  to  be  no
    longer than five years before his conviction in  September  2011.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge therefore applied the 'serious grounds'  test
    when assessing whether the claimant could lawfully be  removed  to  the
    Netherlands.

Secretary of State's challenge

 8. The basis of the Secretary of State's appeal in the  first  application
    was that:

      1) the judge misdirected herself and that the claimant is  a  genuine,
         present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to   the   fundamental
         interests of society and that the  claimant's  conviction  and  the
         length of his sentence so demonstrate;

      2) the best  interests  of  the  claimant's  children  are  a  primary
         consideration but that the public interest  needs  to  be  properly
         weighed against the circumstances; and that

      3) the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with  section  117C(6)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. In the renewal grounds, the respondent relied on the first grounds  but
    also argued that the assessment of the threat which the claimant  posed
    to United Kingdom society was inadequately  reasoned.   She  posited  a
    theory that since the claimant regularly visited  the  Netherlands  for
    the purpose of gambling there, the very risky course he had taken might
    be one which had been forced upon him because he had a  gambling  debt.



Permission to appeal

10. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had arguably erred in failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the claimant was not a 'genuine, present and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society'.
    Permission was not granted on the respondent's argument that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law by failing to take into account section 117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 because a  decision
    under the EEA Regulations is not a consideration of Article 8 ECHR made
    under the Immigration Acts.

11. The only issue before us therefore is whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    properly applied the EEA Regulations.

Discussion

12. We reminded ourselves of the relevant  provisions  of  Part  4  of  the
    Regulations, which deal with  refusal  of  admission  and  removal,  as
    follows:

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         19. ...(1B) If the Secretary of State considers that the  exclusion
         of an EEA national or the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  is
         justified on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
         public health in accordance with regulation  21  the  Secretary  of
         State may make an  order  for  the  purpose  of  these  Regulations
         prohibiting that person from entering the United Kingdom.

         Decisions taken on public policy, public security and public health
         grounds

         21. (1) In this regulation  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security. ...

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles -

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom, the decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

13. The claimant falls to be considered as a permanent resident to whom the
    'serious grounds of public policy' test applies.  Even  at  the  lowest
    end of the sentencing range, his attempt to import a very large  amount
    of a Class A drug from his  EEA  country  of  nationality  attracted  a
    sentence of 5 years. The respondent was fully entitled to consider that
    'serious grounds  of  public  policy'  exist,  particularly  given  the
    confusing and somewhat contradictory statement by NOMS  that  the  only
    reason why the claimant might still be a risk is that he  might  supply
    drugs to others.

14. So far as the EEA Regulations are concerned we are satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did misdirect herself as to  the  gravity  of
    the index offence and that the respondent was entitled to consider that
    the index offence was sufficiently serious to create a serious, genuine
    and present threat to the fundamental interests of society.

15. Our attention has been drawn to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations)  [2015]  UKUT  329  (IAC)  which
    holds that the proper approach is to deal first with  the  question  of
    the EEA Regulations and second, if Article  8  has  been  raised  as  a
    ground of appeal, with the provisions of Sections 117A - 117D.

16. As regards Article 8 the judge did assess the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The claimant on his account has a total of six  children  in
    the United Kingdom  and  two  in  Ghana.   Her  assessment  appears  at
    paragraphs 36 to 37 of the decision and we must  apply  paragraph  117C
    and D in particular  to  the  assessment  of  the  interests  of  those
    children.  Paragraph 117B  notes  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest and paragraph 117C  that
    the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and that
    the more serious the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign  criminal  the
    greater the  public  interest  in  deportation.   Subparagraph  117C(6)
    states that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2",

    set out at 117C(4) and (5), Exception 2 being the parental relationship
    with a qualifying child.

17. It is not clear from the determination  that  compelling  circumstances
    over and above the parental links were established.  It is accepted  by
    the judge that the claimant has a warm relationship with all  eight  of
    his children including two who live with his British wife, another four
    in the United Kingdom and  two  abroad  but  those  considerations  are
    governed by Exception 2 and more  than  the  parental  relationship  is
    required here. Some of his children have visited him in prison, but the
    youngest three have not: they maintain contact  by  telephone  and  the
    youngest thinks already that his father is living in  Amsterdam.   Even
    had we been seised of the Article 8/section 117C argument,  we  do  not
    consider that  on  a  proper  assessment  of  the  factual  matrix  the
    existence of his extended family in the United Kingdom would have  been
    determinative of the appeal.

18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination does not  establish  that
    there are very compelling circumstances over  and  above  his  parental
    role and the affection between him and his children and accordingly  we
    find that she made  a  material  error  of  law  both  in  relation  to
    Regulation 21 and also in relation to Part 5A of the 2002 Act.



Conclusions

The making of the previous decision involved the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

We set aside the decision and remake it by dismissing the appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  I continue that order pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

