

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00723/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Wednesday 31 October 2018              |On Tuesday 27 November 2018    |
|                                          |                               |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                       MR DOMINIK GLADIC (AKA COMPTON)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel instructed on a direct access
                    basis via 36 Civil
For the Respondent:  Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



    BACKGROUND


    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Telford  promulgated  on  21  June  2018   ("the   Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 14 November 2017 making  a  deportation  order.   The
       Appellant is a national of Germany.  As such, the deportation  order
       was made under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
       2016.


    2. Although the Appellant has been in the UK for some considerable time
       (having arrived in about 1997, aged fourteen or fifteen  years),  he
       does not assert an entitlement to any  higher  level  of  protection
       based on his length of residence because of his continual  offending
       since shortly after his arrival and the CJEU judgment in Vomero.

    3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  on
       Article 8 grounds.


    4. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hodgkinson on 2 August 2018  in  the  following  terms  (so  far  as
       relevant):

            "...[2]    The grounds argue that the Judge  erred  in  various
           respects as set out therein.  A reading of the Judge's  decision
           indicates that the grounds as a whole disclose  arguable  errors
           of law.  Permission is granted on all grounds pleaded."


    5. The matter comes before us to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if we so find, either to re-make the
       Decision ourselves or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to
       do so.

    SUBMISSIONS

    6. Mr Harding adopted the pleaded grounds.  In essence, the Appellant's
       case is  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  make  findings  applying
       regulation 27  of  the  EEA  Regulations  but  instead  has  applied
       domestic immigration law provisions, namely section  32  UK  Borders
       Act 2007 and the Immigration Act 1971.

    7. By way of illustration  of  that  challenge,  Mr  Harding  drew  our
       attention to the following parts of the Decision:

           1) At [38]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  directs  himself  in
              accordance with case-law concerning the domestic  immigration
              law provisions that there is a "need to weigh  deterrence  of
              foreign criminals  of  committing  serious  crimes".   As  Mr
              Harding points out, that  is  not  relevant  to  the  EU  law
              context where what the Respondent is required to show is that
              there is a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
              based on the danger posed by the  individual  and  even  then
              based not simply on past convictions.

           2) At [42] and [43] of the Decision, the  Judge  refers  to  the
              cases of MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Chege (Section
              117D - Article 8 - Approach) [2015]  UKUT  00165  (IAC).   He
              does so in the  context  of  there  being  no  need  to  show
              exceptional circumstances in order to deport.  The Judge says
              at [43] of the Decision that "I  know  and  fully  appreciate
              that this case is not four  square  with  the  considerations
              under the Regulations which I have to take  into  account  as
              the legal background was quite different but it  is  employed
              by me to  emphasise  the  basic  point  here  which  was  the
              assessment by a judge  of  the  competing  interests  of  the
              appellant with public interest".  That might suggest that the
              Judge has  appreciated  the  difference  between  deportation
              under the EEA  Regulations  and  deportation  under  domestic
              immigration law. However, he nowhere sets out the appropriate
              EU law test in the findings  and  reasons  which  follow  (at
              least not in so many words: the nearest one comes is at  [29]
              of the Decision).

           3) In similar vein, the Judge at [30] to [32]  of  the  Decision
              (which paragraphs as Mr  Harding  submits  are  difficult  to
              comprehend in any event), the Judge directs himself as to the
              exercise of discretion and, again, to exceptionality.  Again,
              he states at [31] of the Decision that "[t]his should not  be
              confused with the requirement which  I  observe  to  consider
              those  matters  under  Regulation  27  when  decided  if  the
              deportation is justified under  Regulation  23".  That  might
              indicate a recognition of  the  different  legal  context  of
              deportation to another EU member  state.   However,  he  then
              goes on to say that "[w]hen it comes to the  wider  principle
              of discretion to not follow that which is concluded  as  made
              out or proved through the Regulations, namely deportation, it
              is the case that I can and should take into account  the  law
              of the land and  the  common  law  principles  influencing  a
              decision of discretion."  We observe that, if and insofar  as
              that is intended to suggest that the Judge can apply domestic
              authorities to the EU law context, that is  only  permissible
              insofar as those authorities are consistent with EU law.

    8. Mr Harding acknowledged that the Judge does set out regulation 27 of
       the EEA Regulations at [25] of the Decision.  He  submitted  however
       that the Judge had failed to engage with the test laid down by  that
       regulation.

    9. Mr  Harding's  challenge  was  concerned  mainly  with  the  Judge's
       findings in relation to the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations.   He
       did though observe that, when dealing with the Article  8  claim  at
       [48] to [51] of the Decision, the Judge  failed  to  make  a  single
       mention of Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
       which applies in this regard.

   10. Mr Harding also drew our attention to  inconsistencies  between  the
       Judge's findings and the evidence.  At [47]  of  the  Decision,  the
       Judge asserts that the Appellant  had  claimed  that  he  had  never
       worked in the UK.  That is contradicted by  paragraphs  [20],  [23],
       [24], [25] and [30] of the Appellant's witness statement.  There  is
       no finding by the Judge that this evidence is to be rejected or why.
        Similarly, at [45]  of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  says  that  the
       Appellant "has provided no evidence he has ever exercised any Treaty
       rights when in the UK".  That ignores not only the evidence that the
       Appellant has worked in the UK but also evidence that he has studied
       in the UK (see [19] of the Appellant's statement).

   11. Mr Harding also drew our attention to what is said by the  Appellant
       at [52]  onwards  of  his  statement  concerning  his  regret  about
       becoming addicted to drugs, his rehabilitation,  use  of  methadone,
       efforts to become clean, and other efforts to turn his life  around.
       He concludes that:

           "[67] I have behaved terribly in this country and I am sorry for
           it.  I have let my family down but mostly myself.  If  I  return
           to Germany I really fear I will descend into hopelessness  again
           and I worry for my life.

           [68]  I ask to be given a chance that perhaps  I  don't  deserve
           but will do my best to use if given it."

   12. Mr Harding drew our attention to [40] and [41] of the Decision where
       the Judge says this:

           "[40] I was particularly worried by his uncompromising  approach
           to the bald facts of his criminal record,  his  criminality  and
           what was behind it.  I find that he has not reformed and  it  is
           impossible to deal rationally with  someone  who  cannot  accept
           what they have done, why they have done it and then use logic in
           order to address it.

           [41]  I am of the view that this man has had a full  opportunity
           to rehabilitate but that was a wasted  opportunity  and  he  has
           failed to show he benefitted from any steps taken  as  his  mind
           was not set on improving his life  and  taking  himself  out  of
           drugs and violence.  The withdrawal from drugs should of  course
           have taken place in any event if he was in detention."

   13. Mr Harding accepted that the Judge did not  have  to  take  at  face
       value what the Appellant says in his statement.  He accepted that it
       was open to the Judge to view the evidence in one  of  a  number  of
       ways.  However, he submitted that it was not open to  the  Judge  to
       simply ignore the  evidence.   He  also  pointed  out  that  it  was
       incumbent on the Judge to consider the evidence when determining the
       existence and extent of any current threat.

   14. Mr Deller accepted without demur that the Decision contains an error
       of law, in particular the Judge's adoption of domestic case-law when
       assessing deportation under the EEA Regulations.  Although the Judge
       had some limited regard to the EU  law  aspect,  he  had  failed  to
       engage with the relevant tests.

   15.  In relation to materiality, Mr Deller considered whether  it  could
       be said that the Judge had stumbled on the right  result  albeit  by
       the wrong route.  However, he  said  that  he  could  have  no  real
       confidence that the Judge had adequately considered the evidence  or
       the issues.  He accepted that it was open to the Judge  to  consider
       Article 8 ECHR.  However, even in that context, the Judge had failed
       to look at relevant provisions.  Mr Deller therefore  accepted  that
       the Decision was "not salvageable".

    CONCLUSIONS

   16. The Respondent concedes that the Decision contains  material  errors
       of law.  We agree. The Judge has failed adequately  to  engage  with
       the relevant EU law provisions.  He has failed properly to  consider
       the evidence and make findings on that evidence as it applies to the
       tests which are relevant in this context.  There  is  a  failure  of
       reasoning in that regard.  For  those  reasons,  we  set  aside  the
       Decision.

   17. We sought submissions from the parties about the  appropriate  route
       for re-making the decision.  Mr Harding submitted  that  the  appeal
       should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    There   are
       no/inadequate findings of  fact  on  the  evidence.   As  such,  the
       Appellant has not had a proper determination of  his  evidence.   If
       his appeal  were  once  again  determined  adversely  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal, he would be  faced  with  having  to  satisfy  the  second
       appeals test in order to challenge the decision further.  It was not
       fair that he should lose one level of appeal because of the  Judge's
       failure to consider the evidence and make findings on that  evidence
       adequately or at all.

   18. Mr Deller agreed.  He submitted that this is a case which meets  the
       criteria set out in the Practice Direction for remittal to the First-
       tier Tribunal.

   19. We have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement
       of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal  concerning  the
       disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.  That reads as follows:
        "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
        proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
        the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
        that:-
                  a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
                     before the First-tier Tribunal of a  fair  hearing  or
                     other opportunity for that party's case to be  put  to
                     and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
                  b) the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
                     which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
                     appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
                     the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
                     to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

   20. We agree with the submissions made to us that both elements of the
       Practice Direction are met.  If we were to go on to re-make the
       decision, the Appellant would be deprived of the opportunity to have
       his case considered by the First-tier Tribunal due to the Judge's
       failure to engage with the relevant test(s) and make findings on the
       evidence.  Further, as is evident from the foregoing, the nature and
       extent of the judicial fact finding necessary in order to re-make
       the decision is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the
       First-tier Tribunal for that fact finding to be carried out, having
       regard to the overriding objective of the fair and just disposal of
       the appeal.


    DECISION


    We are satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of law.  We
    set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford promulgated
    on 21 June 2018. We remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
    hearing before a Judge other than Judge Telford.
      Signed           [pic] Dated: 20 November 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
