


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00369/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 23 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                 KLEVIS META
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat, Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania.  His date of birth is 7 February
    1989.  He entered the UK illegally in  2007.   He  absconded.   He  was
    arrested on 27 September 2011.  On 25 January 2012 he was convicted  of
    ABH ("the trigger offence").  He received a  two  -year  sentence.  The
    sentencing  judge  recommended   deportation.   When   sentencing   the
    Appellant, the judge said; -

         "You have pleaded guilty to a serious assault, in  my  view.   This
         was a persistent and sustained  attack  on  a  completely  innocent
         member of the public who was seeking to stop you and  your  friends
         behaving in a very unattractive way towards a group of  girls.   So
         unattractive was your behaviour as a group that the girls had moved
         to a different carriage on the underground train you were  all  on.
         Far from letting them  move  and  leaving  them  there,  you  moved
         yourselves and continued the provocative and unattractive behaviour
         towards them.

         This victim was a lone male completely on his own.  He was attacked
         by you and others in your group and perhaps the worst aspect, as it
         always is, was that when he went to the ground (and he went to  the
         ground twice,  once  in  the  carriage  and  once  outside  on  the
         platform) he was kicked a number of times in the head by several of
         you, including yourself.  Afterwards you seemed  to  be  triumphant
         about your  achievement  in  knocking  him  down  and  leaving  him
         unconscious  and  significantly  injured  with   a   broken   nose,
         concussion and a cut and bruised lip ...

         I regard it as an aggravating factor that when the  police  arrived
         you ran away and when  they  caught  up  with  you,  you  struggled
         violently, and it needed four of them to restrain you ...

         It seems to me, looking overall at this situation, this is  a  very
         bad case of assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  the  very
         least sentence that I can impose and the sentence I  do  impose  is
         one  of  two  years'  imprisonment.   That  carries   with   it   a
         recommendation, plainly a  recommendation,  that  you  be  deported
         immediately after you have completed that sentence ..."

 2. A deportation order was made on  16  April  2012.   The  Appellant  was
    deported on 31 May 2012.  He re-entered the UK unlawfully in breach  of
    a deportation order in 2013.  On 6 June 2017 he made an application for
    a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations  2016  ("the  2016  Regulations")   on   account   of   his
    relationship with an EEA national exercising treaty rights, his wife, a
    Hungarian citizen, [BS].  The couple married on 2 December  2017.   The
    Secretary of State revoked the deportation order. On 23  May  2018  the
    Secretary of State made another order to  deport  the  Appellant,  this
    time under reg 23(6)(b) of the 2016Regulations.

 3. The Appellant appealed against this decision.  His appeal was dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  Judge  P  M  S  Mitchell  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 May 2019, following a hearing at Taylor  House  on  3
    May 2019.

 4. In my decision dated 6 November 2019 following an error of law hearing,
    I set aside the decision of the FtT. I found that  there  had  been  an
    error of law. The salient part of the error of  law  decision  read  as
    follows:-

         "14. What the judge says at paragraph  28  is  correct.  Under  the
             heading "Burden and Standard  of  Proof"  the  judge  directed
             himself on the burden and standard of proof  in  human  rights
             appeals. However, this appeal was not a human  rights  appeal,
             it was an appeal under the 2016 Regulations.  Under  the  same
             heading the judge at paragraph  34  properly  identifies  that
             that the Appellant's conduct must represent a genuine, present
             and sufficiently serious threat in the terms of reg 27 ( 5)  (
             c), but he does not identify the correct burden of proof under
             the relevant heading.  Most of what is written in this section
             is not relevant to an appeal under the 2016  Regulations  when
             assessing the risk or threat posed by an Appellant.

         15.  What is clear is that what the judge says at paragraphs 59 and
             72, although not contained in his self  -direction  under  the
             relevant heading, is capable of supporting an argument that he
             properly applied the  correct  burden  of  proof.  However,  I
             cannot discount what the judge says at paragraph 28. The judge
             directed himself throughout as thought his were an  appeal  on
             human rights grounds.  I note that at paragraph 58  the  judge
             referred to the  public  expecting  foreign  criminals  to  be
             deported  which  supports  the  judge  having  conflated   the
             principles to  be  applied  in  deportations  under  the  2016
             Regulations and those under the UK Borders Act 2007. Moreover,
             whilst I am satisfied that the judge throughout the assessment
             reminded himself that a decision should not rely solely on the
             Appellant's criminal conduct, what the judge says at paragraph
             64 is troubling because it strongly suggests  that  the  judge
             has at  the  very  least  attached  too  much  weight  to  the
             Appellant's historic criminal conduct to justify the  decision
             as opposed to making an  assessment  of  current  risk  as  is
             required under EU law. The final  sentence  of  the  paragraph
             strongly supports this.  This is supported by what  the  judge
             said at paragraph which strongly suggests that  he  reached  a
             conclusion  about  threat  based  on  the   Appellant's   past
             criminality. Whilst I accept that there are certain  parts  of
             the decision which support the judge having correctly  applied
             the Regulations, the  position  is  that  the  decision  lacks
             clarity.   Whilst  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the   case   of
             Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 stated at, paragraph 20, that
             save in exceptional cases whether someone presents  a  serious
             threat is to be determined solely by reference to the  conduct
             of the offender therefore not ruling out  that  considerations
             of deterrence and public revulsion have no part to play in the
             matter, I accept Mr Draycott's submission that  it  would  not
             apply in a case with these circumstances.

         16.  A proper reading of the decision does not disclose what burden
             of proof the judge ultimately applied in this case or that  he
             properly considered the risk that the Appellant  presented  at
             the time of the hearing, 9 years after the trigger offence was
             committed.  Whilst in parts of the decision the judge properly
             directed himself on the law, it is  the  case  that  in  other
             parts of the decision he did  not  do  so.   The  decision  is
             muddled.  Whilst there was an assessment of proportionality to
             be made if the level of  threat  posed  meets  the  threshold,
             which would require on assessment of  the  Appellant's  family
             life, such matters were not material to an assessment  of  the
             level of threat itself.  I am  not  satisfied  that  a  proper
             reading  of  the  decision  indicates,  with  any  degree   of
             certainty,  that  the  judge  applied  the  correct  law  when
             assessing the threat  and  risk  the  Appellant  posed.  I  am
             satisfied that it is a real possibility that  he  applied  the
             wrong burden of proof and considered immaterial matters  apart
             from the Appellant's conduct (including public revulsion  (see
             [46]) and the position of the Appellant's wife ( see [ 52]) or
             that he based the level of threat posed  on  past  criminality
             alone.   Either  approach  is  erroneous.  He  conflated   the
             assessment  of  threat  with  considerations  relevant  to  an
             assessment of proportionality. He did  not  properly  consider
             the appeal in accordance with reg 27(5)(b), (c) and (e).  This
             is a material  error  of  law.   In  these  circumstances  the
             decision  of  the  judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
             Regulations is set aside.

         17.  There is an additional ground on which permission was  granted
             (("c") of the permission application raised within "D" of  the
             grounds).  It is asserted that the judge failed to  adequately
             consider the care the Appellant provides for his mother-in-law
             who is herself an EEA national.  The evidence before the First-
             tier Tribunal was that the  Appellant  had  looked  after  his
             mother-in-law following her heart  attack  in  November  2018.
             This was mentioned by the mother-in-law in  her  statement  of
             evidence, but it was not referred to in  the  Appellant's  own
             witness  statement.   In   any   event,   the   evidence   was
             insufficient to establish that at the date of the hearing  the
             Appellant  was  his  mother-in-law's  carer.   There  was   no
             evidence before the judge that this was the case.

         ...

         22.  I  therefore  refuse  permission  on  the  remaining  discrete
             grounds.  I  conclude  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in
             applying the incorrect burden of proof  and  when  considering
             risk and threat posed by the Appellant, he  did  not  properly
             apply 27(5) (b), (c) (d) and (e).  The assessment  is  flawed.
             The decision is set aside.  The decision will be remade before
             the UT.

         ...

         23.  I accept that all the findings which relate  to  the  risk  or
             threat posed by the  Appellant  are  infected  by  the  errors
             identified and cannot stand. There  is  no  challenge  to  the
             weight  the   judge   attached   to   the   letters   from   a
             psychotherapist,  Mr   Phelps.    The   judge   accepted   the
             Appellant's wife's evidence that the Appellant has  not  drunk
             alcohol for two years which he considered  to  be  a  positive
             point in the Appellant's favour as regards the  commission  of
             further offences because the offence was committed whilst  the
             Appellant was drunk. The judge found that  the  Appellant  has
             family and relatives in Albania. The judge also concluded that
             there was limited evidence of rehabilitation here  in  the  UK
             and that the Appellant was  not  his  mother-in  law's  carer.
             There is no  reason  to  go  behind  these  findings  as  they
             represent the position at the date of the  Appellant's  appeal
             before the FTT.  However, the UT will make  an  assessment  of
             the threat/risk posed by the Appellant at  a  future  hearing,
             taking  into  account  any  further  evidence   submitted   in
             accordance with the following directions:- ..."

The legal background

 5. The relevant law is contained in the 2016  Regulations.   The  material
    parts of which read as follows:-

         "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         ...

         23.  (5) If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion  of
             the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national  is
             justified on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
             public health in accordance with regulation 27  the  Secretary
             of State may  make  an  order  prohibiting  that  person  from
             entering the United Kingdom.

             (6)  Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an  EEA  national  who
             has entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such  a
             national who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed  if
             -

                  (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have  a  right
                      to reside under these Regulations;

                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                      removal is justified on  grounds  of  public  policy,
                      public security or public health in  accordance  with
                      regulation 27; or

                  (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                      removal is justified on grounds of misuse  of  rights
                      under regulation 26(3).

             ...

             (8)  A decision under paragraph (6)(b) must  state  that  upon
             execution of any deportation order arising from that decision,
             the person against whom the order was made is prohibited  from
             entering the United Kingdom -

                  (a)  until the order is revoked; or

                  (b)  for the period specified in the order.

             (9)  A decision taken under paragraph (6)(b) or  (c)  has  the
             effect of terminating any right to reside otherwise enjoyed by
             the individual concerned.

         ...

         Decisions taken on grounds of public policy,  public  security  and
         public health

         27.  (1) In this regulation, a 'relevant  decision'  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who -

                  (a)  has a right of permanent residence  under  regulation
                      15 and who has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a
                      continuous period of at least ten years prior to  the
                      relevant decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                      is in the best interests of the person concerned,  as
                      provided for in the Convention on the Rights  of  the
                      Child adopted by the General Assembly of  the  United
                      Nations on 20th November 1989.

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles -

                  (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                      proportionality;

                  (b)   the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                      genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
                      affecting  one  of  the  fundamental   interests   of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                      which relate to considerations of general  prevention
                      do not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                      themselves justify the decision;

                  (f)  the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                      even  in  the  absence   of   a   previous   criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.

             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy and public security  in  relation  to  a  person
             ('P') who is resident in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision
             maker must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,
             state of health, family  and  economic  situation  of  P,  P's
             length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.

             (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
             public health -

                  (a)  a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                      defined by the  relevant  instruments  of  the  World
                      Health Organisation or is not  a  disease  listed  in
                      Schedule 1 to the  Health  Protection  (Notification)
                      Regulations 2010(2); or

                  (b)  if the person concerned is in the United Kingdom, any
                      disease  occurring  after  the  three  month   period
                      beginning on the date on which the person arrived  in
                      the United Kingdom,

             does not constitute grounds for the decision.

             (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.)".

The Evidence

 6. There  was  no  evidence  before  me  served  in  accordance  with  the
    directions of the UT.  The Appellant made an application on 30 December
    2019 to adjourn which was refused by UTJ Jackson on 31  December  2019.
    The Appellant  claimed  not  to  have  been  properly  advised  by  his
    solicitors and sought an adjournment until 27 February 2020 to instruct
    a new solicitor. On 2 January 2020 Wimbledon Solicitors wrote to the UT
    to say that they were no longer representing the Appellant.  Mr  Farhat
    renewed the application for an adjournment at the start of the  hearing
    before me. The purpose being to obtain an expert report to assess  risk
    of reoffending. In support  he  informed  me  that  he  first  received
    instructions on the 6 January. He had with him email exchanges  between
    the Appellant's wife and Wimbledon Solicitors which he  said  supported
    the adjournment.  Mr Whitwell opposed the adjournment.   There  was  no
    expert evidence before the UT; however, in my view  the  Appellant  had
    had ample time to obtain this. Whilst he blamed his solicitor,  he  has
    not made a complaint.  Fairness did not demand an adjournment in  order
    for the Appellant to  obtain  the  opinion  of  an  expert.  There  was
    sufficient evidence before the UT for it to make its own assessment  of
    risk of reoffending. Moreover, I was not prepared to admit evidence  of
    an email exchange between to the Appellant's wife and his solicitor  to
    support the  Appellant's  assertion  that  he  had  not  been  properly
    advised. The appeal proceeded by way of submissions only.

The evidence of the Appellant

 7. The Appellant gave evidence before the FtT. There  is  a  statement  of
    evidence of 1 March  2018.  His  evidence  in  that  statement  can  be
    summarised. He came here in August 2007. He said that he  fled  Albania
    because he "never  received  any  love  or  care  from  my  parents  or
    siblings". He was made to work on a farm. He was arrested in  September
    2007. He left the detention centre  and  absconded.  He  did  not  know
    anyone at this time and was scared.  In November 2011 he went out  with
    friends. They were drinking alcohol. They became involved  in  a  fight
    with another man who had also  been  drinking.  The  Appellant  vaguely
    remembers punching the man once. He served 6 months in prison.  He  was
    deported in 2012 and returned to the UK in May 2013.  When he  returned
    to Albania, he did not visit his parents. He spent his  time  with  his
    friends. He described life there as being a "nightmare". When  he  came
    back to the UK in 2013, he stayed with friends. He met  [BS]  in  April
    2016. She is a Hungarian citizen. She  is  an  EU  national  exercising
    treaty rights here.  They started living together in  June  2016.   Her
    mother and step-father, with whom she has  a  close  relationship  also
    live in the UK. They married in 2017. He has now  "transformed  into  a
    new person". He is remorseful. He puts down his criminal  behaviour  to
    alcohol. Since he was convicted, he has  abstained  from  alcohol.   He
    wants to work here and have a family.

The evidence of [BS]

 8. Ms [S] made a witness statement on 1 March 2018.  Her evidence  can  be
    summarised. She has been in the UK since 2010. She came here  when  she
    was aged 17. She has always worked here.  Her parents  and  step-father
    love the Appellant very much.  He is kind and considerate.  Whilst  she
    is at work, the Appellant does the  housework.  She  cannot  locate  to
    Albania. She does not speak Albanian.

The evidence of [EF]

 9. The witness is the Appellant's cousin. There is a letter  from  him  in
    the Appellant's bundle. His evidence is that the Appellant has  changed
    since he has been in a relationship with Ms [S].  He is more caring.

The evidence of [OJ]

10. The witness is the mother of Ms [S]. There is an  undated  letter  from
    the witness in the Appellant's bundle.  She supports  the  relationship
    and the Appellant. She believes that should he return  to  Albania  the
    marriage would be ruined.



Submissions

 11. Mr Whitwell drew my attention to the preserved findings of the  UT.  In
     respect of the threat presented by the Appellant, he accepted that  the
     FtT accepted that he had been alcohol free for two years.  Mr  Whitwell
     said that in his evidence the Appellant had "airbrushed"  two  material
     events; the details of the offence and his unlawful entry into  the  UK
     in breach of a deportation order in 2013. What the Appellant said about
     the offence cannot be reconciled with the  sentencing  remarks  of  the
     judge.  This goes  to  the  issue  of  remorse  or  lack  thereof.  The
     Appellant was subject to the early release scheme during  the  currency
     of  his  sentence.  He  entered  the  UK  unlawfully  in  breach  of  a
     deportation order in 2013. Even a deportation order  was  not  able  to
     prevent the Appellant from presenting a threat because  he  re-entered.
     Mr Whitwell identified the fundamental interests  of  society  in  this
     case as maintaining immigration control (in respect of  breach  of  the
     deportation order) and maintaining public order and preventing societal
     harm (with reference  to  the  trigger  offence).   He  relied  on  the
     decision letter and draw my attention to paras [17]-[29] therein. There
     is no evidence of rehabilitation. The evidence of the Appellant  having
     engaged in charitable works was limited. Mr Whitwell  addressed  me  in
     respect of proportionality.  He reminded me of the  preserved  findings
     that the Appellant has family in Albania and that he was found  not  to
     be his mother-in-law's carer by the FtT.

 12. Mr Farhat addressed me. He reminded me that  EU  law  applied  in  this
     case.  The assessment was forward  looking  and  concerned  the  threat
     presented by the Appellant. In this case the Appellant has committed  a
     solitary offence almost a decade ago. There has been  no  reoccurrence.
     There has been no "hint" of violent conduct since then.  Rehabilitation
     was inherent in the passage of time since the offence.  At the time  of
     the offence the Appellant was in his early 20's. He is now in his early
     30's. He was single at the time. He is now married.  The  offence  took
     place on public transport. It was  fuelled  by  misplaced  bravado  and
     alcohol. It was not suggested that the Appellant has been disruptive or
     violent whilst in prison or immigration detention. He has  reported  as
     requested to the Home Office.  He regularly takes public transport.  He
     has shown a willingness and desire to do charity work.  He  has  looked
     after his mother-in-law when she was unwell.  This  is  evidence  of  a
     shift in attitude and that he is now more compassionate. Mr Farhat draw
     my attention to the evidence of  Michael  Phelps  at  page  18  of  the
     Appellant's  bundle.   He  initially  submitted  that   breach   of   a
     deportation order went to the  issue  of  proportionality  and  not  to
     public policy or security and the threat posed by  the  Appellant.   He
     then conceded that it was intrinsically linked to  the  index  offence.
     However, the breach took place almost 7 years ago which is  before  the
     Appellant had married and settled down.  In any event,  in  respect  of
     immigration control and the need to maintain it, should the Appellant's
     appeal be allowed, he would not be a threat to immigration control. His
     exclusion  cannot  be  said  to  be  necessary  to   prevent   unlawful
     immigration (identified in  the  decision  letter  as  the  fundamental
     interest which needs protection).  Finally, he  reminded  me  that  the
     Appellant's wife has been here since 2010 exercising treaty rights.

Conclusions

13. The 2016 Regulations transpose into UK domestic law the requirements of
    the Citizens Directive 2004/38.  A person may be removed from the UK if
    the Secretary of State has decided that removal is justified on grounds
    of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health.   The   2016
    Regulations set out a  hierarchy  of  levels  of  protection  based  on
    criteria of increasing stringency. The Appellant as the spouse of an EU
    citizen exercising treaty rights  is  entitled  to  protection  of  the
    Citizen's  Directive.  In  this  case  he  has  the  lowest  level   of
    protection. His removal may be justified  "on  the  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health".  However, the decision  must
    be taken in accordance with the principles set out in  reg  27  (5).  I
    remind myself that the burden of proving that the Appellant  represents
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society rests on the Secretary of  State:  see
    Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation - test) [2017]  UKUT  00294.   In
    Nazli and Others v Stadt Nurnberg [2000] ECR 1-957 CJEU  the  following
    was said at [64]:

         "That EU law precludes the expulsion  of  a  Turkish  national  who
         enjoys a right  granted  directly  by  that  decision  when  it  is
         ordered, following a criminal conviction, as a deterrent  to  other
         aliens without the personal conduct of the person concerned  giving
         reason to consider that he will commit other  offences  prejudicial
         to the requirements of public policy in the host member state";

14. I find that the breach of deportation order in May 2013 does not assist
    the Appellant because it shows a lack of  regard  for  immigration  law
    which is capable of undermining  his  evidence  of  rehabilitation  and
    remorse in respect of the ABH. It is therefore  capable  of  increasing
    the threat posed by the Appellant.  In addition, I accept that it could
    potentially present  a  discrete  threat  to  immigration  control,  as
    advanced by Mr Whitwell.  There can be no doubt that protecting members
    of society from serious violent crime is clearly a fundamental interest
    of society as is the maintenance of immigration  control.   However,  I
    must  consider  whether  the  Appellant  has  a   propensity   to   re-
    offend/behave in a similar way. I find that the risk of reoffending  or
    behaving in a similar way in respect  of  both  matters  on  which  the
    Secretary of State relies is low.

15. The FtT took a dim view of the Appellant's immigration history.  In  so
    far as he was not here lawfully, this is in my view is not material  to
    the assessment of the level  of  threat  presented  by  the  Appellant.
    However, the fact that he entered the UK in  breach  of  a  deportation
    order imposed as a result of his conviction for the trigger offence  is
    a matter material to the assessment of risk. I accept that  should  the
    Appellant reoffend the consequences would be serious; however,  I  must
    assess whether there is a risk  so  that  the  Appellant  represents  a
    threat in accordance with the 2016 Regs.  The Appellant is now aged 30.
    He has one previous conviction for a  serious  and  unpleasant  assault
    that took place almost 9 years ago. He pleaded guilty to this  offence.
    The sentencing comments disclose that it was considered by the judge to
    be a serious  ABH  with  aggravating  features.   However,  whilst  the
    offence was serious, it is not  an  offence  which  carries  a  maximum
    penalty of 10 years.  The maximum sentence is 5 years.  The offence was
    fuelled by alcohol consumption. There is no reason for me to go  behind
    that finding of the FtT that the Appellant has not consumed alcohol for
    two years (at the date of that hearing). The Appellant  has  repeatedly
    expressed remorse. There is support for  this  given  that  he  is  not
    drinking alcohol and that he has remained out  of  trouble.   I  accept
    that there is a gap between the Appellant's account  of  what  happened
    and the sentencing remarks  of  the  judge.  However,  the  Appellant's
    witness statement in these proceedings was made some  years  after  the
    event and it is accepted that  at  the  time  of  the  offence  he  was
    inebriated.  He  has  not  undertaken  courses  aimed  specifically  at
    rehabilitation, but he has undergone counselling  sessions.   There  is
    before me no expert evidence about the risk  posed  by  the  Appellant;
    however, I attach significance to him having remained  out  of  trouble
    for some years and that he is alcohol free.   It  is  also  significant
    that he is older and in a stable relationship.

16. I take on board when assessing the threat posed by the  Appellant  that
    he breached immigration laws in May 2013 (6 � years ago)  when  he  re-
    entered the UK unlawfully and in breach  of  a  deportation  order.   I
    accept that at that time he had a disregard for immigration  law.  This
    sheds light on his attitude to the trigger offence in  2013.   However,
    it cannot sensibly be argued that his exclusion is necessary to prevent
    further immigration offences.

17. Having considered the evidence in the round,  the  Respondent  has  not
    established that the Appellant's conduct presents  a  genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat affecting unlawful immigration,  public
    order and social harm.  Exclusion is not justified on grounds of public
    policy, public security or public health.  There is no need for  me  to
    consider whether the decision is proportionate considering  factors  in
    reg 27 (6).

18. The Secretary of State has not established that the threat posed by the
    Appellant's conduct is genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  to
    justify deportation on grounds of public policy.  Thus, the  appeal  is
    allowed



Notice of Decision

19. The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the 2016 Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 11 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

