

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00304/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th June 2013                             |On 28th June 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR HAYDAR YALDIZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Professor W M Rees (instructed by Fortis Rose,
                    solicitors)

For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, born on 13th May 1982  is  a  citizen  of  Turkey  and  of
   Kurdish ethnicity. He came to the UK with  his  mother  and  siblings  in
   February 1997 when he was aged 14. His mother claimed  asylum  which  was
   originally refused but then allowed on appeal in May 1999. Following that
   she and the children were granted refugee status in September 2000.
2. The basis upon which the Appellant's mother claimed asylum was  that  her
   husband, his father, was a member of  the  PKK  and  was  wanted  by  the
   police. She herself had supported the PKK by supplying them with food and
   she had been detained by the authorities and raped on two occasions as  a
   result. She was also suffering from poor health  and  indeed  suffered  a
   seizure at the hearing. The Tribunal accepted that this was as  a  result
   of the ill-treatment she had received.

3. On 26th November 2010 the Appellant was convicted of permitting  premises
   to be used for the supply of class B  drugs  and  sentenced  to  3  years
   imprisonment. As a result of that conviction the Secretary of State  made
   a decision to deport him under the automatic  deportation  provisions  of
   the UK Borders Act 2007. The Secretary of State also made a  decision  to
   cancel his refugee status under the provisions of article  1C(5)  of  the
   Refugee Convention.

4. The  Appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal (Judge Wiseman and Mr B Yeats) on 25th September 2012. The First-
   tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal in a determination promulgated on 10th
   October 2012.

5. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal and after several false starts  the  matter  came  before  Upper
   Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 7th January 2013. In a Decision and Directions
   dated 17th January 2013 Judge McGeachy found the First-tier  Tribunal  to
   have made errors of law. That decision has been provided to the  parties.
   At paragraph 29 of his decision he found that there were material  errors
   of law in the determination. He considered that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   had not properly engaged with the relevant issues in the case  which  was
   the application of Article 1 of the  Refugee  Convention.  He  found  the
   First-tier Tribunal did not appear to accept that the burden of proof lay
   with the Respondent to show that the Appellant was no longer entitled  to
   refugee status and failed to deal with the detail of the arguments  being
   put forward  by  UNHCR,  including  the  documentary  evidence  mentioned
   therein. Judge McGeachy commented that he was unclear as to exactly  what
   documentary evidence the Secretary of State submitted by way  of  reports
   on the up-to-date situation in Turkey to discharge the  burden  of  proof
   upon her.

6. Judge McGeachy also noted that the Tribunal did not particularise in  any
   way the evidence which led them to conclude that the Appellant  could  be
   returned to Turkey in safety. He therefore decided that the  appeal  must
   be reheard to deal with the issue  of  whether  or  not  the  Appellant's
   entitlement to refugee status is no longer warranted on  the  basis  that
   there has been a fundamental  and  durable  change  in  circumstances  in
   Turkey.

7. Judge McGeachy also noted at paragraph 32 that he had  raised  the  issue
   that the Tribunal did not appear to have dealt  with  the  issue  of  the
   section 72 certificate, namely- whether or not the Appellant, because  of
   his criminal activity  was  entitled  to  the  benefits  of  the  Refugee
   Convention. He referred  to  a  letter  dated  31st  October  2011  which
   indicated that a decision on whether or not the  Appellant  had  rebutted
   the presumption under section 72  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 had yet to be finalised. He noted that  although  neither
   representative demurred from his comment that the  Tribunal  should  have
   dealt with the issue of s.72 and Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention
   it appeared that the issue remained unresolved. He therefore stated  that
   if the Secretary of State wished to argue that there  was  a  live  issue
   under s.72 before the Tribunal she should make that  clear  to  both  the
   Tribunal and the Appellant's representatives immediately.

8. Judge McGeachy then stated at paragraph 33 that  the  grounds  of  appeal
   against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal only challenged  the
   issue of its approach to  Article  1C  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  The
   grounds did not challenge its  conclusions  relating  to  the  Article  8
   rights of the Appellant or  whether  the  Appellant  benefited  from  the
   provisions of the Ankara agreement  as  he  had  worked  in  the  UK.  At
   paragraph 34 Judge McGeachy concluded that the conclusions of the  First-
   tier Tribunal  regarding the rights of the  Appellant  under  the  Ankara
   agreement were, albeit brief, open to it and moreover there  was  nothing
   to indicate that the issue was argued in any way  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  and it was not a ground of appeal originally before  it.  Judge
   McGeachy also concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusions  with
   regard to Article 8 were properly  reasoned  and  detailed  and  did  not
   consider there was any basis on which that issue should be relitigated.

9. In conclusion he stated that he set aside the decision of the  First-tier
   Tribunal with regard  to  issues  relating  to  Article  1C  the  Refugee
   Convention and directed the appeal on that issue be decided afresh.

10. There was then a case management review hearing on 5th April  2013  when
   the Respondent was represented by Mr Melvin and the Appellant by Mr  Esen
   from Fortis Rose, solicitors. In advance of the hearing  Mr  Norton,  who
   has charge of this case on behalf of the Secretary of State, submitted  a
   lengthy submission in which he pointed out that the refusal letter of the
   11th May 2012 made clear that the Secretary of State had applied  section
   72. The matter had also been referred to in a letter of  13th  May  2011.
   Both parties were thus aware from then that s.72 was in  issue.   In  any
   event case law makes clear that even if the Secretary of State  does  not
   issue a s.72 certificate, if the facts fit, the Judge is  bound  to  deal
   with it in any event (Mugwagwa (s.72 - applying  statutory  presumptions)
   Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00338 (IAC)).

11. It is also of note that the case had originally been listed for  hearing
   in  January  2013  but  on  that  occasion  was  adjourned  because   the
   Appellant's representatives indicated they  were  expecting  to  receive,
   imminently, further evidence from  UNHCR.  That  in  the  event  did  not
   arrive.

12. This case should have been listed before Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
   who was seized of the matter, having dealt with  the  error  of  law  and
   adjourned for a resumed hearing. However, the Appellant having been moved
   to an immigration detention centre in the area of Nottingham, it was  not
   practical for Judge McGeachy to  hear  the  case  and  so  the  Principal
   Resident Judge signed a Transfer Order permitting me to deal with it.

13. Thus the matter came before me.

14. In  compliance  with  directions  both  parties  had  filed  significant
   bundles,  each  comprising  two  lever  arch  files.  Contrary   to   the
   directions, the Appellant's representative provided a  skeleton  argument
   on the morning of the hearing and the Respondent failed to do so at all.

15. At the commencement of the hearing the issues  to  be  dealt  with  were
   discussed and it  was  agreed  that  the  starting  point  was  the  s.72
   certificate and whether the Appellant could rebut the presumption that he
   had committed a particularly serious crime and represented  a  danger  to
   the community. If he could not rebut that presumption then the next issue
   to be decided was whether he would be at risk  on  return  to  Turkey  of
   treatment that would breach either Articles 2 or 3 of  the  ECHR.  If  he
   could rebut the presumption then the next issue to be decided was whether
   the situation in Turkey had changed such as to justify  the  cancellation
   of his refugee status under Article 1C of the Refugee Convention.

16. If the Appellant is unable to rebut the presumption then the  burden  of
   proof remains with him to show that he will be at risk on return and  the
   Article 1C issue falls away. If he is able to rebut the presumption  then
   the burden is on the Secretary of State to  show  that  circumstances  in
   Turkey have improved to the appropriate level.

17. Professor Rees also indicated that Article 8 would still be relevant  in
   relation to matters since the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.  He
   indicated he would not be relying on family life but private life.

18. Those matters agreed, we  then  moved  on  to  hear  oral  evidence.  In
   addition to the bundle I  also  had  an  up-to-date  statement  from  the
   Appellant which he adopted and signed during the hearing.

19. The dock at Nottingham Magistrates Court is  a  secure  dock  where  the
   Appellant is behind glass which has gaps in it to allow  conversation  to
   be heard. Professor Rees requested that the  Appellant  be  permitted  to
   leave the dock for the purpose  of  giving  his  evidence.  The  security
   guards, who are outwith the control of the Tribunal, were not content for
   this to happen. While clearly it is not  ideal  for  Appellants  to  give
   evidence from the secure dock I did not find that he would be  prejudiced
   in any way by so doing. Professor Rees asked me to record  his  objection
   and his argument that the Appellant was  disadvantaged  by  my  decision.
   However, the only disadvantage he could identify  was  that  I  would  be
   unable to see his facial expression and demeanour.  Even  if  his  facial
   expression and demeanour were relevant to my  deliberations,  which  they
   are not, I was able to see the Appellant perfectly clearly.  My  view  of
   him was unhindered by the glass.

20. I first heard evidence from two witnesses called  by  the  Secretary  of
   State. I heard them first at Professor Rees's request  so  the  Appellant
   would have an opportunity in his evidence to comment on theirs.

21. The first witness was Detective Constable  Madden  who  is  assigned  to
   "Operation Terminus" which is a partnership operation with UKBA with  the
   aim of tackling the most harmful individuals in society who do  not  have
   UK citizenship. He had provided a 14 page witness statement  attached  to
   which as annexes were CRIS documents  running  to  1258  pages  in  total
   relating to 26 incidents referred to in his statement. The statement is a
   summary of the totality of the Appellant's convictions,  non-convictions,
   non-guilty disposals and  reprimands/warnings  and  cautions.   It  gives
   summaries of each of the 26 incidents for which the  CRIS  documents  had
   been attached.

22. Professor Rees  indicated  that  the  Appellant  accepted  his  criminal
   record which is as follows:-

        a. In April 2002 the Appellant pleaded guilty to having an  article
           with a blade in a public place for which he received a six-month
           conditional discharge.
        b. In September 2002 he was convicted of using threatening, abusive
           or insulting words or behaviour and a breach of the  conditional
           discharge imposed earlier for  which  he  received  a  12  month
           conditional discharge and a fine.
        c. In April 2004 he pleaded guilty to robbery for which he received
           18 months imprisonment. The circumstances of that  offence  were
           that at 4:05 am the victim was walking home talking to a  friend
           on his mobile phone. He was attacked by  three  people,  one  of
           whom was the Appellant. He was pushed  to  the  ground  and  his
           phone snatched. When he refused to give up his wallet one of the
           men told another to "get out the knife". He was then  held  down
           while his jacket was searched and was kicked and  punched  while
           trying  to  keep  hold  of  his  wallet.  The  Appellant,   when
           interviewed by the police, made a no comment  interview  despite
           the victim's property being found on his person.
        d. In June 2006 the Appellant pleaded guilty to criminal damage for
           which he received a fine. In July  2005  he  pleaded  guilty  to
           failing to surrender to bail for which  he  received  one  day's
           detention.
        e. In August 2006 he pleaded guilty to driving  while  disqualified
           and using a vehicle while uninsured  for  which  he  received  a
           community order and disqualification from driving.
        f.   In   September   2006   he    pleaded    guilty    to    using
           threatening/abusive/insulting words or behaviour and failing  to
           surrender to custody for which he was fined and  imprisoned  for
           one day.
        g. In January 2008 he pleaded guilty to possession of cannabis  for
           which he received a 12 month community order.
        h. In April 2008 he pleaded guilty to possession  of  cannabis  for
           which he was given one day's detention.

23. His next conviction was the offence which led to the deportation order.

24. As indicated above DC Madden also included in  his  statement  summaries
   of numerous other matters which did not lead to  charges  or  convictions
   but which were occasions when the Appellant had come to the attention  of
   the police. He also provided a list of persons who in his view were known
   associates of the Appellant.

25. In short, it is the Respondent's case that the Appellant is a member  of
   the "Hackney Turks" gang. This is one of the  three  main  Turkish  crime
   gangs operating in the London area and the persons in charge of that gang
   are the Appellants cousins, Kemel Armagan and Erdal Armagan.  The  police
   say that the Turkish gangs which as well as the "Hackney Turks"  includes
   "Sarhinler/Halkevi Boys/Falcons" and the "Tottenham  Boys",  are  a  very
   powerful organised criminal network and  are  responsible  for  importing
   most of the heroin into the UK. The gangs run their criminal  empires  by
   using extreme violence and intimidation, which includes  such  crimes  as
   torture, arson, blackmail and extortion and over the last  10  years  the
   three gangs have been responsible for a number  of  fatal  and  non-fatal
   shootings, serious GBHs and arson attacks throughout London and the south-
   east.

26. This evidence is put forward by the Secretary of  State  to  argue  that
   the Appellant does indeed represent a threat to the  community  and  that
   the s.72 certificate was appropriately applied and the Appellant is  thus
   excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention as he was excluded
   by Article 33 (2).

27. In addition to the evidence of DC Madden I heard evidence from PC  Flatt
   who works for the Haringey Gangs Unit in London.  Between  February  2010
   and May 2012 he was employed to work  as  a  Turkish  field  intelligence
   officer within the Haringey Borough Intelligence Unit and was  throughout
   that time the dedicated central point of contact within the  Metropolitan
   Police Service focusing on Turkish/Kurdish crime  and  community  related
   issues. It was his view that the  Appellant  was  a  key  member  of  the
   Hackney Turks.

28. PC Flatt, in his statement said that the "Hackney Turks" are run by  the
   Armagan family including Kemel and Erdal (cousins of the  Appellant)  and
   the "Tottenham Boys" by key members of the Eren family. It was  his  view
   that the Appellant had been and remained a gang member. Attached  to  his
   statement is a copy of what is called an "Osman" letter. This is a letter
   to the Appellant given to him on 4th May  2013  by  PC  Flatt  and  other
   officers indicating that they had reason to believe that his life was  in
   danger and offering police protection. It is recorded that the  Appellant
   indicated he understood but did not need police  protection.  The  Police
   evidence was that this arose because they  had  information  to  indicate
   that his life was being threatened by the Tottenham Boys gang in reprisal
   for the murder of one of their number.

29. I then heard evidence from the Appellant. He said that he had  not  seen
   or gone through the statement of DC Madden with  those  representing  him
   and as a result he was taken through each of the incidents by  Mr  Norton
   and asked for his comments. In relation to several of the incidents which
   involved his being arrested but not charged he said he could not remember
   the occasions. I will deal specifically with those in my findings. He was
   then taken through the list of associates. Some he said that he knew  and
   others that he did not.

30. The essence of the Appellant's evidence was  that  he  is  not  now  and
   never has been a member of the gang. He had been  continually  persecuted
   and harassed by the police and he was not guilty of the  offence  leading
   to deportation. He specifically said in his evidence "I had nothing to do
   with it". The police had fabricated the case against him. It is also  his
   case that he would be removing himself from the reach  of  the  gangs  by
   living in Luton and he would  not  commit  further  offences  because  he
   realised the distress it was putting  his  family  to,  particularly  his
   mother.

31. The Appellant was asked why he would be at risk in Turkey. He said  that
   the Turkish government would target him because his father  had  been  in
   the PKK and that if he goes back he  will  either  be  tortured,  put  in
   prison or murdered. He said that Turkey has never changed and in fact  is
   getting worse. He confirmed when asked if  there  was  any  other  reason
   other than his father's activities with the PKK that  would  put  him  at
   risk, that he goes to the Kurdish Community Centre all the time in London
   and that is the PKK.  Also he has been on protests all over London.

32. I then heard submissions from Mr Norton who relied on  the  evidence  of
   the police officers as well as the Appellant's  criminal  convictions  to
   argue that the Appellant could not rebut the presumption  that  he  is  a
   serious criminal who represents a danger  and  argued  that  the  "Osman"
   letter was evidence of involvement with the  gang  recently.  The  police
   took the action they did because they were obliged by law to  do  so  and
   they genuinely believed his life was at risk.

33. As regards his risk in Turkey  he  referred  to  the  UNHCR  report  and
   submitted that although it appeared to be a personalised  report  it  was
   taken from generic information only and not  specifically  customised  to
   the Appellant's situation and  the  attendance  note  supplied  from  the
   representatives  only  indicated  that  personal  letters  could  not  be
   written. He argued that in relation the Appellant's father's situation in
   Turkey, those events took place over  16  years  ago  and  there  was  no
   evidence to show that there was any specific risk of him  being  targeted
   for being the son of a member/ suspected member of the PKK so many  years
   ago. The Appellant would not be at risk as an Alevi Kurd as  although  he
   may encounter harassment, that would not cross the level of  severity  as
   to amount to inhuman or degrading treatment. He submitted  there  was  no
   credible risk of persecution

34. With regard to Article 8 Mr Norton submitted that the  findings  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal had been preserved and nothing meaningful  had  taken
   place since then  that  could  alter  the  decision.   He  relied  on  SS
   (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and in particular paragraphs 54 and  55  in
   relation  to  how  serious  criminality  should  affect  the  issue   and
   assessment of proportionality.

35. On the Appellant's behalf Professor Rees submitted  that  the  Appellant
   had successfully rebutted the presumption. He accepted that the Appellant
   had been involved in a series of  crimes  but  that  the  thrust  of  the
   argument at the hearing on behalf of the Secretary of State was  reliance
   on the various CRIS reports and incidents that had not  led  to  criminal
   convictions. The Appellant's evidence was that he had  been  harassed  by
   the police for years and because he is related to members of the "Hackney
   Turk" gang he had been wrongly linked to them. With regard to the "Osman"
   letter, the Appellant's evidence was that he had nothing to fear and thus
   had not needed protection because he was not at risk. With regard to  his
   knowing a lot of the people referred to in the police  evidence,  it  was
   his case that he was bound to do so having grown up with them.

36. Professor Rees argued that the police evidence was nothing more  than  a
   slur on the Appellant's character  and  apart  from  the  conviction  for
   robbery they were not particularly serious crimes and he is not a  danger
   to the community. He argued that there was no evidence, that crossed  the
   threshold of a balance of probabilities that pointed to his being a  gang
   member or a  strong  associate  of  the  gang.  He  had  had  no  contact
   whatsoever with the gang since the last conviction. He  referred  to  the
   Judge's sentencing remarks which made no  mention  of  it  being  a  gang
   operation.

37. Professor Rees  criticised  PC  Flatt's  evidence  as  being  distinctly
   unimpressive as he did not seem to be aware of precisely what was in  his
   statement (a reference to the witness referring  to  the  statement  when
   answering questions) and further that his statement was not supported  by
   evidence.  He submitted I should attach no weight to his evidence.

38. Professor Rees said  that  clearly  the  Appellant's  cousins  are  gang
   members but the major players were not  people  that  the  Appellant  had
   anything to do with and now he has removed himself from  the  area  where
   the gang operates and is going to be "going  straight"  running  an  off-
   licence with his father. He was, it was  argued,  a  reformed  character.
   Professor Rees said that he recognised that he was in  the  "last  chance
   saloon" but should be given a last chance. He had no family in Turkey and
   had not been there since he was 14.

39. Professor Rees pointed  to  the  Appellant's  response  to  the  various
   incidents relied upon  by  the  police  and  the  fact  that  he  had  no
   recollection of many of them. While he had clearly grown up with a number
   of highly undesirable people, that did not mean he was a gang member  and
   the Secretary of State was "pumping up" her case by guilt by association.

40. He argued that  the  risk  of  the  Appellant  offending  in  future  is
   extremely low.

41. Having argued, he said successfully, that  the  Appellant  had  rebutted
   the presumption in s.72; the next issue is whether the Secretary of State
   had  shown  that  the  Appellant's  refugee  status  could  properly   be
   terminated on the basis of Article 1C. He referred to  the  UNHCR  letter
   and the two attendance notes provided by the Appellant's representatives.
    He argued the position  was  perfectly  clear.  UNHCR  are  required  to
   comment on each case and have done so in this case. He  argued  that  the
   attendance notes together with the UNHCR letter make clear that UNHCR was
   addressing the Appellant's situation and state that he cannot be safe  in
   Turkey and thus the Secretary of State ought not to remove his status  as
   a refugee.

42. With regard to risk on return Professor Rees also submitted that  it  is
   not simply the situation with his father that puts the Appellant at  risk
   but also the fact that he is an Alevi Kurd who  has  had  involvement  in
   protests and with the PKK in the UK. He also referred me to various parts
   of the Respondent's Operational Guidance Note of May 2013.  I  will  deal
   with those later in my deliberations.

43. With regard to Article 8 he referred to the fact that the Appellant  has
   been continuously resident  in  the  UK  for  16  years,  has  spent  his
   formative years and all his adult life in the UK and no  longer  has  any
   ties to Turkey and should therefore succeed on Article 8 grounds also.

Findings

44.  Article 33(1) of the Refugee Convention provides  that  no  contracting
   state shall expel or return a refugee to the  frontiers  of  a  territory
   where his life or freedom might be threatened on  account  of  a  Refugee
   Convention reason.  Article 33(2) provides that the  benefit  of  Article
   33(1): "May not,  however,  be  claimed  by  a  refugee  whom  there  are
   reasonable grounds for regarding as a  danger  to  the  security  of  the
   country in which he is, or who, having been convicted by a final judgment
   of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of
   that country."

45. S. 72 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides
   as follows:-

         72 Serious criminal
E+W+S+N.I.
         This section has no associated Explanatory Notes
         (1)This section applies for the purpose  of  the  construction  and
         application of Article 33(2) of the Refugee  Convention  (exclusion
         from protection).


         (2)A person shall be presumed to have been  convicted  by  a  final
         judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
         to the community of the United Kingdom if he is-


         (a) convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and
         (b) sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least two years.


46. In EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 630 the Court of Appeal said  that
   so far as danger to the community was concerned, the  danger  had  to  be
   real and could be demonstrated by a particularly serious  crime  and  the
   risk of its  reoccurrence  or  of  reoccurrence  of  a  similar  offence.
   However, the wording of Article 33(2) did not require a causal connection
   between the two requirements.

   In IH (s.72; 'Particularly Serious Crime') Eritrea [2009] UKAIT 00012 the
   Tribunal  said  that  the  presumptions  in  s.72  of  the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that in  the  circumstances  specified  a
   person has been convicted by a final judgment of a "particularly  serious
   crime" for the purposes of Art 33(2) of the Refugee Convention if read as
   irrebuttable are inconsistent with  Art  21.2  of  the  EU  Qualification
   Directive (Council  Directive  2004/83/EC)  which  gives  effect  to  the
   autonomous international meaning of Art 33(2) as part of EU  law.   As  a
   consequence, the presumptions in s.72 must be read as being rebuttable.

47. Firstly with regard to whether the Appellant has  been  convicted  of  a
   particularly serious crime, I find that he has despite arguments  to  the
   contrary from Professor Rees. The offence attracted a  three-year  prison
   term, significantly over the threshold provided in section 72. The  Judge
   in his sentencing remarks stated that he had conducted the trial over six
   weeks and was in a good position to form an assessment of the Appellant's
   part in the enterprise. He had been convicted of permitting  cannabis  to
   be supplied from premises of which he was the occupier but  acquitted  of
   conspiracy to supply cannabis. The premises in question were small ground
   floor retail  premises  in  a  predominantly  residential  area  and  the
   Appellant was lessee of the premises. The Judge accepted on the basis  of
   the jury's verdict that he did not take out the lease for the purpose  of
   using the premises for supplying cannabis nor that the subletting was for
   that purpose. However, he noted the operation relating to the  conspiracy
   was brazen and sophisticated. The premises were kitted out ostensibly  as
   a shop selling DVDs  and  CDs  however  the  only  business  was  selling
   cannabis. The Judge noted that to that end considerable  work  went  into
   developing the security of the premises. Off the front room there  was  a
   small enclosed area with a hatch obscured by a curtain from behind  which
   cannabis was supplied. CCTV cameras  were  installed  so  that  customers
   could be viewed before they entered the premises and there was a  monitor
   behind the hatch area.

48. The Judge noted that an air-lock system was incorporated with  a  street
   door and then an interior door and  these  were  fitted  with  electronic
   locks operated from behind the hatch area. The Judge found  that  it  was
   clear from the Appellant's evidence that he always entered  the  premises
   from the back and so would was not shown by the video  surveillance.  The
   Judge noted that when the police stopped customers leaving, 13 out of  15
   were found to be in possession of cannabis.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
   average number of customers was over 17 an hour and  that  it  was  plain
   that anyone in the back of the premises must have known  what  was  going
   on.

49. The Judge did not accept the Appellant was simply turning a  blind  eye.
   In the Judge's view he knew the cannabis  was  being  retailed  from  the
   premises and did nothing to stop the operation. The schedules produced by
   the prosecution indicated retail sales of cannabis to the tune of �90,000
   per month. The Judge said that he was not simply turning a blind eye  and
   that the continued availability of the  premises  was  essential  to  the
   operation of the retailing of cannabis.

50. It is quite  clear  that  the  Appellant  had  sought  to  minimise  his
   involvement in the offence, a fact not accepted by the Judge. The sale of
   drugs is a very serious matter, affecting the lives in such a harmful way
   as it does of both the users and their families. The  offence  for  which
   the Appellant received three years imprisonment was I find a particularly
   serious crime.

51. I then turn to the question  of  whether  the  Appellant  constitutes  a
   danger to the community of the United Kingdom.

52. It was argued on his behalf that he does  not.  The  only  evidence  put
   forward to rebut the presumption by the Appellant was his  oral  evidence
   that he has learned the error of his ways, will be living in  Luton  away
   from his previous associates and will  be  working  for  his  father  and
   keeping on the "straight  and  narrow".  However  there  is  overwhelming
   evidence put forward by the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  Appellant's
   convictions, serious as they are, including a conviction for robbery, are
   only the tip of the  iceberg  in  terms  of  his  conduct.   His  conduct
   indicates that he is  a  person  who  does  represent  a  danger  to  the
   community. The case of Bah (EO (Turkey)-liability to deport) [2012]  UKUT
   00196 (IAC) looked at, police evidence with regard to the  conduct  of  a
   person said to be involved in gangs. At paragraph 5  the  Upper  Tribunal
   noted that in support of the contention that the Appellant was associated
   with a violent criminal gang the Secretary of State  relied,  inter-alia,
   upon incidents involving the Appellant which  had  not  resulted  in  any
   charges being brought or criminal  convictions;  statements  of  evidence
   from police officers describing "Operation Swale",  "Operation  Alliance"
   and "Operation Bite" and the results of checks  made  with  the  criminal
   intelligence system under the Appellant's name and  his  street  name  as
   "MO". Twelve reports were identified and relied on, five of which  linked
   the Appellant directly to the "Anti-Showermen" gang, although the reports
   themselves were not disclosed in evidence or (the Tribunal was  informed)
   to the Secretary of State in the proceedings.

53. The witnesses before the Upper Tribunal included three  police  officers
   who described how intelligence was gathered and  assessed  and  confirmed
   that on the basis of such intelligence, including evidence obtained  from
   police indices (namely "CRIS" reports, Crimint, and the  Police  National
   Computer), the Appellant was a clear and present danger to the community.
   They described allegations of crimes  that  had  been  committed  by  the
   Appellant. On occasions he was charged and convicted. On other  occasions
   charges were brought but not pursued. At other times he was  not  charged
   at all. The police witnesses  were  cross  examined  extensively  on  the
   Appellant's behalf but when asked to reveal their sources, refused to  do
   so, on the grounds that it was necessary to protect their sources.  In  a
   similar way to in this case the  Appellant  in  Bah  suggested  that  the
   police had invented allegations against him and that he was a  victim  of
   police victimisation and had no knowledge of some of the individuals with
   whom he was seen, had only met some of the individuals  in  the  isolated
   cases recorded by the police and/or did not know certain individuals were
   members of a gang.  Those claims have a distinct similarity to those made
   by the present Appellant.

54. At paragraph 46 onwards the Upper Tribunal  looked  at  the  allegations
   of conduct made which fell short of criminal convictions and whether  the
   Secretary of State was entitled to rely upon allegations of  that  nature
   even if that involved the admission of hearsay evidence and  the  unnamed
   undisclosed sources or anonymous sources.

55. The Upper Tribunal found at  paragraph  49  that  the  strict  rules  of
   evidence which apply in  civil  and  criminal  courts  do  not  apply  in
   proceedings  before  the  Tribunal  and  the  only   criteria   for   the
   admissibility of evidence is whether it is relevant. They noted  that  it
   is also a well established principle of law that  the  police  and  other
   authorities charged with investigating crime and protecting the public or
   sections of  it,  are  not  required  to  disclose  the  identity  of  an
   informant. The Upper Tribunal  referred to a High  Court  decision  (V  v
   Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  [2009]  EWHC   1902   (Admin)   where
   Higginbotham J concluded that it was open to the Secretary  of  State  to
   rely upon evidence showing that the claimant, even if he did  not  commit
   the murder, was associated with those who did and  that  it  was  not  an
   abuse for the Secretary  of  State  to  rely  on  evidence  of  anonymous
   witnesses and  from  official  intelligence  although  he  did  say  that
   evidence from anonymous sources inevitably lost  considerable  weight  by
   being anonymous  and,  in  part,  hearsay,  thus  preventing  any  direct
   challenge to the relevant witnesses. However he did not go so far to  say
   that the evidence must inevitably be given no weight.

56. The ultimate conclusion the Upper Tribunal reached in Bah was that  such
   evidence was  admissible  and  its  nature,  being  from  undisclosed  or
   anonymous sources went to the weight to be attached to it.

57. In this case the evidence of DC Madden does contain an  enormous  amount
   of supporting evidence in the form  of  50  CRIS  documents.  PC  Flatt's
   evidence is not sourced but when that is set alongside that of DC  Madden
   I find that weight is to be attached to it.

58. As indicated above a total  of  26  incidents  are  recorded  where  the
   Appellant was involved. I will describe some of the more serious.

59. Incident No 5 is an allegation of  possession  of  a  firearm.  In  that
   incident a member of the public had reported that  she  had  witnessed  a
   male fire two shots with a black handgun before allegedly passing it over
   to one of three friends who put it down his trousers. The  police  saw  a
   male fitting the description of the male  who  had  allegedly  fired  the
   handgun and he was stopped by armed officers along with two other  males.
   A further male, the Appellant, was stopped by armed officers in a  nearby
   alleyway. All four were arrested for possessing a  loaded  firearm  in  a
   public place. Although all were interviewed all four denied  the  offence
   and as the witness was unable to say that she would recognise any of  the
   suspects, no further action was taken.

60. The incident recorded as Incident No 6 took place in  January  2004  and
   again related to firearms. On that occasion the police  observed  a  blue
   Peugeot van driving into a car park and stopping in a corner. The  police
   approached the vehicle and spoke to the driver. Males  were  seen  to  be
   ducking down in the rear of the van. Officers noticed a black bag in  the
   van which was moved by one of the occupants. All  of  them  were  removed
   from the vehicle, one being  the  Appellant.  A  search  of  the  vehicle
   revealed weapons in a black bin liner in the rear, namely a firearm and a
   machete. All the men were arrested and interviewed. Due to the number  of
   suspects and lack of forensic evidence no further action was taken in the
   matter.

61. Incident No 7 in March 2004, refers to an assault  occasioning  grievous
   bodily harm. Police  were  called  to  assist  two  males  who  had  been
   assaulted near a public house. When the police arrived the  victims  were
   being given first aid by the ambulance  service.  The  victims  told  the
   police that they had been to a local Turkish club but when  they  entered
   another person pushed one of them refusing him  entry  and  picked  up  a
   chair to swing at him. A fight then ensued with a large  group  of  males
   inside the club who attacked the two victims with chains and bottles  and
   the fight spilled out  into  the  street.  Persons  identified  as  being
   involved in the assault and subsequently arrested included the Appellant.
   The Appellant admitted being at the venue  but  denied  the  assault.  No
   further action was taken due to inconsistencies in the accounts.

62. Incident No 10 was an incident in  June  2005  and  related  to  alleged
   blackmail and criminal damage. It describes the police attending  a  road
   junction after reports  of  theft  of  a  VW  Golf  stolen  by  means  of
   blackmail. The police spoke to Mr Gull who said that  over  the  previous
   month there had been several incidents with his ex-partner's  father.  He
   been told to go to a restaurant to meet someone and on arrival was met by
   four or five Turkish males who told him that they had been sent by his ex-
   partner's father who wanted a car or a photograph of him  hurt  and  they
   would beat him up and put him in a  coma.  Fearing  for  his  safety,  he
   handed over the car keys and then went to call  the  police.  The  police
   then located the vehicle and when it failed to stop  there  was  a  short
   pursuit with  the  driver  eventually  decamping  from  the  vehicle  and
   attempting to hide. He was  found  and  arrested.  Three  other  suspects
   remained in the vehicle and one of those was the  Appellant.  The  victim
   ultimately withdrew his statement, which the police believed to have been
   as a result of duress. However, without the victim's  assistance  matters
   did not proceed.

63. The recorded incidents continue  in  a  similar  vein.  When  questioned
   about these at the hearing the Appellant denied any memory of some.  With
   regard to the blackmail incident he denied that  that  was  a  result  of
   blackmail claiming the car was handed over voluntarily. At other times he
   seemed to be simply challenging the evidence simply  on  the  basis  that
   there were no charges or a conviction, suggesting  they  were  irrelevant
   because of that.  It  is  in  connection  with  his  responses  to  those
   incidents that I also refer to the fact that at the hearing the Appellant
   also denied his guilt of the events leading  to  the  deportation  order;
   this despite his guilty plea. His claim that he knew  nothing  about  the
   goings on at his premises and was innocent does not  sit  well  with  the
   Judge's findings having observed him throughout the trial. It seems  that
   then, as now he was trying to minimise his involvement.

64. I accept  of  course  that  where  the  Appellant  was  not  charged  or
   convicted he cannot be said to  be  guilty  of  the  offences.  The  fact
   remains however that he has  had  a  considerable  involvement  with  the
   police and was present when  offences  were  committed  and  was  in  the
   company of known criminals. That does not fit his description of  himself
   as belonging to the wrong family and as a result persecuted  (his  words)
   by the police.

65. The associates listed in DC Madden's  statement  were  all  put  to  the
   Appellant. Quite a few he said he did not know and others he said he knew
   because he had grown up with them or they were members of his family. The
   first named, Ali Armagan, the Appellant did admit to knowing and  hanging
   around with. He was his cousin.  He was fatally shot  in  February  2012.
   Another cousin Kemel Armagan is currently wanted for two murders and  has
   13 convictions for serious offences. This gentleman the Appellant claimed
   not to associate with.

66. Incident No 5, the possession of firearms allegation referred to  above,
   involved not only the Appellant but Umit Simsik who appears on  the  list
   of associates as  someone  who  has  12  convictions  for  possessing  an
   offensive weapon in a public place, possession of  cannabis  and  various
   other offences. The Appellant however  claimed  that  he  knew  him  only
   because he knew his brother Malik with whom he  had  grown  up.  A  third
   person involved in that incident was Ozgur  Olkun.  He  has  22  previous
   convictions  including  attempted  robbery,  assault  and  various  other
   offences including an arson offence which resulted in a 32  month  prison
   sentence. The Appellant at the hearing denied knowing him at all; yet  he
   was in their company and they were  all  arrested  together  in  November
   2003.

67. With regard to the second firearm offence (Incident No 6) the  Appellant
   was in the back of the van with others. One was Umit Simsik  referred  to
   above.

68. The other persons involved in the robbery which led to  the  Appellant's
   conviction in 2004 included Melik Tezcan  who  has  some  14  convictions
   including violent  disorder  robbery  and  burglary  and  numerous  other
   offences. He is the person that the Appellant said  he  knew  because  he
   grew up with him. The allegation at Incident No 10 of blackmail  included
   in addition to the Appellant, Melik Tezcan again and Ozgur Olkun.

69. The above represents only a small sample of the police evidence  but  is
   enough for me to find on a balance of probabilities  that  the  Appellant
   was involved with a Turkish gang in London namely the "Hackney Turks",  a
   gang in which the main players are his cousins. There seems no  doubt  on
   the basis of the evidence that that gang is  in what  seems  to  be  open
   warfare with another gang, the "Tottenham Boys" and there were shootings,
   murders and reprisal attacks going on between the two gangs. As a  result
   one of the Appellant's cousins was shot dead and another cousin is wanted
   for two murders. One of the leading lights in the "Tottenham  Boys"  gang
   has been shot and it is that which resulted in the police warning to  the
   Appellant that his life was at risk. I do not accept  that  this  is  all
   guilt by association or that the police have invented  this  evidence  to
   besmirch his character. If the Appellant had never  had  anything  to  do
   with the gang, as he claimed, there is no reason why the "Tottenham Boys"
   would have wanted to kill him. Indeed as well as the "Osman" letter there
   is another recorded incident when the Appellant himself  reported  having
   been shot at by  the  "Tottenham  Boys".  Similarly,  for  someone  never
   involved with the gang he seemed to be encountered by the  police  rather
   often in their company. The Appellant accepted in his evidence  that  the
   various personalities are known to each other and it is known who belongs
   to which gang and which vehicle belongs to which gang because  they  have
   all lived in the same area for years. It seems to me highly  likely  that
   the reason that the Appellant's life was at risk  was  the  threat  of  a
   reprisal attack.

70. The unsourced evidence  of  PC  Flatt  is  given  added  weight  by  the
   detailed evidence provided by  DC  Madden.   Both  are  very  experienced
   police officers working with gang crime and I do not  accept  that  their
   evidence is "manufactured" as  the  Appellant  claims.  The  overwhelming
   weight of evidence points to the Appellant being a member  of  this  gang
   and that his conduct for many years has been reprehensible and has led to
   a number of serious  convictions.  I  have  no  hesitation  therefore  in
   finding that he has been convicted by a final judgment of a  particularly
   serious crime and constitutes a danger to the  community  of  the  United
   Kingdom.  As such he is not entitled to the  protection  of  the  Refugee
   Convention. Given his  attempts  to  avoid  culpability  for  the  recent
   conviction and incredible evidence  about  his  relationships  with  gang
   members I attach no weight whatsoever to his claim that he will commit no
   future offences.

71. As I indicated above, that being the case it is  wholly  unnecessary  to
   consider Article 1C as he is not entitled to refugee status in any event.

72. I then have to consider whether  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
   return to Turkey. The UNHCR letter dated 6th March 2012 is  contained  in
   the Appellant's bundle and  results from a reference to the UNHCR by  the
   Secretary of State when she was  considering  to  cease  and  revoke  his
   refugee status under Article 1C(5). The first part of the letter  recites
   the Appellant's history and the history of the proceedings. It then  sets
   out the principles in relation to the application of  Article  1C(5)  and
   states that UNHCR wishes to highlight that UKBA bears the burden of proof
   to establish that the Appellant is no longer entitled to  refugee  status
   by virtue of changed circumstances in his country of origin. That  is  no
   doubt correct, but for the reasons I have given above is now  irrelevant.
   However UNHCR's position is relevant  in  terms  of  the  safety  of  the
   Appellant on return. While he would not be entitled to asylum he would be
   entitled to remain in the UK if to return him would put him  at  risk  of
   inhuman or degrading treatment as protected by Article 3 of the ECHR. The
   letter indicates that in  UNHCR's  view  Turkey  has  not  undergone  the
   fundamental and durable changes required under Article 1C(5)  and  quotes
   the European Commission Progress Report 2009 stating that:-

          "Overall,  while  the  Turkish   legal   framework   includes   a
        comprehensive set of safeguards against torture and  ill-treatment,
        efforts to implement it  and  fully  apply  the  government's  zero
        tolerance policy have been limited. Allegations of torture and ill-
        treatment, and impunity for perpetrators  are  still  a  cause  for
        great concern, and need to become  a  priority  area  for  remedial
        action by the Turkish authorities."

73. The letter goes on to state that the UNHCR would  like  to  draw  UKBA's
   attention to paragraph 3.6.11 of the Operational Guidance Note on  Turkey
   published in August 2011 which states:-

        "The Turkish government has made  changes  to  legislation  and  is
        committed to a  policy  of  combating  torture  and  ill-treatment.
        However while there has been a decrease in the number  of  reported
        instances of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading
        treatment, instances of mistreatment still  occur.  Those  who  are
        accepted as being in  leading  roles,  or  otherwise  significantly
        involved with Kurdish, left-wing or  Islamic  terrorist  groups  or
        political parties are likely to  face  prosecution  for  activities
        against the state and  may  also  experience  mistreatment  by  the
        security forces amounting to persecution or a breach of  Article  3
        of the ECHR".


74. The UNHCR is of the view that, given that the Appellant's father  was  a
   member of the PKK and wanted by the police, and his mother was also known
   to the authorities, having been raped and detained by them,  it  is  very
   probable  that  the  Appellant  would  come  to  the  attention  of   the
   authorities if he were to be returned to Turkey.

75. With the greatest of respect to the UNHCR there is a huge  leap  between
   the evidence of the way the Turkish authorities behave to those  accepted
   as being in leading roles or significantly involved with "Kurdish,  left-
   wing or Islamic terrorist groups or political parties" and the way  Kurds
   in general are treated. It was never the Appellant's or his mother's case
   that his father was a leading light in the PKK. It was their case that he
   was a member and it was his mother's case that she had been detained  and
   raped because of it. However, that was 16 years ago. If  the  Appellant's
   father was not a leading light in the PKK, there is no reason  whatsoever
   to consider the authorities would have  the  slightest  interest  in  the
   Appellant so many years later, particularly as he was only  14  years  of
   age when he left.  It is  significant  that  the  Appellant  was  granted
   refugee status in line with his mother and not as a result of a claim  by
   him to need it personally.

76. Later in its letter UNHCR stray into the matter of Article 33(2) and  by
   inference Section 72 and also Article  8.  Those  are,  I  would  suggest
   beyond its remit and in any event says nothing of import to the case.

77. Professor Rees relied upon  the  more  up-to-date  Operational  Guidance
   Note (May 2013) in the Appellants bundle.

78. In particular he referred me  to  paragraph  2.2.9  which  outlined  the
   efforts  Turkey  has  made  to  accord  with  the  requirements  for   EU
   candidature but noted that fighting is still continuing. 2.2.10 refers to
   an Amnesty International report of 2012 indicating that  clashes  between
   the PKK and the armed forces increased and that in October 2011  a  major
   military intervention was launched into northern Iraq targeting PKK bases
   displacing hundreds of civilians from their  villages.  This  relates  to
   events in Iraq but more importantly clashes between the PKK and the armed
   forces. This cannot have any bearing on the Appellant who is neither.

79. Professor Rees referred to paragraph 3.2.12 in which it is  stated  that
   the government did not commit  politically  motivated  killings  in  2012
   however, hundreds of security personnel, members of the PKK and civilians
   were killed in the three decades of conflict with  the  PKK.  However  it
   also states  that  the  number  of  civilian  security  personnel  deaths
   decreased from  2011  while  the  number  of  alleged  terrorists  killed
   increased. It notes that some 711 citizens were killed in the conflict it
   being the most violent year for  the  country's  PKK  conflict.  However,
   again that  seems  to  refer  to  the  PKK  as  opposed  to  the  general
   population, of which this Appellant would be a part.

80. I ought at this stage to deal with the Appellant's claim that he  is  in
   fact a PKK supporter. That is a  relatively  new  claim  and  one  wholly
   unsupported by evidence. He relied upon a letter contained in the  bundle
   from the Kurdish Community Centre. However, that  does  not  support  his
   claim. That letter simply states that he  is  an  active  member  of  the
   Community Centre and regularly attends. He often goes  in  to  visit  for
   visits and social conventions and has regularly in the  past  used  their
   advice service or support which they have provided him. The remainder  of
   the letter repeats what the author has been told by  the  Appellant.  The
   letter has various logos at the bottom indicating that the Community is a
   registered charity and  funded  by  Haringey  Council,  London  Councils,
   London  Development  Agency,  Supporting  People,  Refugee  Council,  the
   Community Legal Service, OISC and two other  organisations.  I  therefore
   entirely reject the Appellant's claim made at the hearing that it is  the
   PKK.

81. The Appellant also claimed to have been at  a  number  of  protests  but
   there is no evidence whatsoever of that or any evidence that the  Kurdish
   Community Centre  was  in  any  way  involved.  I  therefore  reject  the
   Appellant's claim to have done anything in support of the  PKK  while  in
   the UK; it is a late, self-serving claim made to boost his weak claim  to
   be at risk in Turkey.

82. I return to the OGN and Professor Rees's submissions. He referred me  to
   paragraph 3.9.2 which states that:-

          "Citizens  of  Kurdish  origin  constitute  a  large  ethnic  and
        linguistic group in Turkey and that more than 15  million  citizens
        identify themselves as such.  Those  who  publicly  or  politically
        asserted their Kurdish identity or promoted using  Kurdish  in  the
        public domain risked censure,  harassment  or  prosecution,  though
        significantly less so than in previous years"

      Censure, harassment and  prosecution  do  not  amount  to  inhuman  or
   degrading treatment.

83. I was then  referred  to  paragraph  3.9.6  referring  to  the  violence
   escalating once more between the PKK and security  forces  in  2011  with
   fatalities on both sides and significant civilian fatalities as a  result
   of the attacks and upheaval within those communities particularly in  the
   south-east of the country and  near  the  Iraq  border.  This  refers  to
   persons regrettably caught up in the attacks and  also  to  a  particular
   geographical area of Turkey, none of which is the Appellant's home  area.
   He comes from Kayseri which I was told was in the centre to eastern  side
   and not near the border with Iraq.

84. I was referred to paragraph 3.9.10 which states that:-


        "Courts continue to use terrorism laws  to  prosecute  hundreds  of
        demonstrators deemed to be PKK  supporters  as  if  they  were  the
        group's armed militants and most spent long  periods  in  pre-trial
        detention and those convicted received long prison sentences".

85. However, there is no reason whatsoever why this  Appellant  should  come
   within a group of persons so prosecuted.  He  is  not  a  PKK  member  or
   activist.  I find he is an Alevi Kurd and although undoubtedly a  serious
   criminal is not politically active in any way.

86. I was referred to paragraph 3.9.13 where it is concluded that:-

         "Although relatives of members or supporters of Kurdish, left-wing
        Islamic terrorist groups  or  political  parties  may  face  police
        harassment or discrimination there is no evidence to  suggest  that
        this, in general will reach the level of persecution. However, each
        case must be considered on its individual facts."


87. There is a vast difference between somebody in Turkey who has  a  family
   member now involved with the PKK and  this Appellant whose father  was  a
   member 16 years ago There is no  reason  to  suggest  that  he  would  be
   targeted or at risk.

88. Professor Rees referred to paragraphs 3.11.1 and 3.11.2 with  regard  to
   persons of the Alevi faith. It is said that there are between 15  and  20
   million Alevis in Turkey. The government  does  not  financially  support
   them but there is no suggestion  of  particular  difficulties.  Paragraph
   3.11.4 talks about UNHCR referring to  Alevis  suffering  discrimination,
   societal abuse and not being generally accepted in Turkish society.  This
   however falls a long way short of inhuman or degrading treatment.

89. Finally, Professor Rees argued that the Appellant may be perceived as  a
   draft evader in relation to military service. Professor Rees referred  me
   to paragraph 3.12 of the OGN in relation to that. However,  there  is  no
   suggestion of any ill-treatment other than  conscientious  objectors  who
   may not have their conscientious objection recognised. I  do  not  accept
   that the Appellant would fall into that category. I cannot conceive  that
   having left the country at the age of 14 it would be a  thought  that  he
   left to evade  military  service.  I  find  further  that  he  is  not  a
   conscientious objector.  That would be totally out of character for  this
   Appellant.

90. It follows from the above that despite the letter  from  the  UNHCR  and
   the reason that I have given to place little weight on it  and  based  on
   the Operational Guidance Note, I find that after so  many  years  out  of
   Turkey and having left as a child the Appellant would not be at  risk  on
   return. Turkey is a vast country and as a young, healthy, single  man  he
   can choose where in the country he wishes to live.

91. In summary therefore I find the Appellant to be a serious  criminal  who
   constitutes a danger to UK society due to his  previous  convictions  for
   serious offences including robbery and allowing premises to be  used  for
   the sale of cannabis, his  involvement  with  gangs  in  London  and  the
   extreme antisocial behaviour indulged in by them.  He  therefore  is  not
   entitled to the benefit of the Refugee Convention. In any event given  my
   findings on risk on return he has need of  the  benefit  of  the  Refugee
   Convention or the protection of the ECHR.

92. With regard to Article 8 as Judge McGeachy made clear  in  his  Decision
   and Directions, this was fully argued and decided before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal whose decision in that respect has been upheld. There  has  been
   no change of any significance since the First-tier Tribunal  decided  the
   case late in 2012 and there is no reason therefore for me to find removal
   disproportionate today when it was not then.

93. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  containing errors  of  law  and
   having been set aside in certain respects I have made a fresh decision in
   relation to asylum and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR  and  I  dismiss  the
   appeal.




Signed                 Dated 28th June 2013




C J Martin
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
