
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00618/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On1st July 2019                      |On 1st August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 Sheroze [K]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr McIndoe, Latitude Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of France born in 1994.  On the 29th March
    2019 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge AJ Parker) allowed his appeal  with
    reference to Regulation 27 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ('the Regulations'). The Secretary of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.






    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent has committed a series  of  criminal  offences  in  this
    country. To date  he  has  been  to  court  on  five  occasions,  being
    convicted of 14 offences including drug offences, breaching  conditions
    and dangerous driving. He was sentenced to 58 weeks in  prison  on  the
    21st February 2018  for  driving  dangerously,  without  insurance  and
    without a licence.


 3. It was the Secretary of State's case, set out in his letter of the 18th
    September  2018,  that   these   convictions,   and   this   persistent
    criminality, exposed the Respondent to  deportation  action  under  the
    Regulations. It was not accepted that the Respondent had ever accrued a
    permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom and so  received  no
    enhanced protection from expulsion.  The relevant tests were  therefore
    those set out at Regulation 27(5).

 4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal found as fact that the Respondent has
    lived in this country since 2007, having arrived when he was  13  years
    old. The entire family were issued with registration documents in  2007
    that were valid for five years. The Respondent's father was working  as
    a taxi driver at that time. The Tribunal was accordingly satisfied that
    the Respondent had  lived  in  this  country  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations between 2007 and 2012 and that he therefore accrued a right
    of permanent  residence.  Having  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent was educated in this country, and that  he  has  lived  here
    continuously since his arrival, the Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent has further accrued ten years continuous residence such that
    he  attracted  the  maximum  protection  from   expulsion   under   the
    Regulations. In making that finding the Tribunal had specific regard to
    the fact that the Respondent  had  been  sent  to  prison  during  that
    period, but was not satisfied that the ties  of  integration  had  been
    broken by that incarceration.


 5. The Tribunal was not satisfied, in light of its own findings, that  the
    Secretary of State could justify expulsion and the appeal was allowed.




    The Secretary of State's Appeal and the Response


 6. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal on the 7th  May
    2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria.  Although commenting that  the
    decision was well-reasoned and that consideration had been given to the
    pre-sentence report, Judge Haria  granted  permission  on  all  of  the
    following grounds:


              i) Making findings without evidential foundation. The Tribunal
                 accepts without reasons, or reference to the evidence,  the
                 assertion that the Respondent's father  was  working  as  a
                 taxi driver between 2007-2012.  Without  that  finding  the
                 Respondent could not show that he qualified  for  permanent
                 residence.  This in turn meant that he could  not  rely  on
                 his ten years continuous  residence  to  attract  a  higher
                 level of protection from removal: Vomero[1];


             ii) In its assessment of whether  the  Respondent  presented  a
                 genuine or present threat the First-tier Tribunal failed to
                 have regard to, or make adequate findings on, the evidence.
                 The pre-sentence report assesses the risk  of  re-offending
                 as 67% within 2 years, and the sentencing judge  said  that
                 the offences came "somewhere close  to  one  of  the  worst
                 cases"  he  had  seen.  This  evidence  is  not  adequately
                 reflected in the determination.


 7. For the Respondent Mr Mcindoe accepted, in respect of ground  (i)  that
    there  was  no  independent  corroboration  of  the  claim   that   the
    Respondent's father had been a self-employed taxi driver.  There  were,
    for instance, no HMRC records because he had  never  earned  above  the
    personal allowance and so had not  been  liable  to  pay  any  tax.  Mr
    McIndoe did however submit that the Tribunal was rationally entitled to
    accept such evidence as there was: a series of self-prepared  accounts,
    stamped by an accountant, and the oral evidence of the man in question,
    his wife, the Respondent  and  the  Respondent's  sister.   Mr  McIndoe
    further pointed out that the Secretary of  State  had  recognised  that
    this gentleman was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  June  2007  when  a
    residence card was issued to him and his family.  As to ground (ii)  Mr
    McIndoe points out that the figures cited by the Secretary of State  do
    feature in the Tribunal's reasoning, albeit that they were derived from
    the OASys and not the pre-sentence report.



    Discussion and Findings


 8. The bulk of the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning  appears  to  start  at
    paragraph 60 of its decision. Between paragraphs 61 and 64 the Tribunal
    sets out its reasons for finding that the Respondent  had  accrued  ten
    years' continuous residence, and that the links of  integration  forged
    during that time have not been broken by his imprisonment. That is  all
    sustainable  reasoning.   Applying  Vomero,  however,  none  of  it  is
    relevant if the Respondent cannot establish that he  had,  during  that
    ten years, accrued a  right  of  permanent  residence,  by  living  "in
    accordance with the Regulations" for a continuous five year period.

 9. At paragraph 65 the Tribunal identifies the crucial five years as being
    between 2007 and 2012. The Respondent was aged between 13 and 18 during
    this period. Although payslips in the bundle indicate that  he  started
    work sometime in April 2011, prior to that he  was  a  student.  It  is
    common ground that he did not have the comprehensive sickness insurance
    required to make him a 'qualified person' in that capacity, so  he  had
    to rely on the income generated by his father (no mention  is  made  of
    the Respondent's mother so I assume that she was not exercising  treaty
    rights).  Of this the Tribunal refers back to a finding that it made in
    the course of discussion of the Secretary of State's  submissions.  The
    Secretary of State  was  at  that  hearing  represented  by  Presenting
    Officer Ms Groves:

         "56.     ... Ms  Groves  rejected  the  accounts  produced  by  the
         appellant's father which shows that from 2007 to date he has worked
         as a taxi driver  by  saying  no  tax  documents  or  taxi  licence
         certificates had  been  produced.  I  find  that  this  is  a  weak
         argument. I find that  he  has  lived  in  this  country  and  been
         exercising  treaty  rights  since  2007  based  on   the   credible
         documentary and oral evidence presented to me."

10.  It is the Secretary of State's  contention  that  there  was  not  the
    evidence to reach this conclusion.  The only documentary evidence was a
    collection of self authored accounts statements. It was true that these
    had been stamped by an accountant as verified but there was no covering
    letter from the accountant, and more  significantly,  no  corroborative
    evidence from HMRC.  Other than that the evidence consisted of the oral
    evidence of the Respondent's father, who in Mr  Bates'  submission  had
    obvious reasons to want to stop his son being deported.


11. Mr McIndoe pointed out that in fact the oral evidence had been of  four
    witnesses who had all confirmed that the Respondent's  father  drove  a
    taxi in that period, and that the Tribunal had found, of (at least some
    of) this evidence [at 57]:

         "The oral evidence of the appellant's parents  relating  to  treaty
         rights  was  not  successfully  challenged  and  I  find  that  the
         appellant did enter the country in 2007"

12. There is no specified evidence requirement to demonstrate  that  treaty
    rights were being exercised. It is a question of fact to be  determined
    in the round, taking all available information into account.  It is the
    Secretary of  State's  case  that  there  was  "no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's father was lawfully employed" (my emphasis) but  of  course
    that is not right.  There  was  evidence;  it  is  just  that  it  came
    exclusively from the witnesses (I say exclusively because the  accounts
    statements added little if anything to the evidence of the Respondent's
    father, given that he had  prepared  them  himself).   Nothing  in  the
    record of proceedings before Judge Parker indicates that the  Secretary
    of State was able to score  any  particular  points  to  undermine  the
    testimony; nor was Mr Bates  able  to  bring  any  such  points  to  my
    attention.  There were, for instance,  no  inconsistencies  identified,
    nor evidence brought to contradict it.  The weight to  be  attached  to
    that evidence was, classically,  a  matter  for  the  judge:   see  for
    instance Manzi v Kings' College Hospital NHS Trust [2018] EWCA Civ 1882
    [at 23]: "weight is a contextual evaluation for the  judge  who  reads,
    hears and sees the evidence of the witnesses. It is  inappropriate  for
    this court to interfere with that evaluation unless  it  is  perverse".
    There is nothing perverse in the Judge's decision to accept as credible
    the consistent evidence of four witnesses. It follows that  ground  (i)
    is not made out.


13. Ground (ii) is concerned with the question of risk. I do not propose to
    address it in light of my findings on ground (i).  That is because  the
    evidence fell far short of establishing that  there  were  'imperative'
    grounds to deport the Respondent.


      Decisions


14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


15. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               6th  July 2019
                           -----------------------
[1] B v Land Badem-Wurtemburg and Secretary of State for the Home
Department v Vomero (Directive 2004/38/EC) Joined cases C-316/16 and C-
424/16

