
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00363/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 December 2013                        |On 16 December 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR TYRONE ANTHONY WHITE
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

         For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
         For the Respondent: Mr R Toal of counsel instructed by Rodman
Pearce


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Jamaica who was born on 9 May 1971. I will refer to him  as
      the claimant. The Secretary of State  has  been  given  permission  to
      appeal the determination of a panel (First-Tier Tribunal Judge Jackson
      and non-legal Member Mr P Bompas) who allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision of 5 February 2013 to make a
      deportation order against  him  pursuant  to  section  5  (1)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  and
      under Paragraphs 398 to 399A of the Immigration Rules, to  refuse  him
      asylum, humanitarian protection or leave to  remain  on  human  rights
      grounds.


   2. The claimant came to the UK in October 2001  with  a  six-month  visit
      visa. He claimed to have made an application for further leave shortly
      after, but there is no  record  of  this.  He  was  granted  temporary
      admission subject to reporting conditions in around 2004 or 2005 which
      he complied with  for  approximately  2  years.  He  then  married  an
      American citizen who has leave to remain in the UK.


   3. On 20 May 2010 the claimant pleaded guilty and was  convicted  of  one
      count of attempted robbery and one count  of  possession  of  a  small
      firearm. He was sentenced  to  8  years  imprisonment  and  six  years
      imprisonment to run concurrently. He claimed asylum on 11  April  2011
      whilst in prison. There was a screening interview followed by  a  full
      interview. He was served with a notification of his  liability  to  be
      deported on 27 September 2011.


   4. The claimant appealed against the decision of 5 February 2013 and  his
      appeal was heard by the panel on 13 August  2013.  Both  parties  were
      represented and the panel heard evidence from  the  claimant  and  his
      wife. They married on 7 January 2006 and have two children born  on  1
      February 2004 and 9 May 2005.


   5. The panel found that the claimant had been convicted of  very  serious
      crimes but that  it  was  extremely  unlikely  that  he  would  become
      involved in criminal activities in the future. He did not constitute a
      continuing danger to the community. In relation to  the  asylum  claim
      the panel concluded that the claimant had suffered  serious  harm  and
      persecution in Jamaica at the hands of the PNP  party  and  associated
      gangs. He would still face serious harm and  persecution  were  he  to
      return although he would not face destitution and would not be at risk
      from his co-defendants in the offences for which he was  convicted  in
      this country or  their  associates.  It  would  be  unduly  harsh  and
      impractical to expect him to internally relocate within  Jamaica.  The
      panel found that the claimant had established that he came within  the
      exception to automatic deportation  in  section  33(2)(b)  of  the  UK
      Borders Act 2007. The panel said that as a result it was not necessary
      for the human rights grounds to be determined  although  had  it  been
      necessary to do so the conclusion would have been that the  claimant's
      deportation would be a disproportionate interference with his right to
      respect for family life in the UK. The panel assessed  the  claimant's
      family life with his wife, who has no time limit on her stay in the UK
      and their two children who are British citizens.  The  respondent  had
      conceded that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  wife  and
      children to relocate to Jamaica.


   6. The claimant's appeal was allowed on asylum grounds. The Secretary  of
      State applied for and was granted permission to appeal. I will address
      her grounds.


   7. Mr Saunders informed me that he had given careful consideration to the
      determination and the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal.  Apart
      from relying on the  grounds  he  would  not  be  making  any  further
      submissions. In the circumstances I indicated to Mr Toal that  I  need
      not trouble him to make any submissions. I was conscious of  the  fact
      that Mr Toal was in some difficulty. There had been a misunderstanding
      between the claimant's solicitors and counsel's clerk and as a  result
      counsel who appeared for the claimant before the  panel  had  gone  to
      South Wales to hear another case. Another member of chambers, Mr Toal,
      was present at Field House dealing with  another  case  and  had  been
      asked to appear before me without having seen any papers. I gave him a
      duplicate Tribunal bundle but it was clear that he would not have  had
      sufficient time to both prepare and consult with the claimant and  his
      wife who were present.


   8. I find that the determination of  the  panel  is  clear,  careful  and
      detailed. There is one overarching ground of appeal which submits that
      the panel erred in law by failing to give reasons or adequate  reasons
      for findings on material matters.


   9. Paragraph 1 of the grounds argues that the panel failed to resolve the
      different opinions expressed in the Probation Service reports and  the
      independent risk assessment as to the claimant's risk of harm  to  the
      public if he were to reoffend. It is argued that the  conclusion  that
      he does not constitute a danger to the public is flawed. I  find  that
      this ground is largely misconceived because it addresses only part  of
      the risk assessment; the secondary part which only comes into play  if
      the claimant does reoffend. In paragraph 73 the panel correctly  state
      that; "The OASys Report, the National Probation  Service  report  with
      information for a Foreign National Prisoner and the  Independent  Risk
      Assessment  all  agree  that  the  Appellant  is  at  a  low  risk  of
      reoffending". The difference of opinion was not  as  to  the  risk  of
      reoffending but the risk of harm if he were to  reoffend.  The  public
      reports assessed this as a medium risk to the public although  low  in
      other categories whilst the Independent Risk Assessment concluded that
      there was a low risk of serious  harm.  The  panel  properly  assessed
      these reports in  the  light  of  the  evidence  and  gave  clear  and
      sufficient reasons for the conclusion that it was  extremely  unlikely
      that he would be involved in criminal activities in the future.


  10. In paragraph 2 of the grounds it is argued that in paragraphs  80  and
      94 the panel failed properly to  assess  the  admitted  delay  by  the
      Secretary of State which should not have been determinative,  although
      it is not disputed that the delay  allowed  the  claimant  to  develop
      stronger Article 8 rights in this country. Paragraph 18  deals  almost
      entirely with delay not by the Secretary of State but by the claimant.
      The only reference to any lack of action on the part of the  Secretary
      of State is in the sentence; "given that the appellant  was  reporting
      for a number of years and there is no  evidence  that  the  respondent
      ever commenced in the enforcement action against him, we  accept  that
      the appellant may have formed the view that he could continue  without
      formally regularising his status." In paragraph 94 the panel  properly
      weighed the fact that the claimant established family life in  the  UK
      at a time when he had no lawful leave to be  here  and  he  must  have
      known that his situation was  precarious  against  the  fact  that  he
      reported to the Secretary of State for a number of years  without  any
      action being taken to remove him. I can find no  indication  that  the
      panel treated any delay by the Secretary of State as determinative  or
      that there is any error in the approach to delay.


  11. In paragraph 3 of the grounds it is not  correct  to  state  that  the
      panel's conclusions as  to  risk  on  return  are  not  based  on  any
      objective evidence. There is a  proper  assessment  of  the  objective
      evidence and the country guidance case law in  paragraphs  82  to  84.
      There is no conflict or inconsistency between these findings  and  the
      conclusion that the claimant would not be at risk  on  return  at  the
      hands of those with whom he was involved in the crimes  for  which  he
      was convicted in this country or their associates. There is  a  proper
      consideration  of  state  protection  and   internal   relocation   in
      paragraphs 87 to 89 and the question of  whether  the  claimant  would
      still be at risk after the length of time he has spent outside Jamaica
      in paragraph 84.


  12. Paragraph 4 of the grounds does not  identify  the  paragraph  in  the
      determination as a result of which it is argued that the panel made an
      incorrect assessment or gave too much weight  to  the  fact  that  the
      claimant "has a restricted use of his  hands".  On  the  contrary,  in
      paragraph 85 the panel concluded that the claimant would  have  family
      support and assistance on return to Jamaica  that  he  had  previously
      been employed in Jamaica and had regular employment in the UK and  had
      gained educational qualifications, skills and experience that he could
      use in finding employment on return.


  13. Paragraph 4 of the grounds incorrectly states that the  panel  allowed
      the appeal on Article 8 grounds. The  appeal  was  allowed  on  asylum
      grounds only; although the panel gave an indication that had  it  been
      necessary to do so the appeal would also have been allowed on  Article
      8 human rights grounds. There has been a proper consideration  of  the
      public interest and the panel referred to the  relevant  case  law  in
      paragraph 95. The grounds amount to no  more  than  disagreement  with
      conclusions properly reached by the panel.


  14. I  find  that  the  panel  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  the
      determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 11 December 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

