
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00369/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 27 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                OLEGAS LVOVAS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tububu of Ty Arian Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Holder and Ms V S Street JP) allowing the appeal of  Mr
    Lvovas, a citizen of Lithuania, against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State taken on 8 February 2014 to make a deportation order against  him
    by virtue of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    (SI 2006/1003 as amended) and s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Lithuania who was  born  on  5  September
    1990.  The appellant came to the UK in early 2010.   Between  14  March
    2011 and  22  November  2013,  the  appellant  was  convicted  on  four
    occasions of a total of fourteen offences  including  driving  a  motor
    vehicle with excess alcohol, driving otherwise than in accordance  with
    a licence, using a vehicle whilst uninsured, aggravated vehicle taking,
    failing to stop after an accident and using  threatening,  abusive  and
    insulting words or behaviour with intent to cause fear  or  provocation
    of violence and battery.  In  relation  to  the  latter  offences,  the
    appellant was subject to a suspended sentence order.

 4. On 18 October 2013, the appellant was convicted at  the  Swansea  Crown
    Court of threatening to kill, breach of a restraining order; two counts
    of assault by beating; and  using  threatening,  abusive  or  insulting
    words or behaviour with intent to cause fear  of/to  provoke  violence.
    The circumstances of those offences were that the appellant met his ex-
    partner at a party and, realising that someone  else  must  be  looking
    after their child, he became aggressive whilst  drunk.   He  threatened
    his ex-partner, demanded that she go home with him  and  then  attacked
    her. On 22 November 2013, the appellant was sentenced to twelve months'
    imprisonment for those sentences and a further four months concurrently
    for breach of the suspended order, making a total sentence  of  sixteen
    months' imprisonment.

 5. As a consequence of that conviction, on 8 February 2014  the  Secretary
    of State made a decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
    appellant under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 6. The Secretary of State's reasons are set out in her decision letter  of
    8 February 2014.  First, the Secretary of State did not accept that the
    appellant had a permanent right of residence  based  upon  five  years'
    continuous residence in the UK and so concluded  that  his  deportation
    could  be  justified  on  the  grounds  of  "public  policy  or  public
    security".  The Secretary of State concluded, in the absence of a  NOMS
    Assessment but based upon the appellant's criminal record, that he  had
    a propensity to reoffend and that he posed a risk to the  public  or  a
    section of the public  and  so  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the public" to justify  his  deportation
    on  grounds  of  public  policy.   Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be  proportionate
    applying  reg  21(5)  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations.   Finally,   any
    interference with the appellant's family life with his 3 year  old  son
    was proportionate and not a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 22 April 2014, the First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that
    the appellant's deportation was not in accordance  with  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations and would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    family life with his son and so a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a number of  grounds.   On  24  June  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted the Secretary of  State  permission
    to appeal on the basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  assessment  of
    proportionality was arguably legally flawed.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Submissions

10. At the outset, Mr  Richards  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    accepted that the grounds' reliance upon OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA
    Civ 694 to support an argument that the Tribunal  had  failed  to  take
    into account the public interest in deterring other EEA nationals  from
    committing offences and to  demonstrate  society's  revulsion  to  such
    criminal offences could not be relied on in the context  of  an  appeal
    under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  The sole issue as regards  the  public
    interest was, Mr Richards accepted, the risk, if any, of an  individual
    reoffending and so presenting  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society".
    That concession was, in my judgment, entirely correct.   It  is  beyond
    doubt that an individual's previous criminal  convictions  "do  not  in
    themselves justify" a decision (see reg  21(5)(e)).   Past  convictions
    are, however, relevant in assessing whether an individual is at risk of
    committing an offence or offences in the future  which  is  the  proper
    scope of enquiry for "public policy" in a deportation case  based  upon
    an EEA national's criminal convictions.

11. Putting that matter  to  the  side,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had failed properly to consider the issue  of  proportionality
    both under the 2006 EEA Regulations and under Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   He
    submitted that the Tribunal  had  failed  to  make  clear  findings  in
    relation to the 2006 EEA Regulations and had, in effect, conflated  the
    two in para 36 of its determination.  Further,  Mr  Richards  submitted
    that the Tribunal had failed to properly carry out the  proportionality
    assessment and, in particular, to have regard to the  appellant's  risk
    of reoffending which the NOMS Report dated 18 March 2014 stated  was  a
    "low" risk to the public and a  "medium"  risk  to  his  ex-partner  of
    causing serious  harm.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning was inadequate both in respect of its decision to  allow  the
    appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations and also under Art 8.

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Tububu submitted that the  Tribunal  had
    made a finding in relation to proportionality both in  respect  of  the
    2006 EEA Regulations and  Art  8.   The  Tribunal  had  considered  the
    appellant's propensity to reoffend at paras 28 to 29 and had noted  the
    appellant's expressed  remorse  and  that  he  had  gone  some  way  to
    addressing his  offending  (through  alcohol  problems)  by  completing
    courses whilst in prison.  Mr  Tububu  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had carried  out  the  balancing  exercise  and  had  properly
    considered the impact upon the appellant's son if  the  appellant  were
    deported from the UK.





Discussion

13. The appellant is an EEA national and consequently his deportation  must
    comply with the requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations, in particular
    reg 21.  No challenge is  made  to  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    appellant could not establish a right of permanent residence in the  UK
    and that, therefore, the heightened level of protection in reg 21(3)  -
    requiring  proof  of  "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
    security" - did not apply.  The decision must,  instead,  be  taken  on
    "the grounds of public policy, public security or public health."  (reg
    21(1)).

14. For the purposes of this appeal, regs 21(5) and (6)  are  relevant  and
    are as follows:

         "(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;


             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;


             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."


15. There is no doubt that the Tribunal had these provisions well  in  mind
    which are quoted at paras 23 and 24 of its determination.

16. The Tribunal's findings begin at para 25 and set  out  the  appellant's
    circumstances, including those of his family as follows:

         "25. Mr. Lvovas is twenty-three years of age.  We find that he  has
             spent the vast majority of his life in Lithuania.

             His close family and his son aged two years are in the  United
             Kingdom.  They are all Lithuanian nationals.

             The Appellant has a close relationship with  his  parents  and
             brother.  We find, as such, that it is likely that they  would
             help him financially should he be deported to Lithuania."

17. Then at paras 26-29 the Tribunal dealt with the  appellant's  offending
    as follows:

         "26. The Appellant's personal conduct is reflected in his  criminal
             record.   He  has  accumulated  a  criminal  record   in   the
             relatively short period of time that he has been in the United
             Kingdom.  This is set out in the Respondent's  letter  of  8th
             February, 2014 at page 4.

             In short, the appellant has been convicted four times  for  14
             offences between 14th March, 2011  and  22nd  November,  2013.
             These included driving a motor vehicle  with  excess  alcohol,
             driving otherwise in accordance  with  the  licence,  using  a
             vehicle whilst uninsured, aggravated vehicle  taking,  failing
             to stop after  an  accident,  using  threatening  abusive  and
             insulting words or behaviour with  intent  to  cause  fear  or
             provocation of violence and battery.

         27.  The Appellant was made the subject  of  a  Suspended  Sentence
             Order and a Restraining Order for some of those offences.

             However,  not  long  after  those  orders  were  imposed,  the
             Appellant met his ex-partner at a  party.   He  realised  that
             someone else must be looking after their child and  he  became
             aggressive whilst in drink.   He  threatened  his  ex-partner,
             demanded that she goes home with him,  dragged  her  into  the
             street by the hair, hit her twice to the head  and  left  her.
             He also threatened her with a butterfly knife.   She  did  not
             receive any significant injuries.

             As a consequence,  he  received  the  16  months  imprisonment
             sentence as indicated at paragraph 2 above.

             They are serious offences and are described  as  such  by  the
             Sentencing Judge.  We take  into  account  the  fact  that  he
             pleaded guilty.

         28.  We find from the nature of the offences for which he  received
             his sentence of imprisonment, the domestic situation  and  the
             Assessment of the Probation Service  dated  18th  March,  2014
             that Mr Lvovas poses a low risk to the  public  and  a  medium
             risk to his ex-partner of causing serious harm.   He  will  be
             the subject of a multiagency  risk  assessment  conference  on
             release from prison.  He has previously  complied  fully  with
             sessions  regarding  Respectful  Relationships   and   Alcohol
             Awareness.  Alcohol was deemed a factor in his offending.

         29.  There is a lack of evidence as to any proposed  rehabilitation
             process save it is said at page 7  of  the  Probation  Service
             Assessment that 'Mr. Lvovas has reflected upon  his  behaviour
             whilst in custody and is very aware that his relationship with
             his partner is now over.   That  he  must  continue  to  self-
             monitor his alcohol use and address his consequential thinking
             deficits.  I am of  the  opinion  that  Mr  Lvovas  would,  as
             previously demonstrated, work to apply himself to comply  with
             his  period  of  licence  and  engage  with  offender  focused
             intervention given both my experience as his offender  manager
             and  his  responses  to  his  offender  supervisor  whilst  in
             custody.'

             Given the above, we find  that  the  Appellant  has  expressed
             remorse for his offending and has gone some way to  addressing
             his offending by way of completing courses and impressing  his
             offender manager."



18. Then at para 31 the Tribunal dealt  with  the  appellant's  links  with
    Lithuania and his potential for reintegration if he returned there:

         "31. We do not find that he has any particular significant links to
             Lithuania now that his close family are in the United Kingdom.
              We accept that he may well experience difficulties in finding
             accommodation and work in that country.

             We find that it is likely that he came to the  United  Kingdom
             in order to find work and a better standard of living (as  did
             his family members).  That said, we do not find  that  he  has
             been away from Lithuania for such a time that his  social  and
             cultural integration there cannot  reasonably  take  place  if
             deported."

19. At para 34 the Tribunal dealt with the  appellant's  relationship  with
    his 3 year old son and the evidence concerning that  relationship,  not
    least from his mother who was, of course, the victim of his most recent
    offence.  The Tribunal said this:

         "34. We are mindful that the Appellant has  a  son  almost  aged  3
             years.  In that regard, we find the following:

             a)   the Appellant is no longer in a close  relationship  with
                  the  mother  of  the  child.   Indeed,  he   is   formally
                  restrained from contact with her,

             b)   the child's mother still maintains  a  good  relationship
                  with the Appellant's family.   This  was  evident  at  the
                  hearing and from her evidence;

             c)   the child's mother wishes that the Appellant  remains  in
                  the United Kingdom in order that  their  son  can  have  a
                  reasonable relationship with his father.  She  wishes  for
                  the Appellant to play a part in his upbringing.   That  is
                  also the Appellant's wish;

             d)   the Appellant has had regular visits from his son  whilst
                  in custody;

             e)   we  are  mindful  of  case  law  such  as  considered  ZH
                  (Tanzania) v SSHD (2011) UKSC 4 and LD (Article 8  -  Best
                  Interests of the Child) Zimbabwe (2010)  UKUT  278  (IAC).
                  Furthermore, we have considered Section 55 of the Borders,
                  Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  regarding  the  best
                  interests of the child."

20. At para 35, the Tribunal set out the  well-known  five  stage  test  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and at para 36  concluded  that  the  appellant's
    deportation engaged Art 8.1 on the basis of an  interference  with  his
    family life, was in accordance with the law and for the legitimate  aim
    of the prevention of disorder or crime.

21. Then at para 36(e) the Tribunal turned to the issue of  proportionality
    as follows:

         "(e)  It  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference   with   the
             Appellant's and his child's family life should he be deported.



             We say this having taken into account all matters and  in  the
             knowledge that the Appellant has committed  serious  offences.
             The relevant ones are in relation to his ex-partner.  However,
             his perceived risk to the general public is low  in  terms  of
             reoffending.  His offender manager's  findings  give  optimism
             that the medium risk to his ex-partner can reduce.

             His own family's involvement with the child and  the  family's
             good relationship with  his  ex-partner  bodes  well  for  the
             appellant to be able to maintain a positive  and  contributing
             relationship with his son.

             Additionally, his continued involvement with their son has the
             endorsement of his ex-partner.

             We find that the best interests of the child are served by him
             having close relationships with both his parents.  We  do  not
             find  that  this  can  be  achieved  by  the  Appellant  being
             deported.  It may  be  that  he  could  visit  his  father  in
             Lithuania on occasions but we do not find that family life can
             be reasonably expected to be enjoyed in that way."

22. The Tribunal expressed its conclusions as follows at para 37:

         "37. We find that the interference is not in  accordance  with  the
             law given our findings that the Appellant's deportation is not
             in accordance with Regulation 21(5)(a) of the 2006 Regulations
             and is a disproportionate  interference  with  his  Article  8
             rights."

23. Whilst the Tribunal could, perhaps, have structured  its  determination
    more closely following the rubric of first the 2006 EEA Regulations and
    then of Art 8  of  the  ECHR,  I  am  unable  to  accept  Mr  Richards'
    submissions that the Tribunal erred in law in reaching its decisions in
    favour of the appellant under both those heads.

24. Taking first the EEA Regulations, as I have already noted, the Tribunal
    set out the relevant provision in regs 21(5) and (6).  At paras  26-29,
    the Tribunal clearly considered, indeed in some  detail,  the  evidence
    concerning the appellant's offending and that the  NOMS  Report  stated
    that he was a low risk to the public and  a  medium  risk  to  his  ex-
    partner of causing serious harm.  However,  at  para  29  the  Tribunal
    noted the NOMS Report at page 7 and concluded that it demonstrated that
    the  appellant  had  expressed  remorse  and  had  "gone  some  way  to
    addressing" his offending behaviour which was associated with excessive
    alcohol use.  In particular, the NOMS Report states:

         "Mr Lvovas has reflected upon his behaviour whilst in  custody  and
         is very aware that his relationship with his partner is  now  over.
         That he must continue to self-monitor his alcohol use  and  address
         his consequent thinking deficits.

         I  am  of  the  opinion  that  Mr  Lvovas  would,   as   previously
         demonstrated, work to apply himself to comply with  his  period  of
         licence and engage with offender focused intervention given both my
         experience as  his  offender  manager  and  his  responses  to  his
         offender supervisor whilst in custody."

25. It is clear that the appellant had engaged with the  services  provided
    in prison  to  deal  with  his  offending  difficulties  and  had  made
    progress.  The Tribunal was entitled to take that into account and that
    he had no continuing relationship with his ex-partner.  The risk to the
    general public was low.

26. Secondly, the Tribunal accepted that the appellant could  socially  and
    culturally reintegrate into Lithuania but also  noted  that  his  close
    family was all in the UK.  Those findings are set out  in  para  25  as
    well, including that he is financially dependent upon his  parents  and
    brother in the UK.  The fact that all his close family are in the UK is
    undoubtedly a factor relevant to his  future  risk  and  rehabilitation
    which is relevant in assessing proportionality in  an  EEA  case  (see,
    e.g. Essa (EEA: rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC)).

27. Thirdly, the Tribunal set out the nature of  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his 3 year old son at para 34.  It is noticeable that
    the appellant's ex-partner gave oral evidence at the hearing indicating
    that she wished the appellant to have a  reasonable  relationship  with
    his son and that she wished the appellant to play a part in their son's
    upbringing.  The evidence was that the appellant had had regular visits
    from his son whilst he was in custody.   At  para  36(e)  the  Tribunal
    concluded that it was in the best interests of the appellant's  son  to
    have a close relationship with both parents which could not be achieved
    if the appellant were deported.  The Tribunal did not accept  that  his
    family life with his son could reasonably be enjoyed simply  by  visits
    to him in Lithuania.

28. I did not understand Mr Richards to challenge those factual findings as
    such.  Indeed, in my judgment they were properly open to  the  Tribunal
    on the evidence.

29. The Tribunal had before it evidence that the  Secretary  of  State  did
    not, namely the NOMS Report and  that  of  the  appellant's  ex-partner
    concerning her views as to  the  need  for  the  appellant's  continued
    relationship with their son.  There is no  doubt  that  the  Tribunal's
    findings that it was in the best  interests  of  their  child  for  the
    appellant to remain in the UK  and  to  continue  to  have  a  positive
    relationship with his son which had continued whilst he was in  custody
    were findings which were not irrational and were properly open  to  the
    Tribunal.

30. It is clear that in relation to the 2006 EEA Regulations  the  Tribunal
    had well in mind the risk the appellant posed and which  it  stated  at
    para 36(e) as a "low risk" to the general public  and  also  that  "his
    offender manager's findings give optimism that the medium risk  to  his
    ex-partner can reduce."

31. It is clear that in reaching the Tribunal's ultimate finding  that  the
    appellant's deportation was not proportionate under reg 21(5)(a) of the
    2006 EEA Regulations was, reading the determination as a whole, reached
    after a consideration of the public policy grounds relied upon  by  the
    Secretary of State based on the appellant's  offending  and  took  into
    account all the circumstances of the appellant including that his close
    family were all in the UK, that he could return to  Lithuania  but  the
    effect of that would run counter to the best interests of his son  with
    whom he would, in effect, cease to enjoy the family life and which  the
    appellant, and even his ex-partner, wished to continue with their son.

32. In my judgment, it was open to the Tribunal to conclude,  applying  the
    terms of reg 21(5), that the risk  of  the  appellant  reoffending  was
    outweighed by his circumstances considered in detail by  the  Tribunal.
    Despite the clarity of Mr Richards' submissions, the Tribunal  did,  in
    fact, take into account all relevant factors in reaching their ultimate
    finding which, despite the structure of the determination, clearly  led
    them to their conclusion in favour of the appellant under the 2006  EEA
    Regulations.

33. That, in my judgment, is equally true  of  the  Tribunal's  finding  in
    relation to Art 8.  Although there, the concept of the public  interest
    is wider than under the EEA Regulations (see, e.g. OH (Serbia)), it was
    open  to  the  Tribunal  to  conclude  that  the  public  interest  was
    outweighed by the effect upon the appellant and his son's family  life.
    The reasoning in para 36(e)  has  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the
    Tribunal's determination as a whole.   That  finding  was  not,  in  my
    judgment, irrational.  It may well be that  not  every  Tribunal  would
    have reached that conclusion under Art 8.  However, that does  not,  in
    itself, establish that the conclusion was not open to the  Tribunal  in
    the sense that it was irrational and therefore unlawful.   As  Carnwath
    LJ (as he then was) observed in Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at
    [40]:

         "[t]he mere fact that one Tribunal has reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law ..."

34. In any event, the favourable finding under Art 8 does not detract  from
    the primary finding in favour of the appellant as an EEA national  that
    he cannot be deported by virtue of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

Decision

35. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations and Art 8 of the ECHR
    did not involve the making of an error of law.  Its decision stands.

36. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



                                                                       Dated


                                                              8 October 2014
