

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: DA 00935-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   03.12.2013|
|on    02.12.2013                              |sent out:      16.12.2013    |

Before:
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Andrew WILSON

Between:
                           Dzulian Krzystian ZEMLA
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Anawar Babul Miah  (counsel instructed by Patterson &
Co)
For the respondent: Mr Steve Walker


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Peter Ievins and a lay member), sitting at Taylor House
    on 25 September, to  a deportation appeal by a Roma citizen of  Poland,
    born 17 December 1993, against a decision made on 30  April  2013.  The
    panel allowed the appeal solely on the basis  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled  to  the  protection  of  reg.  21(4)(a)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 [the  2006  Regulations].  On
    their, literally correct, reading of the regulation, someone who is now
    an EEA citizen, and " ... has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous  period  of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
    decision", in whatever capacity, could not  be  removed  "...except  on
    imperative grounds of public security".

ISSUES

 2. It was accepted by the presenting officer before  the  panel  that  the
    appellant had been in this country since  1997;  however,  Poland  only
    joined the European Union, and so the EEA, on 1  May  2004.  Mr  Walker
    accepted before us that the appellant's period of residence  from  then
    till the coming into force of the 2006 Regulations  fell  to  be  taken
    into account for the purposes of reg. 21(4)(a); but the issue for us is
    whether the appellant's stay here before Polish accession can count  in
    that way.

 3. Before we discuss that question, it is worth making clear that

        a. the panel dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  both  the  other
           grounds on which he relied (as  someone  entitled  to  permanent
           residence under reg. 21(3), and under article 8), and

        b. there has been no cross-appeal  against  those  parts  of  their
           decision; however

        c. there has been no challenge by the Home Office  to  the  panel's
           assessment  that  this  appellant's  record  did  not  make   it
           imperative to remove him on public security grounds; so

        d. our answer to the question before us will settle the  result  of
           this appeal one way or the other.

HISTORY

 4. The appellant, then only 3�, arrived here in May 1997 with his parents,
    who claimed asylum for themselves,  him  and  his  siblings.  That  was
    refused, and their appeals were finally dismissed on 23  January  2001,
    following which they all left this country. Then on 10 March 2002  they
    all came back here, and a further asylum claim was made, refused on  24
    July because the appellant's father had failed to complete  their  SEF.
    This time too their appeals were dismissed, the decision becoming final
    on 5 January 2004; however  they  stayed  on  till  Poland  joined  the
    European Union  on  1  May,  and  the  appellant's  parents  registered
    themselves later that year under the Accession State Worker scheme.

 5. In April 2010 the appellant,  by  then  16,  committed  an  offence  of
    attempted robbery; but it was on 14 June that year that he was involved
    in the crime which led to the decision  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him. This was charged as 'engaging in sexual  activity  in  the
    presence of a child'. What happened, as  described  by  the  sentencing
    judge, was that he and two other young men, one of whom was  his  elder
    brother Denis, and the other called Daniel Stephenson, all took  a  13-
    year old girl down into a basement room  with  a  mattress,  apparently
    used for sexual congress by all and sundry. They used a degree of force
    to get her in there,  and  then  partly  stripped  her;  two  of  them,
    apparently Denis and Daniel, forced her  to  commit  sexual  acts  with
    them, and, as the judge said "there was a degree of masturbation  going
    on ... as an additional act of humiliation". They took pictures of what
    they were doing on their mobiles, and threatened the  girl  with  wider
    publication if she dared to complain to anyone.



 6. The judge described the conditions in that little room as  "desperately
    unpleasant": he noted that the girl  had  suffered  profound  emotional
    damage, to the extent that, even by the time sentence  was  passed  two
    years later, she was staying much of the time in  her  room,  withdrawn
    from life and beset by nightmares. On 11 May 2012  he  sentenced  Denis
    and Daniel, both convicted of rape, to seven  years'  detention,  while
    the appellant received a sentence of two years for the part he  played.
    Shortly before the custodial part of that was due to expire,  the  Home
    Office began the proceedings leading to the decision under  appeal.  At
    the date of the appellant's offence, his  British  girl-friend  Shannon
    had been only just over a week from giving birth to his daughter.

DISCUSSION

 7. The panel took the appellant as someone who had resided  here  for  ten
    years on the literal meaning of the  expression:  as  they  noted,  the
    appellant, with his family, had lived and had his home here since 1997,
    only going back to Poland for  weddings  and  holidays.  Permission  to
    appeal was given on the basis of grounds, not  settled  by  Mr  Walker,
    which he accepted were misleading and off the point,  so  far  as  they
    referred to authority (without any attempt at proper citation) at  all.
    So far as the parties and we are aware, there is no direct authority on
    the point before us. We shall turn later to authorities  which  may  be
    helpful.

 8. Mr Miah drew  our  attention  to  reg.  15  of  the  2006  Regulations,
    beginning like this:

       (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
       United Kingdom permanently-
       (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
       accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of five
       years;

    As he pointed out, the words "in accordance with these Regulations" are
    conspicuous by their absence from reg. 21(4); so, he argued, this  must
    be treated as a deliberate omission, and the expression 'resided' there
    given its ordinary natural meaning, as the panel had done.

 9. We accepted that the panel had done just this, and took the  view  that
    they would have been well entitled to do so in the case of an  ordinary
    piece of domestic legislation, which had to be read in accordance  with
    conventional  'black-letter'   principles.   However,   that   is   not
    necessarily the case with the 2006 Regulations, passed into law in line
    with this country's  obligations  to  give  effect  to  European  Union
    legislation which  is  binding  on  us,  and  in  particular  Directive
    2004/38/EC of 29 April 2004, known as  the  'Citizens'  Directive'.  Mr
    Miah had not considered the possible implications of this,  and  so  we
    drew his attention in  some  detail  to  the  terms  of  the  Citizens'
    Directive.

10. We went on  to  put  to  Mr  Miah  some  of  the  consequences  of  the
    construction of 'residing' for which he was arguing. It was implicit in
    his own argument that an accession state citizen (a Pole  for  example)
    who had been living here for however long, and on  whatever  basis,  at
    the date of accession, could not, because of the words  "in  accordance
    with these Regulations" in  reg.  15,  acquire  a  permanent  right  of
    residence till five years had passed from the  accession  date.  So  he
    could not acquire the right, under reg. 21 (3), not to be removed  "...
    except on serious grounds of public policy or  public  security"  until
    that time.

11. However, on Mr Miah's construction of reg. 21 (4), a Pole  who  at  the
    accession date happened to have been in this country on whatever basis,
    either as a dependent asylum-seeker or overstayer like this  appellant,
    or even as an entirely clandestine illegal entrant, for  the  necessary
    ten years would immediately on that day acquire the much more extensive
    protection against removal "...except on imperative grounds  of  public
    security". This seemed to us a result so absurd that it should  not  be
    adopted on nothing more than a literal reading of the 2006 Regulations,
    without looking further into their history and purpose.

12. As already mentioned, the 2006 Regulations were passed to  give  effect
    to the Citizens' Directive. Both the provisions with which we have been
    concerned have been more or  less  directly  transposed  from  it:  the
    requirement in paragraph 15 from article 16 (1) -

       Union citizens who have resided legally for a  continuous  period  of
       five years in the host Member State shall have the right of permanent
       residence there.

    and the one in reg. 21(4)(a) from article 28 (3):

       An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens, except
       if the decision is based on imperative grounds of public security, as
       defined by Member States, if they:
               (a) have resided in the host Member State for  the  previous
               ten years

13. There are, for present purposes,  no  significant  differences  in  the
    language used in the Directive and in the  Regulations,  so  Parliament
    should in our view be taken to have enacted  the  Regulations  for  the
    purpose of  giving  effect  to  the  Regulations,  without  independent
    consideration of the point in question. While it is well known that the
    long title  of  a  British  statute  is  not  to  be  resorted  to  for
    interpretation purposes, under the 'mischief  rule',  unless  there  is
    some real apparent ambiguity in the body  of  the  legislation  itself,
    that rule does not apply by analogy in the interpretation  of  European
    legislation.

14. In this case, the preamble is  an  integral  part  of  the  legislation
    itself, and the recitals in it are to be given effect  in  finding  out
    the purpose of that. Without  going  through  all  those  of  potential
    relevance, we shall concentrate  on  those  directly  relating  to  the
    purposes behind articles 16 and 28. They are as follows:

       (17) Enjoyment of permanent residence  by  Union  citizens  who  have
       chosen to settle long term in the host Member State would  strengthen
       the feeling of Union citizenship and is a key  element  in  promoting
       social cohesion, which is one of the fundamental  objectives  of  the
       Union. A right of permanent residence should therefore be  laid  down
       for all Union citizens and their family members who have  resided  in
       the host Member State in compliance with the conditions laid down  in
       this Directive during a  continuous  period  of  five  years  without
       becoming subject to an expulsion measure.
       ...
       (24) Accordingly [with the requirement for proportionality set out at
       (23)], the greater the degree of integration of  Union  citizens  and
       their family members in the host Member State, the greater the degree
       of protection  against  expulsion  should  be.  Only  in  exceptional
       circumstances, where there are imperative grounds of public security,
       should an expulsion measure be taken against Union citizens who  have
       resided for many years in the territory of the host Member State,  in
       particular when they were born  and  have  resided  there  throughout
       their life.

15. It is clear from (17) that the right of permanent residence after  five
    years is laid down to "... strengthen the feeling of Union  citizenship
    and  [promote]  social  cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the  fundamental
    objectives of the Union". That is why it is  to  be  extended  only  to
    those "... who have resided in the host Member State in compliance with
    the conditions laid down in this Directive". Can any different  purpose
    be seen behind (24)?

16. We invited Mr Miah to deal with the obvious question as to how, in  the
    terms of (24), someone who for his first seven years in  this  country,
    before Polish accession, had been here, either as a  dependent  asylum-
    seeker, or an overstayer, could be said to have acquired,  during  that
    time, any degree whatever of integration as a Union citizen himself, or
    the family member of parents who were nothing  of  the  kind  till  the
    accession date.

17. Mr Miah was not able to shed any significant light on that problem, nor
    to refer us to any authorities which might guide our interpretation  of
    the Citizens' Directive; so we were driven to look into it further  for
    ourselves.

AUTHORITIES

18. Most of  those  which  deal  with  quality  of  residence  concern  the
    different question of whether a Union citizen can count  periods  spent
    in prison towards the 5-year qualifying period for permanent residence.
    However there are two decisions of the Court of Justice of the European
    Communities which specifically deal with the  one  about  pre-accession
    residence before us. Both concerned pre-accession residence  by  Polish
    citizens: in Ziolkowski (Freedom of movement for persons) [2011]  EUECJ
    C-424/10 it was held as follows (and followed in almost identical terms
    in Czop [2012] EUECJ C-147/11):

       1. Article 16(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC ... must be  interpreted  as
       meaning that a Union citizen who has been resident for more than five
       years in the territory of the host Member State on the sole basis  of
       the national law of that Member State cannot be  regarded  as  having
       acquired the right of permanent residence under  that  provision  if,
       during that period of residence, he did not  satisfy  the  conditions
       laid down in Article 7(1) of the directive.

       2. Periods of residence completed by a national of a non-Member State
       in the territory of a Member State before the accession of  the  non-
       Member State to the European Union must, in the absence  of  specific
       provisions in the Act of Accession, be taken  into  account  for  the
       purpose of the acquisition of the right of permanent residence  under
       Article 16(1) of  Directive  2004/38,  provided  those  periods  were
       completed in compliance with the conditions laid down in Article 7(1)
       of the directive.

19.  So far as domestic authority goes, HR (Portugal) [2009] EWCA  Civ  371
    is an imprisonment case, and on that might now need to be read  in  the
    light of Tsakouridis  (European  citizenship)  [2010]  EUECJ  C-145/09.
    However,  there  are  interesting  comments  on   the   principles   of
    interpretation of European legislation  by  both  Stanley  Burnton  and
    Elias LJJ, and in particular the approach to be taken to art.  28  (3).
    They confirm (at paragraphs 17 - 18) that the EEA Regulations are to be
    interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  purpose  behind  the  Citizens'
    Directive, which they were passed to implement.

20. Going on to recital (24) [set out at 14], Stanley Burnton LJ says  this
    at paragraphs 21 - 23 (echoed in more general terms by Elias LJ at 33):


  21. ... It is clear from recital 24 that the reason for the restriction on
      the right of the state to expel someone who has been in  this  country
      for many years is his integration into this country. Recital  24  does
      not envisage that the restriction on  expulsion  to  which  it  refers
      should be applicable to a person who has not availed  himself  of  the
      rights and freedoms conferred on him  by  the  Treaty,  but  has  been
      compulsorily detained in this country.


  22. If I read Article 28.3 literally, and assume that "resided"  means  no
      more than "been present in", there is no qualification to  the  period
      of his presence in this country, and no link with the requirements  of
      Article 16 that he should have resided in this country  "legally".  It
      is clear from recital 23 that "legally" in Article 16  means  "in  the
      exercise of the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the  Treaty",
      as was held by the  Tribunal  in  GN  (EEA  Regulations:  Five  years'
      residence) Hungary [2007] UKAIT 00073. If the  appellant's  submission
      is well-founded, a person who has been in this country for  11  years,
      of which 8 were spent in prison, is  not  entitled  to  the  right  of
      permanent residence, and is therefore not protected by  Article  23.2,
      but is protected by Article 23.3, and  cannot  be  removed  except  on
      imperative grounds of public security. That consequence is  manifestly
      inconsistent with recitals 23 and 24.  So  is  the  fact  that  it  is
      impossible to consider the Appellant to have been integrated into this
      country as envisaged by recitals 23 and 24.


  23. In my judgment, recitals 23 and 24 make clear how Article 28.3  is  to
      be applied in a case such as the present. "Residence" is  presence  in
      this country in the exercise of the rights and freedoms  conferred  by
      the Treaty. ...

CONCLUSIONS

21. While the Court of Appeal in HR (Portugal) were of course dealing  with
    an imprisonment case, it seems to us  that  their  conclusions  on  the
    quality of residence required to get the enhanced protection of article
    28 (3) are of general application, and in line with those of the  Court
    of Justice of the European Communities in Ziolkowski  and Czop. To fall
    under article 28 (3) of the Citizens' Directive, and reg.  21(4)(a)  of
    the 2006 Regulations, an accession country citizen must have spent  the
    necessary ten years in the host country, not  simply  as  a  matter  of
    fact, but "in the exercise of the rights and freedoms conferred on them
    by the Treaty"; or, in the words used in Ziolkowski  ,  "in  compliance
    with the conditions laid down in Article 7(1) of the directive".

22. These are the conditions in art. 7 (1):

       1. All Union citizens shall  have  the  right  of  residence  on  the
       territory of another Member State for a period of longer  than  three
       months if they:
       (a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member State; or
       (b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members
       not to become a burden on the social assistance system  of  the  host
       Member State during their period of residence and have  comprehensive
       sickness insurance cover in the host Member State; or
       (c) - are enrolled at a private or public  establishment,  accredited
       or financed by the host Member State on the basis of its  legislation
       or administrative practice, for the principal purpose of following  a
       course of study, including vocational training; and
       - have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the  host  Member
       State and assure the relevant  national  authority,  by  means  of  a
       declaration or by such equivalent means as they may choose, that they
       have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not
       to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host Member
       State during their period of residence; or
       (d) are family members accompanying or joining a  Union  citizen  who
       satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).

23. Before Polish accession, the appellant and his family were not here  as
    workers, or for any other purpose set out in  art.  7  (1):  they  were
    asylum-seekers from their arrival in 1997 till their first  appeal  was
    finally dismissed on 23 January 2001; following that,  they  left  this
    country till 10 March 2002, when they again claimed  asylum,  but  were
    refused again. From the time when the dismissal of their appeal against
    that became final on 5 January 2004 till accession on 1 May, they  were
    no more than overstayers. It was not till 19 August and 2 October  that
    year that the  appellant's  father  and  mother  registered  under  the
    Accession State Worker Scheme. Though the appellant himself  is  likely
    to have been going to school here from 1998 - 99, there is  nothing  to
    suggest that either he or any other member  of  the  family  was  in  a
    position to provide either the evidence of means to support  themselves
    here before the  accession  date,  or  of  any  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance they held.

24. In our judgment, both following the conclusions in Ziolkowski and those
    in HR  (Portugal),  and  as  a  matter  of  general  principle  on  the
    legislative purpose behind recital  (24),  article  28  (3)  is  to  be
    interpreted as entitling an accession country citizen to rely, for  the
    protection given by that provision and by  reg.  21(4)(a)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, only on those periods of residence here during which he or
    family members with him satisfied the conditions in art. 7 (1)  of  the
    Citizens' Directive.

25. On the facts set out at 23, it is clear that neither this appellant nor
    any of his family with whom he was here did  satisfy  those  conditions
    before Polish accession on 1 May 2004. It followed that, though by  the
    date of his deportation crime in  2010  he  had  acquired  a  right  of
    permanent residence here,  because  of  his  post-accession  residence,
    neither by then nor by the date of the decision under  appeal  in  2013
    had he acquired the  greater  protection  given  by  reg.  21(4)(a)  or
    article 28 (3), and the panel's  decision  is  wrong  in  law  to  that
    extent. Since their findings against him on his  case  as  a  permanent
    resident and under article 8 remain unchallenged, the  result  is  that
    his appeal as a whole is dismissed.

Home Office appeal
Appellant's appeal against deportation dismissed
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



