
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |
|On 16 February 2015                           |On 31 March 2015             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                       JORGE ALEXANDRE BIZITO PIEDADE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Oshunrinde, Solicitor, Samuel & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Portugal who was born  on  3
    February 1972.  It is not entirely clear when he first arrived in  this
    country because although the appellant says that he first entered  here
    in about May 2003 the respondent has no record of this entry.   However
    it is accepted that he started a relationship with another  citizen  of
    Portugal about ten years ago and that they  have  a  son,  and  to  all
    intents and  purposes  it  is  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant has been in this country for more than five years  such  that
    he had acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK.   It  is  not
    suggested on his behalf that he has been here for over ten years.

 2. The appellant has a very bad criminal record which  has  got  worse.  I
    will deal with this below. The index offence which  gave  rise  to  the
    decision now under challenge was a very serious street robbery.  On  12
    April 2013 the appellant attacked a lady who had just taken �200 from a
    cash machine outside Lloyds TSB in Tottenham High Road.

 3. The OASys report summarises the offence as follows:

         "He came from behind the victim and grabbed  the  bank  notes  that
         were sticking out of her hand. The victim kept hold  of  the  money
         and when [the appellant] realised she was not letting go he  pushed
         her and she fell to the ground. The victim only let go of the  bank
         notes when she thought [the appellant] was going to bite  the  hand
         with the money in."

 4. Some very brave witnesses apprehended and detained the appellant  until
    the  police  arrived.   Again  according  to  the  OASys  Report,   the
    appellant's version of events was that he had spent the money he had on
    him before the offence on alcohol and crack cocaine and when he saw the
    victim at the cash machine decided to rob her as he wanted more  money.
    In the words of the report "He states that as he struggled to  get  the
    cash the victim fell to the ground but was not injured".

 5. The OASys Report, which was considered by  the  panel  which  made  the
    decision upholding the respondent's decision to  deport  him,  assessed
    that the appellant posed a medium risk of reoffending.

 6. Having considered the seriousness  of  the  offence  in  light  of  the
    appellant's personal circumstances, including his criminal history, the
    respondent made a decision to deport him.  A  letter  setting  out  the
    reasons  for deportation was drafted on 4 April 2014.  I am told by  Mr
    Shilliday now representing the respondent that  that  appears  to  have
    been a draft which was subsequently  amended  by  a  senior  caseworker
    working for  the respondent.  In that letter the respondent set out the
    respondent's initial view that the appellant had not acquired the right
    of permanent residence in this country because it was not accepted that
    he had been continuously resident for five years excluding  periods  of
    time spent in prison.

 7. However when this letter was amended the  respondent  did  accept  that
    the appellant had acquired a permanent right of  residence  because  in
    the amended letter setting out reasons for deportation dated  10  April
    2014 this is stated in terms at paragraph 28,  which is as follows:

         "... there is, therefore, evidence of your having exercised  treaty
         rights  from  2003  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for   a
         continuing period of five years and it is accepted  that  you  have
         acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK."

 8. It is clear from what  is  then  set  out  at  paragraph  30  that  the
    respondent  had  in  mind  the  right  test  when  considering  whether
    deportation was warranted because  the  letter  goes  on  to  state  as
    follows:

         "Assessment of threat

         30.      Consideration has been given to the principles set out  in
             Regulation 21(5). This states that a decision  to  deport  the
             person under the 2006 Regulations must be taken in  accordance
             with the following principles:

             .     The  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality

             .    The decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned

             .     The  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society,

             .    Matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision, and

             .     The person's previous criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  them justify the decision."

 9. The sentencing remarks of the judge are set out  at  paragraph  34  and
    bear repeating.  They were as follows:

         "Mr Piedade, you have pleaded guilty to the robbery of  a  lady  in
         the street, and that is  so  serious  that  nothing  other  than  a
         custodial penalty may follow. In plain language, it means  I  shall
         be passing a prison sentence today.  I note from your  Counsel  you
         understand that, and the remainder of my remarks govern the  length
         of the sentence to be passed.

         This was a robbery of a lady alone using a cash machine. That is  a
         vulnerable victim.  Women are vulnerable.  It is targeting.   Women
         who use cash machines are a ready target.  It indicates there  will
         be money. And in this particular  case,  she  was  knocked  to  the
         ground and suffered some degree of injury.

         I agree with Counsel that this places it  in  category  2  robbery,
         with a starting point of four years' imprisonment.  I believe  that
         is too high for the circumstances in this case, and I  believe  the
         proper starting point is one of three years.  From  there,  I  then
         look at the other factors.

         You are aged 34 and you  have  a  record  of  offending  of  twelve
         convictions and eighteen offences. There were no  robberies  before
         this but there is  a  consistent  theme  of  minor  unpleasant  and
         violent behaviour.  That is disorderly  conduct  of  assaults,  and
         racially aggravated matters.

         In this particular case, you clearly indicated  your  guilt  at  an
         early opportunity in a police  station.  Of  course  you  could  do
         little else as you had been pinned to the ground by two  courageous
         and helpful citizens.  Nevertheless, you have pleaded guilty at  an
         early stage, and the earliest possible. I accept that  remorse  has
         been expressed, and I also certainly  accept  that  this  is  as  a
         result of drugs and drug taking. I therefore will reduce the  three
         years to a sentence of two years' imprisonment.  I  make  no  order
         for compensation or as to costs.

        I turn finally then to  the  fact  that  this  is  a  breach  of  a
        conditional discharge, and I am going to take no action on that.  I
        note that it is breached.  It has not been put to him,  of  course.
        But I am passing no separate penalty.

        The sentence that I have passed means that as a Portuguese national
        the  Secretary  of  State  will  be  considering   your   automatic
        deportation, it being a sentence of over twelve months.  That then,
        Mr Piedade is the sentence of the court."

10. Then in the following paragraphs of the revised reasons it is  said  on
    behalf of the respondent as follows:

         "35.     Your victim would doubtless have been traumatised  by  the
             events and may suffer long-term psychological harm as a result
             of your behaviour.  Moreover, street robberies  have  a  wider
             impact upon society in that they create feelings of  fear  and
             insecurity in the community.

         36.  In completing your NOMS1 assessment the offender manager found
             that you posed a medium risk of reoffending.  In assessing you
             as a medium risk it  has  been  acknowledged  that  there  are
             identifiable indicators that you will seek  to  reoffend.   In
             reaching this conclusion your offender manager has taken  into
             consideration those  factors  which  originally  led  to  your
             offending behaviour and whether those same factors continue to
             exist.   In  particular  the  following   issues   have   been
             highlighted within the NOMS1 report.

         37.       It  is  noted  that   you   sought   to   minimise   your
             responsibility by stating that drink and drugs were  to  blame
             for your behaviour.  Seeking employment  will  be  problematic
             because of your substance abuse despite your work ethic;  that
             you are a long term user of cocaine and crack cocaine and that
             you have a history of alcohol use and being drunk was a  major
             factor in this offence and others.

         38.  While living in Brazil and Portugal you claimed to  have  been
             involved in violent  gang  warfare   and  you  continued  this
             lifestyle while in the United Kingdom when you became involved
             with the Tottenham Boys, one of the main gangs in Hackney. You
             claimed to have left the gang two years ago as "I did not want
             to spend the rest of my life behind bars", although there  are
             reports that you still have a loose connection with  them  and
             that you are at risk from a feud  with  the  Bombacilars  from
             Hackney which led to a discussion about being transferred to a
             different probation office.  However, even after  leaving  the
             gang your chaotic lifestyle continued, disinhibited  by  drugs
             and alcohol.  Your offending has led to an  Asbo  banning  you
             from large parts of Tottenham which has been breached numerous
             times.

         39.  Your  conviction  history  includes  an  anti-social  attitude
             towards the public and community.  You appear to have given no
             consideration to the time and public funds spent each time you
             offend - from the resources spent by the police  investigating
             your crimes to your victims spending  time  in  reporting  the
             offences and in addition, the high costs  involved  in  taking
             you to court.

         40.  Your convictions indicate an established pattern  of  repeated
             offending within a  relatively short period of time.  The fact
             that you have continued to offend without  being  deterred  by
             previous convictions or sentences indicates you have a lack of
             regard for the law, a  lack  of  remorse  for  your  offending
             behaviour, and a lack of understanding of the negative  impact
             your offending behaviour has on others.

         41.  Furthermore, there is clearly an escalation in seriousness  of
             the offences you have committed, as indicated by the sentences
             you have received.  Your  offender  manager  has  stated  that
             alcohol is linked to your current previous offending and  that
             you often drink to offend.

         42.  Your offender manager has also stated that drug use is  linked
             to your current and previous offending.  Your offender manager
             has stated that your gang affiliation, as well as alcohol  and
             drugs, give cause for concern.  The nature  of  your  offences
             suggests you are unable to support yourself or your  lifestyle
             in the United Kingdom without resorting to criminal  activity.



         43.      All the available  evidence  indicates  that  you  have  a
             propensity to reoffend  and  that  you  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  public   to
             justify your deportation on grounds of public policy."

11. The respondent's  reasons  for  considering  why  deportation  of  this
    appellant would be proportionate (as it has  to  be  within  Regulation
    21(5)(a)) are then set out.

12. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before a panel of the First-tier Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Archer sitting with Miss V S Street JP, non-legal  member)  sitting  at
    Columbus House,  Newport  on  21  October  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 17 November 2014 the  panel  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.

13. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission having been
     granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 30 December 2014.   There
    are a number of grounds which I  will  attempt  to  summarise.   It  is
    suggested in paragraph 1 that the respondent  having  "simply  based  a
    deportation decision on the fact that the appellant  has  not  acquired
    the right of permanent residence in the UK ... it is contended that the
    judge is going outside the purview of his adjudication" in seeking  "to
    make findings on the appellant's threat to public security as  a  basis
    for justifying the appellant's deportation  when  in  actual  fact  the
    respondent has relied on the length of the  appellant's  residence  for
    justifying  taking  the  appellant  outside  the   high  threshold  for
    deportation set in Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations 2006."

14. With regard to this ground, it  is  apparent  first  of  all  that  the
    appellant's solicitors are relying on the draft which had been sent  to
    them dated 4 April 2014. Although the appellant's solicitors would  not
    have been aware that this letter was a draft, they were also  sent  the
    amended version dated 10 April 2014 and so it should have been clear to
    them then (and also to Judge Adio who also did not appear to have given
    any consideration to the subsequent reasons which were sent)  that  the
    respondent had indeed considered the appellant's case on the basis that
    he had acquired a right  of  permanent  residence  but  had  sought  to
    justify her decision on the basis that there were  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security  justifying the decision.

15. In any event, the panel considered the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had acquired the right of permanent residence in this country
    because this is stated in terms at paragraph 18  of  the  determination
    where it is said as follows:

         "We find that the appellant has not resided in the UK in accordance
         with the Regulations for a period for ten  years,  because  of  his
         periods of imprisonment, but he has resided in the UK in accordance
         with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years. He  has
         therefore acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK and can
         only be removed on serious  grounds  of  public  policy  of  public
         security."

16. It is not suggested that this is not the right test, but what seems  to
    be suggested at paragraph 1 of the grounds is that  as  the  respondent
    had not sought to suggest this it was not  for  the  panel  to  do  so.
    Apart from the fact that the respondent had indeed suggested  this  (as
    is clear from what has been set out above), in any event, even  if  she
    had not, the panel could not in any event be criticised for considering
    whether or not the appellant's deportation  was  justified  applying  a
    higher test than that applied by the respondent in the event  that  the
    panel considered that that higher test needed to be applied.

17. The second paragraph suggests that the  appellant's  threat  to  public
    security as found by the panel was "clearly inconsistent with the OASys
    Report" which "the judge  sought  to  rely  on".   The  basis  of  this
    submission is that because that report  had  assessed  the  risk  as  a
    medium risk of reoffending "Our submission is simply that an  appellant
    with a medium risk of reoffending or risk to others  will  hardly  fall
    within the high threshold of deportation on serous  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security".

18. In oral argument before  me  Mr  Oshunrinde  sought  to  maintain  this
    submission on the basis that a medium risk  of  reoffending  could  not
    amount to serious grounds justifying deportation.  In  the  grounds  at
    paragraph 2 it is even said that "the panel has failed to  justify  its
    decision that the appellant is a potentially dangerous individual".

19. There is then a challenge at paragraph 3 to the  panel's  consideration
    of the prospect of rehabilitation of this appellant even though  it  is
    conceded that reference was made to the principles set out in Essa (EEA
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316.  It  is  suggested  that
    the panel relied on the appellant's criminal history  "rather than  the
    threat posed by the appellant by his propensity to  reoffend".   It  is
    suggested "that the OASys Report of the appellant lays  all  issues  to
    rest on the appellant's  propensity  to  reoffend  and  danger  to  the
    public".

20. Paragraph 4 of the grounds appears to repeat what is said at  paragraph
    3 and at paragraph 5 it is suggested again that the panel had  departed
    from the OASys Report and was being influenced "mainly by the  fact  of
    the appellant's criminal conviction rather than any present  threat  he
    poses to the public".

21. It is then suggested at paragraph 7  that in any event the panel should
    have allowed the appeal under Article 8.

22. In  my  judgement  these  grounds  are  entirely  without  merit.   The
    determination of the panel is a model determination in  the  course  of
    which  its  conclusions  and  findings  are  properly  reasoned.    The
    requirements of the Regulations are set out  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination and it is quite clear that at all times the panel had  in
    mind that this appellant, as someone  who  had  a  permanent  right  to
    reside in this country, could only  be  removed  if  that  removal  was
    justified on "serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security".
    The panel also had in mind that "the personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of   society"  and  that  "a
    person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves justify the
    decision".

23. When setting out the background to the decision the panel had  in  mind
    also, as it was obliged to do, that  in the view of the respondent  (as
    set out in paragraph 16 of the determination)

         "The appellant took pride in his involvement with gang culture. The
         robbery was a revolting offence. He has a poor criminal record  and
         has engaged in unpleasant and violent  behaviour.   He  is  a  thug
         addicted to drugs and alcohol.  He takes no responsibility for  his
         addictions."

24. There was no attempt by the respondent to suggest  that  the  appellant
    represented a "high" risk of reoffending, and the respondent's case had
    always been  put  on  the  basis  that  "there  is  a  medium  risk  of
    reoffending and harm to the public".

25. The panel set out the family circumstances of the appellant  so  it  is
    clear that matters which might have led to a consideration  of  whether
    there were compelling reasons why notwithstanding the  public  interest
    in deporting the appellant he should  not  be  deported  were  properly
    considered.

26. At paragraph 19 the panel summarised the  appellant's  account  of  his
    family history as follows:

         "It is common ground that the appellant has  a number  of  children
         who live in the UK. He states in his witness statement of 2  August
         2014 that Joysie has been diagnosed with cerebral palsy with severe
         developmental delay. She has also severe gastro  esophageal  reflux
         and requires gastronomy feeding. She is unable to  do  anything  on
         her own and will require  care  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  She
         requires constant hospital appointments for the doctors to  monitor
         her condition. His relationship with Ana broke up in  2007  but  he
         continued to support her with the children by  spending  time  with
         them and making financial provision for them as he could. He stayed
         close to Ana throughout the period.   He  has  matured  greatly  in
         prison and has ambitions to live a peaceful life and contribute his
         own quota to the progress of society."

27. Having  set  out  the  appellant's  case  with  regard  to  his  family
    circumstances the panel then stated at  paragraph  25  that  "There  is
    insufficient evidence  to conclude that he has a family life  with  Ana
    and no such family life has existed since 2007" although it is accepted
    that he has a family life with Zion and Joysie.  However,  it  was  not
    accepted that the  deportation  of  the  appellant  would  "necessarily
    result in permanent separation from Ana and the children".

28. In any event, the panel went on to conclude  that  the  deportation  of
    this  appellant  was  entirely  justified  in   accordance   with   the
    Regulations.

29. At paragraph 27 the panel states as follows:

         "The index offence of robbery is very serious.  It was a robbery of
         a lady alone using a cash machine. The sentencing judge  recognised
         that women are vulnerable and women who use  cash  machines  are  a
         ready target. It indicates that there  will  be  injury.   In  this
         particular case, the victim was knocked to the ground and  suffered
         some degree of  injury.   The  sentencing  judge  stated  that  the
         appellant's criminal record discloses a consistent theme  of  minor
         unpleasant and violent behaviour. That is  disorderly  conduct  and
         assaults  and  racially  aggravated  matters.  The  appellant   was
         detained at the scene of the robbery by two courageous and  helpful
         citizens."

30. It is also noted that the crime "was  the  result  of  drugs  and  drug
    taking".

31. The panel at [29] had in mind that part of the OASys Report that states
    that: "unless there is a radical change in his lifestyle and associates
    then there is the possibility of relapse".  It summarised what was said
    in the OASys Report  about  the  appellant's  previous  involvement  in
    violent gang warfare in Brazil and Portugal.  It was noted that he  had
    various knife and bullet wounds and was involved  in  struggles  within
    British gangs after his arrival in the UK.

32. It is "against that factual background" that the panel then went on  to
    consider whether the deportation of the appellant  could  be  justified
    having noted that "the standard for removal is relatively high for this
    appellant because  he falls within the second level of  EEA  nationals.
    He can only be removed on serious grounds of public  policy  or  public
    security".  However, the panel then goes on to  "find  that  the  index
    offence of robbery  marks  a  serious  escalation  in  the  appellant's
    criminal behaviour in the UK" and "that the appellant continues to pose
    a medium risk of serious harm to others, including potential victims of
    violent crime".  In other words,  the  panel's  findings  are  entirely
    consistent with the OASys Report.

33. The panel then notes that "We have seen no evidence that  persuades  us
    the appellant is not at significant risk of relapse into substance  and
    alcohol abuse if he is  released  in  the  UK.   He  is  a  potentially
    dangerous individual with a very violent history".

34. With regard to the  principles  set  out  in  Essa,  I  agree  with  Mr
    Shilliday, who in his submissions  to  the  Tribunal  argued  that  the
    summary of what was said in Essa contained at paragraphs 32 and  33  of
    the determination was entirely correct and was indeed a  model  of  its
    type.  It is perhaps worth setting out these paragraphs,  which are  as
    follows:

         "32.     We have carefully considered the  principles  set  out  in
             Essa ... We note that rehabilitation is a relevant  factor  to
             be  taken  into   account   but   is   not   a   determinative
             consideration. We recognise that for any deportation of an EEA
             national to be justified  on  public  good  grounds  then  the
             claimant must constitute a present  threat.   The  fact  of  a
             criminal conviction is not enough  and  deterrence  principles
             are  irrelevant.   A  candidate  for  EEA   deportation   must
             represent a present threat by reason of propensity to reoffend
             or an unacceptably high risk of  reoffending.   We  have  seen
             clear evidence of a propensity to reoffend and the appellant's
             offences are becoming much more serious.  There is no credible
             evidence that the appellant has ceased to be a  threat  to  UK
             citizens. He is  a  recidivist  offender  who  has  failed  to
             respond to previous court orders.

         33.  We find that the appellant has achieved a  limited  degree  of
             integration into UK society. His achievements in  relation  to
             work  history  and  his  children  are  marred   by   repeated
             reoffending and addiction to dugs and alcohol.   We  find  the
             appellant does constitute a  present threat and  is  not  well
             advanced in rehabilitation in a host state where  there  is  a
             substantial degree of integration. Taking all of our  findings
             into  account,  we  therefore  conclude  that  the  tests   in
             paragraphs 21(3) and 21(5) of the Regulations  are  met.  Both
             the public policy or public security  tests  are  met  to  the
             required standard. The decision  does  also  comply  with  the
             principle of proportionality."

35. The panel then considered whether the decision of  the  respondent  was
    proportionate under Article 8 by referring both to the Court of  Appeal
    decision in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraphs  41-46  and
    also by reference to the questions posited in Razgar.  The  panel  also
    had in mind the best interests of the children with whom the  appellant
    had been found to have some family life but nonetheless considered that
    removal was proportionate to "the legitimate objective that  is  sought
    to be achieved, for all of the reasons set out above".

36. The suggestion advanced on behalf of the  appellant  that  because  the
    risk of reoffending has been stated to be "medium" rather  than  "high"
    it cannot then be argued that this is a serious ground for  removal  is
    unarguable.   One has to bear in mind just what the nature of the  risk
    is which this appellant poses. The  type  of  offences  to  which  this
    appellant has now graduated are sufficiently serious as to  affect  key
    interests of society.

37. The panel was accordingly entitled to find  that  the  appellant  is  a
    highly dangerous individual whose continued presence  in  this  country
    would constitute a serious  and  present  threat  to  society.  It  was
    therefore entirely justified also in concluding that  his  removal  was
    justified on serious grounds  of  public  security  and  there  was  no
    arguable error of law in the  panel's  determination  to  that  effect.
    Indeed, on the facts of this case, had the  panel  come  to  any  other
    decision that would have been arguably perverse.

38. It follows this appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

There being no arguable error of law in the decision of  the  panel  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.



Signed:

     [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                          Date: 27 March 2015

