
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00815/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18th November 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     C S
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Ms V Easty, counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

We make an order pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  anything
that might lead members of the public to identify the parties identified  in
this decision as CS (Mr S), KMP or  E.  Any  failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department (SSHD)  was  granted
         permission to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  panel
         which allowed the appeal of Mr S against a  decision  by  the  SSHD
         refusing to revoke the deportation order that was  signed  on  14th
         June 2012.

         Background

      2. Mr S, a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago born on  17th  August  1982,
         arrived in the UK on 17th June 2005 on a two year  working  holiday
         visa. He was subsequently granted a  five  year  work  permit,  his
         leave to remain expiring in August 2012. On 2 September 2011 he was
         convicted, after a trial, of assault occasioning actual bodily harm
         and sentenced to 16 months imprisonment.

      3. Mr S was served with the deportation decision dated 14th June  2012
         and the  deportation  order  dated  15th  June  2012.  Although  he
         appealed, his appeal was out of time and, for reasons  given  in  a
         written decision dated 14th June 2013, time was not extended.

      4. On 29th April 2013 Mr S submitted an application for  a  derivative
         right to reside in the UK. That application  was  refused  with  no
         right of appeal on 30th January 2014.

      5. On 18th October 2013 Mr S applied to revoke the  deportation  order
         and for him to be  given  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  and
         compassionate grounds. On 28th March 2014 Mr S sent a letter before
         action challenging the refusal to grant him a derivative  residence
         card and failing to make a decision on the  application  to  revoke
         the deportation order. The SSHD took a decision refusing to  revoke
         the deportation order on 17th April 2014, for reasons set out in an
         accompanying letter.

      6. Whilst lawfully in the UK he established a relationship with KMP, a
         British Citizen, and on 21st February  2009  their  child,  E,  was
         born. In 2007 KMP had a serious accident and suffers  from  chronic
         back pain, fluid retention  in  her  right  knee  and  locking  and
         numbness of her leg.

      7. Mr S appealed the decision of 17th April 2014  on  general  grounds
         including that if he is deported his British  Citizen  child  would
         have  to  leave  the  UK  thus  unlawfully  and  disproportionately
         depriving him of the benefit of  EU  citizenship;  that  paragraphs
         399(a) and 399(b) apply; that alternatively there  are  exceptional
         circumstances in his case such as outweigh the public  interest  in
         deportation and that deportation would be a breach of Article 8 and
         a breach of his rights under the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

      8. The First-tier Tribunal panel found that the deportation  of  Mr  S
         would not be unduly harsh in its effect on KMP but that the  effect
         on the child would be unduly harsh and thus found that  Mr  S  fell
         within Exception 2 and allowed the appeal.







    Grounds of appeal upon which permission was granted.

      9. The SSHD submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  its
         approach to paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) and (a)(i)(b), had not addressed
         in particular the public  interest  factors  set  out  in  Part  5A
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  had  failed  to
         engage with the pressing public interest in deportation  cases  and
         further failed to acknowledge the weight in favour of  enforcing  a
         decision to deport.

    Relevant law

     10. The Immigration Rules relevant to Mr S at the date  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing are as follows:

         'A398.   These rules apply where:

                (a)    ...

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

                (a)    ...

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                conducive to the public good  and  in  the  public  interest
                because they have been convicted of  an  offence  for  which
                they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)    ...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is
                in the UK, and

                   (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                   (ii)    the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                   least the 7 years immediately preceding the date  of  the
                   immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen  or
                settled in the UK, and

                   (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                   (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration
                   status was not precarious; and

                   (ii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                   in the country to which the person  is  to  be  deported,
                   because of compelling circumstances over and above  those
                   described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                   (iii)   it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                   remain in  the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                   deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                integration into the country to which it is proposed  he  is
                deported.'

     11. Part 5A in so far as relevant reads:

         'Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part


                (1)    This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                required to determine whether  a  decision  made  under  the
                Immigration Acts -

                   (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                   family life under Article 8, and

                   (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                   Human Rights Act 1998.

                (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the
                court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                   (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                   117B, and

                   (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                   criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

                (3)    In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                means  the  question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is
                justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom are able to speak  English,  because  persons
                who can speak English -

                   (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the
                United Kingdom are  financially  independent,  because  such
                persons -

                   (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                   (b) are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                   (a) a private life, or

                   (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
                person's removal where-

                   (a) the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                   relationship with a qualifying child, and

                   (b) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                   leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


                (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who  has  not
                been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or
                more, the public interest requires  C's  deportation  unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

                (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                   (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                   for most of C's life,

                   (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                   Kingdom, and

                   (c) there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                   integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                   deported.

                (5)    Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and
                subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a
                genuine  and  subsisting  parental   relationship   with   a
                qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation  on  the
                partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has  been
                sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                years, the public interest requires deportation unless there
                are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
                described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

                (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to
                be  taken  into  account  where  a  court  or  tribunal   is
                considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only  to
                the extent that the reason for the decision was the  offence
                or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part


                (1)    In this Part-

                   "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on
                   Human Rights;

                   "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of
                   18 and who -

                      (a)  is a British citizen, or

                      (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                      period of seven years or more;

                   "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

                      (a)  is a British citizen, or

                      (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                      meaning of the Immigration Act  1971  -  see  section
                      33(2A) of that Act).'

     12. The First-tier tribunal panel, having  considered  the  documentary
         and oral evidence concluded:

             (i)  Mr S speaks English fluently  and  would  be  less  of  a
             burden to tax payers and better able to  integrate  with  such
             skills;

             (ii) Mr S worked when he was able to and, if  he  is  able  to
             find work, will do so in the future;

             (iii)    His relationship with KMP  was  formed  when  he  was
             lawfully in the UK;

             (iv) Mr S has not been lawfully in the  UK  for  most  of  his
             life;

             (v)  Mr S has retained ties with Trinidad and Tobago and is in
             regular contact with his family there;

             (vi) Mr S has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  KMP,
             who is a British Citizen;

             (vii)    He has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
             their child, E, a British Citizen;

             (viii)   Mr S has a close  relationship  with  his  child  and
             plays a full part in her life;

             (ix) During the time Mr S was in prison, KMP struggled to cope
             with her own life and in caring for their child;

             (x)  KMP has a number  of  medical  problems:  post  traumatic
             stress  disorder,  depression,  chronic   back   pain,   fluid
             retention  of  the  right  knee,  urine  retention,   thoracic
             scoliosis, "female  related"  problems,  dyslexia,  Vitamin  D
             deficiency. She is engaged in treatment for her  'conditions',
             attends appointments and takes appropriate medication;

             (xi) The medication taken by KMP is available in Trinidad  and
             Tobago and there is support  for  mental  health  problems  in
             Trinidad and Tobago;

             (xii)    KMP said  and  it  was  accepted  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal that she would not relocate to Trinidad and Tobago;

             (xiii)   KMP maintained regular contact with Mr  S  whilst  he
             was in prison, travelling considerable distances to do this;

             (xiv)    KMP does not have support from  her  family  but  she
             would be able to receive support from Mr S's family in the  UK
             although she would be less willing and able to accept  support
             from them. She would not seek or  accept  help  from  her  own
             family. She has close friends nearby who do and would continue
             to help;

             (xv) E is bright, intelligent and settling well at school.

             (xvi)     KMP  is   receiving   appropriate   treatment   from
             healthcare professionals, can access social  care  to  provide
             her with assistance  in  daily  living,  she  is  sufficiently
             engaged in her own treatment to ensure she would manage in the
             absence of Mr S. Although accepted that she  would  face  some
             deterioration  of  her  condition,  particularly  her   mental
             health, the difficulties she would face in the event of Mr S's
             deportation would not be unduly harsh;

             (xvii)   In the absence of Mr S,  KMP  would  be  the  primary
             carer for E and the impact upon E would be unduly harsh if her
             father  were  deported:  E's  anxiety   about   his   absence,
             separation  from  a  father  who  has  such  a  practical  and
             important role in her daily life;  his  presence  ensures  E's
             development can proceed so as to ensure her welfare and it  is
             in her best interest that he continues to be present as parent
             and carer. He has a pivotal role in the child's life;

             (xviii)  The committed support he provides to his  partner  to
             allow her to care for their daughter while managing her health
             and mental problems result in a finding that his absence would
             be unduly harsh for the child.

     13. Mr S has not sought  to  appeal  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal that it would not be unduly harsh on KMP if he were to  be
         deported.

     14. Mr Bramble submitted that although the case law of MAB  (para  399;
         "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) and KMO (section 117  -
         unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC) had not been reported
         at the date of this decision, the two reported cases  informed  the
         interpretation of the Rules and legislation.  He  relied  upon  the
         definition of unduly harsh as set out in MAB: "The consequences for
         an individual will be "harsh" if they are severe"  or  "bleak"  and
         they will be "unduly" so if they are 'inordinately' or excessively'
         harsh taking into account all the circumstances of the individual".

     15. He confirmed that the SSHD's position was that whilst  KMO  adopted
         the same definition of unduly in so far as it amounted to something
         over and above harsh,  "...the word "unduly" in the phrase  "unduly
         harsh" requires consideration of  whether,  in  the  light  of  the
         seriousness of the offences committed by the foreign  criminal  and
         the public interest considerations that come into play, the  impact
         on the child, children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being
         deported is inordinately or excessively  harsh."  Both  he  and  Ms
         Easty accepted that whether MAB or KMO was correct, there would  be
         some cases that would fall within both interpretations  of  "unduly
         harsh" whereas there would be others that would have  succeeded  in
         an appeal under the interpretation of MAB but would fail under KMO.



     16. As a backdrop to his grounds of appeal, Mr Bramble  submitted  that
         there was no tension between the wording of  s117C  (5):  "...  the
         effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would  be  unduly
         harsh" and 399(a)(ii)(a) and (b). He submitted  s117C  (5)  brought
         the two  elements  of  paragraph  399  together  in  one  phrase  -
         "effect". Ms Easty submitted that  this  would  be  to  strain  the
         interpretation of the word "effect"; the  drafting  was  inadequate
         and there was a lacuna between the Rules and the Statute. S117C (5)
         should be read as a requirement to look  at  the  circumstances  in
         terms of the foreign criminal going, not as requiring both  aspects
         namely whether it was unduly harsh for the family either to go with
         him or stay in the UK without him.

     17. Having set out these preliminary matters as  the  backdrop  against
         which he submitted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  should  be
         considered, Mr Bramble relied upon three grounds of appeal:

             (i)  That the First-tier Tribunal had accepted the refusal  of
             KMP to go to Trinidad and Tobago as a given whereas the  panel
             ought to have considered whether it was unduly harsh  for  her
             to leave the UK; there had been no critical  analysis  of  the
             objective basis for that decision. Without that  analysis,  he
             submitted, the decision on the circumstances for the child was
             flawed. Ms Easty accepted there had been no finding  in  terms
             on whether it would be unduly harsh for KMP to  leave  the  UK
             but submitted that the fact that  it  was  accepted  that  she
             would not go did not require further investigation; the First-
             tier Tribunal was required to consider the position as it  was
             in reality; to consider whether it was unduly harsh for her to
             relocate to Trinidad and Tobago when she had  made  clear  she
             would not  (and  it  had  been  accepted)  was  to  engage  in
             speculation divorced from the reality of the  family  dynamic.
             The fact that KMP would not go  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  was
             material and relevant; the reality is  that  the  family  were
             being left in the UK and a reading of the decision as a  whole
             made clear that this would be unduly harsh for the child.  She
             submitted that the whole tenor of the decision when read as  a
             whole - as it should be  -  made  clear  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal panel concluded that it would be unduly harsh for KMP
             and the child  to  move  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  Ms  Easty
             submitted that the other matters relied upon by  the  SSHD  in
             this ground were no more than disagreements with the  findings
             of the judge and that the attempt by the SSHD  to  import  the
             whole of the Article 8 balancing act into  the  word  "unduly"
             should be rejected.

             (ii) Mr Bramble submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  panel
             had erred in  failing  to  set  out  the  factors  within  the
             evidence that resulted in a finding that it  would  be  unduly
             harsh for the child to remain in the UK without her father. He
             drew attention to [51] to  [58]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             decision which set out the evidence relied upon by  the  panel
             including the report from the Lead Case Worker in Lewisham and
             the Independent  Social  Worker  and  the  conclusion  reached
             regarding KMP that she would be able to access social services
             support in the absence of her partner, that she was housed  in
             appropriate accommodation and was  sufficiently  engaged  with
             her own medical treatment to ensure she would manage  this  in
             the absence of Mr S. The conclusion reached by the  panel  was
             that it would not be unduly harsh for KMP to remain in the  UK
             without Mr S. In contrast Mr Bramble submitted that there  was
             no such reasoning employed for the finding that  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the  UK  without  her
             father: there had  been  no  consideration  of  "unduly",  the
             finding appeared to be based on KMP becoming the primary  care
             for the child, the child was anxious and  would  be  separated
             from her father who plays such a practical and important  role
             in her life and it was in the child's best interest for her to
             remain with her father. Mr Bramble submitted  that  a  finding
             that this amounted to "unduly" harsh was so unreasoned  as  to
             be perverse and in  any  event  evinced  a  lack  of  adequate
             reasoning. Ms Easty reiterated that the  decision  has  to  be
             read as a whole and, when taken with the expert reports relied
             upon,  the  acceptance  that   KMP's   mental   health   would
             deteriorate and that in the absence of Mr S she would have  to
             rely heavily on social services  support  rendered  it  unduly
             harsh. She submitted that "unduly" meant unusual. She compared
             the facts of MAB where the appellant was unsuccessful  because
             the impact on the family was no more than the ordinary  impact
             of a family splitting whereas the facts in this case were that
             significant levels of social services, publicly paid  services
             would be required to support KMP in looking after the child.

             (iii)    Finally Mr Bramble submitted that there  had  been  a
             failure by the First-tier Tribunal panel to take into  account
             the pressing nature of the public interest in the  deportation
             of Mr S,  failed  to  adequately  engage  with  his  offending
             behaviour and failed to consider  this  through  the  lens  of
             s117C(1) and (2). The assessment of the public  interest  must
             be in all of the findings and this was, he submitted  lacking.
             [45] of the First-tier Tribunal panel decision which states:

                   "We note the seriousness of the  violent  crime  that  he
                   committed. We take into account his explanation that  the
                   assault was motivated by his concern for his partner  and
                   daughter as he understood they were being stalked by  the
                   victim which is consistent with the witness  evidence  of
                   his devotion to his family and with the concerns set  out
                   by [KMP] and recorded by her medical team."

             could not, he submitted be read as including any assessment of
             the public interest whether under s117C (2) or under paragraph
             398(b).

     18. Ms Easty submitted that [45] of the decision was  sufficient,  when
         read with the decision as a  whole,  to  show  that  the  panel  of
         experienced First-tier Tribunal judges, had taken  account  of  the
         serious nature of Mr S's criminality and the sentence he  received.
         It was not necessary for them to have added further words to merely
         set out what is self evident  namely  that  deportation  can  split
         families and that  the  public  interest  lies  in  deportation  of
         foreign criminals. S117C when read consecutively, as it should  be,
         set out the serious weight to be attached to criminality  but  that
         the Exceptions provided, irrespective of s117C(2) that if a  person
         met one of those exceptions then deportation  was  not  the  proper
         course of action. The proper interpretation of 'unduly  harsh'  was
         as in MAB and in the instant case that test was met.   In  response
         to a question from us as to whether by including  consideration  of
         the  criminality  in  s117C(2),  to  then  consider  the  level  of
         criminality in the assessment  of  whether  one  or  other  of  the
         Exceptions in s117C was  met  amounted  to  'double  counting'  the
         criminality, she said that the assessment of  the  public  interest
         meant giving sufficient weight to the public  interest;  that  test
         already applies. The length of the sentence  is  reflected  in  the
         Rules and the statute as indicative of the public interest  and  it
         was then a question of considering  whether  the  effect  would  be
         unduly harsh.  She  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
         considered this question and, when viewed in the round and read  as
         a whole, had come to a sustainable conclusion that the effect would
         be unduly harsh. Thus, in line with s117C(3) the deportation  order
         should be revoked.

     19. Ms Easty expressed the view that there was  a  lacuna  between  the
         Rules and the Statute. The Statute does not have  the  subtlety  of
         the Rules but  it  was,  she  submitted  a  distinction  without  a
         difference. The lack of specific reference in the decision  to  the
         Immigration Rules did not result in a finding that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had erred in law. The panel had  plainly,  she  submitted,
         taken account of all the relevant evidence in reaching  a  decision
         that the effect on the child of Mr S's deportation would be  unduly
         harsh and thus Exception 2 applied and thus the appeal was allowed.

     20. Ms Easty submitted that in any event  Mr  Bramble  was  seeking  to
         widen in his submissions the grounds upon which he  relied  and  he
         should either seek leave to amend his grounds or the appeal  should
         be limited to those in the application.

    Findings

     21. We do not agree that Mr Bramble was seeking to  widen  the  grounds
         upon which he had been granted permission to  appeal.  The  grounds
         clearly relied upon an asserted inadequate assessment by the First-
         tier Tribunal judge of the meaning of "unduly harsh" and a  failure
         to consider the public interest in deportation. There was  no  need
         for Mr Bramble to seek permission to amend his  grounds  of  appeal
         and in any event Ms Easty was not, so far as  we  could  ascertain,
         disadvantaged by or taken by surprise by any of the matters  relied
         upon by Mr Bramble in his submissions.

         We do not agree with Ms Easty that the use of the word "effect'  in
         s117C(5) refers only to a situation where the foreign  criminal  is
         deported and the children/partner remain in the UK.  An "effect" is
         "something that is produced by a cause or agent"  (Collins  English
         Dictionary and others).To put it another way the  'effect'  is  the
         consequence  of  a  particular  action.  So  far  as  the  parental
         relationship between the parent and child is  concerned  there  are
         two possible outcomes: the first  is  the  child  travel  with  the
         parent to the country of  deportation;  the  second  is  the  child
         remains in the UK and is, if the parent is removed, separated  from
         the parent. In either case the effect is the effect of  deportation
         upon the child. Not only would the interpretation put forward by Ms
         Easty be a restriction on the interpretation of the word  "effect",
         it would also significantly contradict the Immigration Rules  which
         were amended at the same time as the implementation of Part 5A.  It
         cannot have been the intention that the Rules  impose  a  different
         requirement to be fulfilled than is in a Statute. The "effect" on a
         child or partner is plainly an "effect" caused  by  deportation  of
         the foreign criminal; it cannot possibly import an assumption  that
         such effect is only to  be  considered  in  terms  of  the  foreign
         criminal leaving the UK and the children/partner remaining  in  the
         UK. On a plain reading of the words it must include  a  requirement
         to consider the effect on the child/partner of travelling with  the
         foreign criminal out of the UK.  It is in the  public  interest  to
         deport foreign criminals. Thus the starting point for consideration
         of the 'effect' is that the foreign criminal is to be deported  and
         it is the consequences, as  a  whole,  of  that  which  are  to  be
         considered.

     22. The  considerations  in  s117C  are  a  mixture  of  statements  of
         established jurisprudence and Parliament's  stated  intention  that
         particular scenarios would not result in  deportation.  It  is  not
         that some of those sub-sections are of greater importance  or  that
         greater weight should be attached to them  than  others,  but  that
         where  the  tribunal  is  considering  an  Article  8   appeal   in
         deportation proceedings these are matters that must be  considered.
         Therefore no matter that a person has been convicted of  a  serious
         offence that has resulted in a prison sentence just short  of  four
         years, if he meets Exception 2 then the public  interest  does  not
         require his deportation.

     23.  Part  5A  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  draws
         attention to the fact that the deportation of foreign criminals  is
         in the public interest and that the more serious offence  committed
         by the foreign criminal, the greater  is  the  public  interest  in
         deportation of the criminal. The Immigration Rules,  introduced  at
         the same time as Part 5A are  the  more  nuanced  framework  within
         which decisions are to be taken. The SSHD is required to  take  her
         decisions in accordance with that framework which, it is  now  well
         established, are a complete  code  in  so  far  as  deportation  is
         concerned. The Courts and Tribunals  will  consider  the  Rules  in
         appeals against the  SSHD's  decision  but  are  also  specifically
         required to consider Part 5A. This does not  mean  that  the  Rules
         cease to be a complete code: the Rules are directed at the decision
         maker and Part 5A is directed  to  the  Tribunal  and  Courts.  The
         difference in approach, whether addressed first under the Rules  or
         first under Part 5A will not in practice make   any difference. The
         Rules are reflective of Part 5A. It might be asked -  What  is  the
         purpose of the legislation when the Rules are a complete  code  and
         are reflective of the legislation? The answer must surely  be  that
         the legislation is Parliament's view and not merely a statement  of
         policy, albeit passed by way of negative resolution. Although there
         is a distinction in the wording, the route followed will result  in
         the same outcome.

     24. The Rules tread the same ground as Part 5A and can  be  seen  as  a
         more detailed framework and, as is  now  well  established,  are  a
         complete code. Provided the decision reached is on the basis  of  a
         full and proper assessment of all  the  circumstances,  bearing  in
         mind the fundamental legislative provision that the deportation  of
         foreign criminals is in the public interest and  the  more  serious
         the offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater the  public
         interest in deportation, then it matters not whether the outcome is
         expressed as having been reached through consideration of the Rules
         first or the Act first.

     25. What does this mean in terms of Exception 2 (s117C(5)) or Paragraph
         399(a)? First of all s117C(5) is, to all intents and purposes fully
         reflected in 399(a) albeit  the  language  used  is  more  concise.
         Secondly, the interpretation of this must have as its backdrop  the
         underlying expressed will of Parliament  that  the  deportation  of
         foreign criminals is in the public interest and  the  more  serious
         the offence committed by a foreign criminal the greater the  public
         interest in deportation. The general principles as set out  in  the
         legislation inform and underpins the  decision  to  be  reached  on
         whether an Exception applies. To exclude these  general  principles
         in reaching a decision on whether the effect of deportation of  the
         foreign criminal on the child/partner would be unduly harsh  is  to
         subvert the expressed will of Parliament.  We  do  not  agree  that
         there is a lacuna between the Rules and the Statute.

     26. It plainly follows that in assessing whether  it  is  unduly  harsh
         (whether under the Rules or under Part 5A)  on  the  child/partner,
         there must be included in  that  assessment  consideration  of  the
         seriousness of the crime and the public interest in deportation  of
         the foreign criminal -  as  set  out  in  KMO.  Without  this  full
         assessment the Rules would not be a complete  code  in  deportation
         cases. A failure to include the extent of the criminality  and  the
         public interest when carrying out an assessment of  whether  it  is
         unduly harsh would result in the expressed will of Parliament being
         effectively ignored where a foreign  criminal  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a child or partner in the UK.

     27. Ms Easty's response to our question about 'double counting' did not
         appear to us to deliver an answer to that question. In our judgment
         the principle set out in s117C(2) falls to be applied   during  the
         assessment.. That means that  in  respect  of  a  foreign  criminal
         sentenced to more than four years  the  principle  in  s117C(2)  is
         applied at the stage of assessment provided by paragraph 398 of the
         Immigration Rules and s117C(6). In respect of  a  foreign  criminal
         sentenced to more than 12 months but less than  four  years  it  is
         applied in deciding whether the Exceptions in  s117C  or  paragraph
         399 apply. To fail to  take  account  of  the  criminality  in  the
         assessment  of  "unduly  harsh"  would  result  in  the  level  and
         seriousness of the criminality not being considered at all.

         Our decision on the instant appeal

     28. The First-tier Tribunal panel erred in law in failing  to  consider
         whether it would be unduly harsh for KMP to travel to Trinidad  and
         Tobago. The fact that she has  decided  not  to  go  does  not,  of
         itself, result in the consideration of the effect of deportation on
         her and the child being limited to the effect on them remaining  in
         the UK without  Mr  S.  It  is  not,  as  submitted  by  Ms  Easty,
         speculative to examine the circumstances of her decision not to  go
         to Trinidad and  Tobago.  An  assessment  of  the  objective  well-
         foundedness  of  that  decision  must  of  itself  impact  on   the
         consideration of the effect of Mr S's deportation on the child.

     29. The First-tier Tribunal panel erred in law in failing  to  consider
         whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to  go  to  Trinidad
         and Tobago, whether with or without her mother.

     30. The First-tier Tribunal panel erred in law in failing  to  identify
         what, in the separation of the child from her  father  is  of  such
         moment that it is unduly harsh. Separation of a child from a parent
         is inevitably going to be harsh. The matters  relied  upon  by  the
         panel, expressed in [62] & [63] and taking account  of  the  expert
         reports are no more than this. Although the departure of Mr  S  may
         adversely affect the child and her mother, there is no right  to  a
         particular standard of living or quality of  life.  Of  course  the
         welfare of the child is of primary importance but the existence  of
         social services to enable adequate care and protection impacts upon
         that. That KMP may have to rely more on public and social  services
         than if Mr S were in the UK does not render what is  harsh,  unduly
         harsh. As was made clear in MAB

             "... whether the consequences of deportation  will  be  unduly
             harsh for an individual  involves  more  than  "uncomfortable,
             inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome or merely  difficult  and
             challenging" consequences  and  imposes  a  considerably  more
             elevated  or  higher  threshold.  The  consequences   for   an
             individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe" or "bleak" and
             they will  be  "unduly"  so  if  they  are  "inordinately"  or
             "excessively" harsh taking into account all the  circumstances
             of the individual".

     31. We accept Ms Easty's submission that there was no requirement  upon
         the FtT to set out what is self-evident  ie  that  deportation  can
         split families. Although it is, or should be self-evident that  the
         public interest lies in deportation we do not accept that  the  FtT
         took this into account.

     32. The matters relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal do not  approach
         the definition of unduly harsh as set out in MAB, never mind  if  a
         proper assessment had been undertaken  incorporating  consideration
         of the criminality of Mr S and the public interest. Although it was
         submitted by Ms Easty that the SSHD objections to the  findings  of
         the First-tier Tribunal were nothing more than  disagreements  with
         the findings this is clearly not so.  At no point do the First-tier
         Tribunal panel address the level of harshness likely to be  endured
         by the child - even assuming that it is unduly harsh for the  child
         to go to Trinidad and Tobago on which no finding was made.

     33. Mr Bramble's submission that the decision of the FtT that it  would
         be unduly harsh for the child to be left  in  the  UK  without  her
         father was perverse is obviously a very high test. It is  important
         to look at exactly what the judge took into account in reaching the
         decision that it would be unduly harsh:

           . Mr S has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
             daughter

           . He has a practical and important role in her life

           . There would be support for KMP in the UK from family and
             social services

           . The child is bright and intelligent

           . His daughter is anxious that he won't be there to collect her
             at the end of the school day; it is in the child's best
             interests that her father continues to be present as her
             parent and carer

           . He provides regular support to her and practical and emotional
             support to her mother ensuring stability in the home.

     34. On the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         applying MAB it cannot conceivably be concluded that  a  reasonable
         judge would have reached the decision that the circumstances relied
         upon by the panel met the threshold of "unduly harsh".

     35. In [45] the FtT panel "... notes the  seriousness  of  the  violent
         crime" and take into account  Mr  S's  explanation  "...  that  the
         assault was motivated by his concern for his partner  and  daughter
         as he understood they were being stalked by  the  victim  which  is
         consistent with  the  witness  evidence  of  his  devotion  to  his
         family...". The panel, although referring to  and  setting  out  in
         [34] extracts from the sentencing remarks, does  not  anywhere  set
         out that the nature  and  seriousness  of  this  assault  has  been
         factored into their assessment, rather there is  an  acknowledgment
         of his motivation rather than an acknowledgment of the judge's view
         that his offence "was one of  the  more  serious  offences  of  its
         kind". Despite Mr S having no previous convictions other  than  two
         cautions for assault he was sentenced to 16 months.

     36. On the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         applying KMO it again is inconceivable that  any  reasonable  panel
         could have reached the conclusion that  the  threshold  of  "unduly
         harsh" was met  when  the  circumstances  of  the  criminality  and
         sentence are factored in.

     37. We are satisfied that the finding that it would be unduly harsh for
         the child to remain in the UK without her father is perverse on the
         evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  panel;  furthermore  that
         there is an absence of adequate reasons given.

     38. For these reasons we are satisfied the  First-tier  Tribunal  panel
         erred in law and we set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

     39. Both parties intimated to us that should we find an error of law in
         the First-tier Tribunal decision such that it be set  aside  to  be
         remade, given the extent of the requirement for fresh findings,  it
         was appropriate for it to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         for a fresh hearing.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    We set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    remade.


[pic]
     Date 22nd December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
