
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00351/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |

                                     And

|           |KH                                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Thomas, of Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.
I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
claimant (as defined in para 1 below) by initials only.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hodgkinson who, following a hearing  on  17  March  2015,  allowed  the
    appeal of KH (hereafter the "claimant"), a national of Eritrea, against
    a decision of the Secretary of State of 19 February 2014 to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order made against him on 7 April 2009.

    The judge's findings and reasons

 2. The judge's findings may be summarised as follows: The  judge  accepted
    that  the  claimant  was  a  practising  Pentecostal  Christian   whose
    preferred means of worship is by attendance  at  a  Pentecostal  church
    rather than at any other denominational church, that he has  chosen  to
    practise his faith in a larger church community, that he was not  happy
    to practise his faith in small groups and that he  needed  to  be  with
    more people ([44] and [45] of his decision). At [49], the judge made  a
    point of reiterating that he had concluded that the claimant wishes  to
    practise his religion in the Pentecostal Church "for  the  reasons  set
    out by him in his oral evidence" and at [50] that he wishes to continue
    to be an active member of the Pentecostal faith.

 3. At [47] and [48] of his decision, the judge quoted from Germany v Y & Z
    [2012] EUECJ C-71/11 and HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010] UKSC 31, to the effect that a person  should  not  be
    required to  modify  his  or  her  sexual  behaviour-  and,  the  judge
    considered, by analogy, their practice of their religion - in order  to
    avoid persecution. At [50], he noted that the respondent accepted  that
    the claimant would face persecution in Eritrea on account of  a  Geneva
    Convention reason if he were an active Pentecostal Christian.

 4. It can be seen that the judge found the claimant's  evidence  credible.
    At the very beginning of his assessment of the evidence (at  [30)],  he
    summarised the findings of a panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    "panel") in a previous appeal. The panel dismissed  the  appeal  on  12
    February 2009. The judge said, at [36]-[37]:

         "36.     I reiterate that the Devaseelan Guidelines are  applicable
             to the findings of the Panel, whose findings I  have  set  out
             above, the Panel's determination being my  starting  point  in
             considering the relevant evidence in the present  appeal.   It
             should be noted that the Panel accepted that,  in  2006,  (the
             claimant) had come into contact with the Pentecostal church in
             the United Kingdom and that he became a member of that  Church
             in Sheffield, led by a Pastor Hirpo  Kumbi.   The  Panel  also
             accepted that (the claimant) attended prayer meetings  at  the
             home of a Mr Thorn, as referred to above, but  concluded  that
             there was no evidence that (the claimant)  had  latterly  been
             attending a Pentecostal church.  For the avoidance  of  doubt,
             the Panel did  not  make  any  definitive  finding  that  (the
             claimant) was not  a  practising  member  of  the  Pentecostal
             church; it simply concluded  that  there  was  no  documentary
             evidence supporting his contention that he  was  and,  without
             more, did not accept that he was.

         37.      However, and in any event, the Panel proceeded to conclude
             that it was not essential,  to  (the  claimant's)  ability  to
             worship, for him to attend large  gatherings,  such  as  in  a
             church, bearing in mind its  conclusion  that  (the  claimant)
             appeared to be  content  to  attend  relatively  small  prayer
             groups in a Mr Thorn's house.  However, interestingly, and  of
             relevance to the appeal before me, as part of (the claimant's)
             evidence before the Panel, in  paragraph  26  of  the  Panel's
             determination, (the claimant's) evidence is recorded,  to  the
             effect that he considered it desirable, albeit not  essential,
             to worship in a large group, it also being recorded that  (the
             claimant) indicated that he would prefer to worship in a large
             group.  The Panel concluded, relying upon the findings of  the
             Tribunal in its Country Guidance decision  in  YT,  that  (the
             claimant) was  "therefore  clearly  capable  of  limiting  his
             involvement to meetings of less than five people and would not
             be at risk of persecution on  his  return  to  Eritrea"  as  a
             result.  Of course, the Panel did not have available to it the
             subsequent Supreme Court judgment in  HJ  (Iran)  upon  which,
             inter alia, (the claimant) also now relies."

 5. The judge then summarised the claimant's oral evidence and the evidence
    of his wife at [39] before turning (at  [41])  to  a  letter  dated  30
    November 2010 from the Chaplain of HMP Birmingham confirming  that  the
    claimant was a practising Christian with a  Pentecostal  background,  a
    letter from Pastor Hailemariam of "Holiness unto the Lord International
    Church" ("HUTLIC") dated 25 July 2014 which confirmed that the claimant
    was a full member of his church. The judge  said  that  "there  was  no
    challenge to the indication that HUTLIC (was) a Pentecostal church". At
    [42], the judge referred to a letter from a Michael Haile,  a  "leader"
    of HUTLIC in which he indicated that the claimant  was  a  genuine  and
    enthusiastic believer. At [43],  he  referred  to  a  letter  from  the
    claimant's GP which said, inter alia, that  "the  [claimant]  was  well
    supported by the church community and in particular by his pastor".

 6. The judge then referred to the matters  adverse  to  the  claimant,  at
    [44], stating:

         "44.     I confirm that, in assessing (the claimant's) credibility,
             I have borne  in  mind,  and  have  taken  into  account,  his
             willingness to claim asylum under a false name  in  2008,  and
             his subsequent willingness to use a false identity,  in  2010,
             in order to obtain employment, but  I  have  also  taken  into
             account (the  claimant's)  circumstances  and  explanation  in
             relation to those two offences.  I have  also  borne  in  mind
             Judge Forster's adverse credibility findings  in  relation  to
             (the claimant's) 2005 asylum claim.  The  respondent  has  not
             raised any issues with reference to Section 8  of  the  Asylum
             and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004  and  I
             am not aware of any behaviour which engages that Section."

 7. The judge then made his findings which I have summarised at [2] above.

    The grounds:

 8. The original grounds stated that the judge had materially erred in  law
    in placing weight on HUTLIC being a Pentecostal church because a print-
    out from the church's website does not suggest that it  is  Pentecostal
    church. Reliance was placed on an extract from the  website  of  HUTLIC
    which said:

         "We are a non denominational and charismatic church based  in  West
         London one of the most cosmopolitan cities in the world.   Holiness
         unto the Lord International Church was set  up  with  one  goal  in
         mind: to share the  uncompromising  Word  of  God  with  signs  and
         wonders following.  We welcome all who are seeking God and want  to
         know him.

                                 (Source: http://www.hutlic.org/index.html)"

 9. It was contended that this shows that HUTLIC is  "a  non-denominational
    space for Eritreans/Ethiopians" which, it was contended, undermined the
    claimant's claim that he attends a Pentecostal church and that he  only
    wishes to attend such a place of worship.



10. The renewal grounds contended:

    (i)    The judge erred when he said at [36] that the panel had not made
         a positive finding against the claimant's claim to be a  practising
         Pentecostal Christian. It is contended that this was a  distinction
         without a difference as the burden of proof was on the claimant and
         the clear finding of the panel was that he  was  not  a  practising
         Pentecostal Christian.

    (ii)   The renewal grounds refer to the fact that, in the period follow
         the determination of the panel, the claimant had been convicted  of
         another offence of dishonesty.

    (iii)  The judge's assessment of these adverse  credibility  issues  at
         para 44 was an inadequate assessment of  the  truthfulness  of  the
         claimant's assertion that he will avoid genuinely desired religious
         practice on return because of fear. The renewal  grounds  contended
         that, given the claimant's history of  deceit,  more  analysis  was
         required.

    (iv)   In view of the claimant's past conduct, the conclusion  at  [45]
         and [50] was simply irrational.

    Assessment

11. Mr Thomas submitted a letter from HUTLIC dated 11 August 2015 in  which
    Mr Michael Haile who signed himself as "Trustee,  Chair"  stated  that:
    "...we would like  to  unequivocally  confirm  that  we  are  indeed  a
    Pentecostal church", that "HUTLIC is a  Pentecostal  church"  and  that
    "(the claimant) is a Pentecostal member of HUTLIC".

12. I heard briefly from Mr Wilding following which I  informed  Mr  Thomas
    that I did not need to hear from him. I announce  my  decision  that  I
    could not see any material error of law. I will now give my reasons for
    reaching that conclusion.

13. Dealing first with the original grounds, it is clear that there was  no
    concession on behalf of the respondent that HUTLIC  was  a  Pentecostal
    church. Nevertheless, the fact is that the respondent did not challenge
    the evidence given at the hearing that it was a Pentecostal church. The
    Secretary of State's evidence from the website of HUTLIC (at [8] above)
    should have been submitted to the judge. It was not  submitted  to  the
    judge. It can only be admitted under the principles in Ladd v  Marshall
    [1954] 1 WLR 1489 (Denning LJ, at p1489) and E and R v  Home  Secretary
    [2004] EWCA Civ 49 if it can be shown, inter alia,  that  the  evidence
    shows that the judge was mistaken as to  an  incontrovertible  existing
    fact. This simply cannot be said, given the letter from HUTLIC dated 11
    August 2015 which was submitted at the hearing before me.  Accordingly,
    the evidence from the website is not admissible.

14. My conclusion on this  ground  is  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    attempting, belatedly, to present a case or  rely  upon  evidence  that
    should have been presented or submitted to the judge.  I can see  that,
    if this evidence had been submitted to the judge, it might have made  a
    material difference. It might have  persuaded  the  judge  to  take  an
    entirely different view of the credibility  of  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence, both written and oral.  However,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative did not rely upon this evidence at  the  hearing  before
    the judge. This notwithstanding the fact that the  hearing  before  the
    judge was a second hearing of this appeal because the appeal  that  was
    heard before the judge had been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  by
    the Upper Tribunal. The jurisprudence concerning the  admissibility  of
    evidence that was not relied upon before a judge at first  instance  is
    clear. Such evidence cannot be relied upon to demonstrate an  error  of
    law except in limited circumstances. One of those  is  that  the  judge
    made an error as to an existing fact which is incontrovertible. I  have
    already explained why this cannot be said to apply. No other  arguments
    as to admissibility were advanced before me.

15. There is quite simply no substance in the renewal grounds, which I will
    deal with in turn.

16. In relation to the first argument (at [10(i)]  above),  the  judge  was
    entitled to note that the panel had not made a definitive finding  that
    the claimant was not a practising member of the Pentecostal church  and
    that it had concluded that there was no documentary evidence to support
    his contention that he was and that, without more, it  did  not  accept
    that he was. It was the judge's duty to understand  the  scope  of  the
    panel's findings, so that  he  could  start  his  assessment  from  the
    correct footing, given that the panel's findings were a starting  point
    under the guidance in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v.  D
    (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702* (also known as Devaseelan) which the  judge
    applied.

17. The next argument is essentially that the judge overlooked  considering
    the fact that, since the  previous  determination  by  the  panel,  the
    claimant had been convicted of another offence of dishonesty. There  is
    nothing at all in this argument. As the author of the  grounds  himself
    said, the judge referred to this further offence of dishonesty  at  [5]
    of his decision and at [44] he specifically referred to the offence  in
    2008 and the offence in 2010.

18. The third argument is likewise  bereft  of  substance.  There  are  two
    points made in this regard. First, that the judge only  considered  the
    adverse matters after he had already  made  a  positive  assessment  of
    credibility. However, this argument simply  ignores  the  fact  that  a
    judge has to start his assessment somewhere. The mere fact that he  has
    started with the positive aspects  does  not  mean  that  he  left  the
    negative aspects out of account. In this  particular  case,  the  judge
    specifically said that, at [44], that: "I confirm  that,  in  assessing
    the [claimant's] credibility, I have borne in mind, and have taken into
    account ..." It is plain,  in  my  judgment,  that  he  had  taken  the
    negative  aspects  into  account  in   reaching   his   conclusion   on
    credibility. It is not the case that he made  his  positive  assessment
    before  turning  to  those  factors  which   impacted   negatively   on
    credibility.

19. The second  point  in  the  third  argument  is  that  the  judge  gave
    inadequate reasons for his positive assessment.  However,  the  renewed
    grounds identify nothing that has been left out of account, other  than
    the matters I have dealt with in the preceding paragraph.  Accordingly,
    there is nothing in this point.

20. Mr Wilding could not  explain  what  argument  was  being  advanced  in
    relation to [10(iv)] above if it was intended to  advance  an  argument
    that was different from the remainder of the renewal grounds.

21. For these reasons, the Secretary of State's grounds  do  not  establish
    that the judge erred in law.




    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


Signed      Date: 4 October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

