
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ION EMILIAN IORGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Querton, Counsel instructed by Ennon & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Romania born on 30 July  1973  as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Finch on 8 December 2014 to allow the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's decision to make a deportation order against him on 14
    April 2014.

3.   The respondent noted that the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  five
    counts of exposure and the commission of a further offence  during  the
    operational period of a suspended sentence on 10  February  2014.   The
    appellant  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'  imprisonment  and  the
    previous suspended sentence of twelve weeks was activated.  It was  the
    respondent's case that the  appellant  posed  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy if he was
    allowed to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  deportation  was
    justified under Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations.

4.   An issue before the First-tier Judge  was  whether  the  appellant  had
    acquired a permanent right of residence under Regulation 15 of the  EEA
    Regulations.  In order to achieve  permanent  residence  the  appellant
    needed to demonstrate that he had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the Regulations for a continuous period of  five  years
    before being imprisoned.  Under Regulation 21(3) "a  relevant  decision
    may not be taken in respect of a  person  with  a  permanent  right  of
    residence under Regulation 15  except  on  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security".

5.   The First-tier Judge set out her findings and conclusions as follows:

         "11. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant  is  a  national  of
             Romania and, therefore, a foreign national.  The  Home  Office
             Bundle contained an order for imprisonment and the  sentencing
             remarks made by  the  judge  on  10th  February  2014.   These
             confirm  that  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  18   months
             imprisonment.  Therefore, the Respondent was obliged  to  make
             an automatic deportation order under Section 32(5) of  the  UK
             Borders Act 2007 and my starting  point  should  be  that  the
             deportation of a foreign national criminal is conducive to the
             public good.

         12.  However, as the Appellant is an EEA national  the  Immigration
             (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended,  also  apply.   Regulation
             19(3) states that a person who has acquired a right to  reside
             in the United Kingdom under these Regulations may  be  removed
             if (b) he would otherwise be entitled to reside in the  United
             Kingdom under these Regulations but the Secretary of State has
             decided that his removal is justified on the grounds of public
             policy, public security or public health  in  accordance  with
             Regulation 21.

         13.   In  addition,  Regulation  21(1)  states  that  "a  'relevant
             decision' means an EEA decision taken on the grounds of public
             policy, public security or public health" and Regulation 21(3)
             states that "a relevant decision may not be taken  in  respect
             of  a  person  with  a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
             regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy  or
             public security".

         14.  It is the Appellant's case that he has  acquired  a  permanent
             right of residence in the United Kingdom and that,  therefore,
             Regulation 21(3) means that he cannot be deported  unless  the
             Respondent established  that  there  are  serious  grounds  of
             public policy or public security.

         15.  In order to show that he has acquired  a  permanent  right  of
             residence under Regulation 15 he must establish  that  he  had
             resided in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
             Regulations for a continuous period of five years before being
             imprisoned.  The refusal letter confirmed that the Appellant's
             passport indicated that he had entered the United  Kingdom  on
             2nd August 2006.  At this time Romania had not yet acceded  to
             the European Union.  It did so the following year and  I  note
             that there is a letter from HM Revenue &  Customs,  dated  9th
             February 2007 which indicates that the Appellant had  provided
             some tax records and been advised to start making tax returns.
              There was also a self-assessment tax assessment for 2007-2008
             in the Appellant's Bundle.  The Home Office Bundle contained a
             letter from the UK Border Agency, dated 30th June 2009,  which
             said that the Appellant had been issued  with  a  Registration
             Certificate confirming that he was exercising a  Treaty  right
             as a self-employed EEA national.  There was also a letter from
             Vlavar Ltd, dated 9th  May  2009,  which  confirmed  that  the
             Appellant was carrying out plastering work for that company at
             that time and had been working for them previously.  There was
             also a letter and some invoices from Marian  Tudorache,  dated
             18th October 2011, which confirmed that the Appellant had been
             working for her since 2009 as a sub-contractor.  In  addition,
             there was also correspondence from HM Revenue & Customs  which
             confirmed that the Appellant was paying tax in 2010 to 2012.

         16.  Furthermore, the Appellant's Bundle contained tax calculations
             made by HM Revenue & Customs for 2008-09, 2009-10,  2011-12-13
             and 2013-14.  There were also invoices for his plastering jobs
             for Ellite Cladding in 2008  and  statements  of  payment  and
             subcontractor payment certificates for his work for Vladar Ltd
             in 2009 and 2010 and a  CIS  Subcontractor  Service  Agreement
             with Sprite Construction Limited,  dated  1st  December  2011.
             Taking this and the totality of the evidence  and  applying  a
             balance  of  probabilities  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has
             acquired a right of permanent residence in the United  Kingdom
             by the time he was sent to prison.

         17.  Therefore, the Respondent has to show that there  are  serious
             grounds of public policy or public security, which require the
             Appellant to be deported.

         18.  I have also reminded myself that in accordance with Regulation
             21(5)(b) of the  EEA  Regulations  I  must  base  my  decision
             exclusively  on  the  Appellant's  personal  conduct  and   in
             accordance with Regulation 21(5)(e) I must take  into  account
             the fact that the Appellant's previous criminal convictions do
             not in themselves justify the decision.   I  have  taken  into
             account the criminal judge's sentencing remarks and have noted
             that the Appellant exposed himself  to  women  on  the  London
             underground on five separate occasions and  that  he  targeted
             women travelling in the evening.  On some  occasions  he  also
             followed these women after exposing himself.  Three  of  these
             offences were also committed when the  Appellant  had  already
             been sentenced to  a  community  order  for  outraging  public
             decency and in breach of a  previous  suspended  sentence  for
             another offence of exposure.  I have taken  into  account  the
             fact that the Appellant is also subject  to  a  Sex  Offenders
             Prevention Order and an order preventing him travelling on the
             London Underground between 6:30pm and 5:00am.  However,  I  do
             not think that this indicates an additional seriousness of his
             offences as these are standard responses to such offences  and
             do offer some protection to any possible future victims.

         19.  I must also consider whether the Appellant's actions represent
             a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
             one of the fundamental interests of society.  When considering
             this I  have  also  taken  into  account  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant pleaded guilty to all five counts at  the  start  of
             his trial and that the civilian witnesses had been stood  down
             at an earlier pre-trial hearing.  In  his  oral  evidence,  he
             also said that he had tried  to  sign  up  for  sex  offending
             courses whilst in prison but that his  English  was  not  good
             enough for him to attend the course.  He also  confirmed  that
             since being released from prison he had not drunk any alcohol,
             which was said to be a contributory factor to  his  offending.
             In addition, in his oral evidence he said that  he  wanted  to
             apologise in public for his  actions  and  realised  that  his
             offences had affected his victims as well as himself  and  his
             own family.  He also said that he took full responsibility for
             his actions.   In  addition,  it  was  accepted  that  he  was
             complying  with  his  reporting  conditions.   In   her   oral
             evidence, the Appellant's wife also made  it  clear  that  her
             relationship with the Appellant was much better and  that  she
             was offering him her full support to address his problems.   I
             have also taken into account the fact that the  OASys  report,
             completed on 25th February 2014, concluded that  there  was  a
             low likelihood of the Appellant re-offending  and  that  there
             was a medium risk of serious harm to others.  Taking this  and
             the totality of the  evidence  into  account  and  applying  a
             balance of probabilities, I find that the Appellant  does  not
             present a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of   society
             justifying his deportation.

         20.  I have also reminded myself that Regulation 21(a) requires  me
             to consider the principle of proportionality.  I have reminded
             myself of the great weight which I must give to the fact  that
             the Appellant was convicted of  serious  sexual  offences  and
             that the young  women  concerned  were  traumatised  by  their
             experiences.  However, there was no evidence to  suggest  that
             their trauma had had any serious long term effect on them  and
             it is my view that the Appellant expressed genuine remorse and
             that his risk of re-offending is low.   In  addition,  I  have
             taken into account the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  wife  is
             working and exercising her Treaty rights in the United Kingdom
             and has done so for some years.  Her and the Appellant's three
             children were also all born in the  United  Kingdom  and  have
             lived here all their lives.  I have reminded  myself  that  as
             part of any proportionality exercise I must  treat  a  child's
             best interest as a primary consideration.  I accept  that  the
             Appellant's wife said that, if  the  Application  were  to  be
             deported, she and the children would  accompany  him.   But  I
             have also taken into account the fact that  the  oldest  child
             has started at Chalk Hill Primary School and the  two  younger
             children attend Willow Children's Centre and their  attendance
             and education would be disrupted if they did so.  It  is  also
             clear that the Appellant and his  wife  are  exercising  their
             Treaty rights here because they do not believe that they could
             obtain  employment  and  housing  in  Romania  and  that   the
             children's best interests would be better met by living here.

         21.  Finally, in oral evidence the Appellant  stated  that  he  was
             having an operation on his testicles on 23rd December 2014 and
             he was not sure what treatment he  could  access  if  he  were
             deported to Romania.  Taking this  and  the  totality  of  the
             evidence into account and applying a balance of  probabilities
             I find  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  deport  the
             Appellant to Romania."

6.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal refused permission.   The  application  was  renewed  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission with specific reference
    to the issue of whether the First-tier Judge had erred in deciding that
    the appellant had accrued five years' residence  which  the  respondent
    had argued failed to take into account a period of imprisonment in  the
    financial year 2013/2014.  The respondent made reference to Onuekwere v
    Secretary of State C-378/12.

7.   There was a Rule 24 response settled by Counsel previously  instructed.



8.   Mr Avery relied on all the grounds that had been submitted  and  argued
    that the appellant had been issued with an EEA residence card  in  2009
    and he had in fact applied to the Secretary of State as a dependant  of
    his wife which did not suggest that he  was  economically  independent.
    The appellant's English was inadequate and  there  was  a  gap  in  his
    employment history and Mr Avery submitted that the judge's approach  in
    paragraph 16 had been "sketchy".  There  had  been  totally  inadequate
    evidence to establish permanent residence at the time of imprisonment.

9.   The judge had minimised the serious nature  of  the  offending  of  the
    appellant.  There had been an escalation in the offending behaviour and
    he had demonstrated a disregard of the law by  offending  again  during
    the period of a suspended sentence.  The judge had minimised the effect
    of the appellant's offences on the victims in paragraph 20.  The  OASys
    Report had found that the appellant demonstrated  a  low  risk  of  re-
    offending - it had not been found that he had demonstrated no  risk  of
    offending.

10.  Counsel submitted that the grounds represented a reasons  challenge  to
    the determination.  She said that the appellant had  been  remanded  in
    custody from 18 July 2013 and that was the appropriate start date  from
    which to consider his imprisonment - she referred to Essa  [2013]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC).   She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  appropriate
    calculations and addressed herself  correctly  to  the  Regulations  in
    paragraphs 15 and  16  of  the  determination.   She  referred  to  the
    evidence before the First-tier Judge which she had listed in  paragraph
    34 of her skeleton  argument.   The  judge  had  heard  from  both  the
    appellant and his wife and appeared to have accepted them  as  credible
    witnesses.  The judge had heard submissions from Counsel summarised  in
    paragraph 7 of the decision referring to the evidence in both the  Home
    Office and appellant's bundles relating to his previous history of self-
    employment.  The registration certificate issued in 2009  was  evidence
    of the existing position.  However this was confined to self-employment
    and if the appellant wished to take employment then he  would  need  to
    apply as a dependant of his wife.  There was  nothing  inconsistent  in
    making such an application.  The points argued in the original  grounds
    did not raise  an  error  of  law  but  represented  an  expression  of
    disagreement with the judge's assessment.  The judge had  had  material
    before her to  support  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  expressed
    contrition in the shape of a letter from the prison  chaplain  dated  3
    April 2014.  She submitted that  the  judge  had  properly  taken  into
    account the aggravating factors in the appellant's offending history as
    well as the risk assessment set out in the OASys Report.  In respect of
    Article 8 the judge had not found  that  the  appellant  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat and  by  reference  to
    paragraph 29(b) of MC (Portugal) [2015] UKUT 00520  (IAC)  it  was  not
    relevant to consider whether the decision was proportionate.

11.  In reply Mr Avery submitted that the judge had not been specific as  to
    when the five year period ended and the judge had minimised the  effect
    of the appellant's actions in paragraph 20 of the decision.

12.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the decision if it was materially flawed  in
    law.  The principal point on which permission to appeal was granted was
    the question of the appellant's imprisonment  had  wrongly  been  taken
    into account when the judge had calculated the appellant's five  year's
    residence in the UK.  The problem with that argument is that the  judge
    expressly reminds herself in paragraph  50  that  it  is  necessary  to
    demonstrate a continuous period of five years before  being  imprisoned
    (emphasis added).  At the end of paragraph 16 the judge finds that  the
    appellant had acquired a right of permanent  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom "by the time he was sent  to  prison"  (emphasis  added).   The
    First-tier Judge had material before  her  to  confirm  her  assessment
    including the tax calculations made by HMRC.  In the response  previous
    Counsel had taken a later start date  for  the  appellant's  period  of
    imprisonment (10 February 2014) but his  argument  that  the  appellant
    would have accrued five years' residence by April 2013 would appear  to
    apply equally to the start date of 18 July 2013 proposed by Ms Querton.



13.  In relation to the points made in the initial grounds of  appeal  I  am
    not satisfied they go further than  expressing  disagreement  with  the
    judge's decision.  The findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Judge
    were open to her.  In relation to the principal points she was entitled
    to conclude that the appellant had established  a  permanent  right  of
    residence and she had sufficient material before her to  justify  those
    findings.  Having made her finding that the appellant did not present a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society it was not incumbent on  her  to  make
    further reference to the issue of proportionality for the reasons given
    in MC (Portugal), paragraph 29(b) of which reads as follows:

         "It is only if the personal conduct  of  the  person  concerned  is
         found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6)."

    In any event I do not find that part of her determination is materially
    flawed as argued by the respondent.

14.  Accordingly the respondent's appeal is dismissed.  I  direct  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

15.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

Fee award

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 20 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
