

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/00012/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reason Promulgated       |
|On 04 November 2019                       |On 06 November 2019                 |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 VALTER KOZI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr E. Fripp, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I shall refer to the parties as they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the  Secretary  of
      State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (Valter Kozi) appealed the respondent's  decision  dated
      12 November 2018 to remove him on public policy grounds with reference
      to The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA
      Regulations 2016") following his conviction for possession with intent
      to supply a Class A drug for which he  was  sentenced  to  six  years'
      imprisonment.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 28  August  2019.  She  noted  the
      appellant's immigration history, the serious nature  of  the  criminal
      offence and then summarised the case put forward by both  parties  [2-
      25]. The  judge  directed  herself  to  the  correct  legal  framework
      applicable to the  appeal  [28-33].  She  noted  that  the  respondent
      accepted  that  the  appellant  had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
      residence. As such, the appellant could only  be  removed  on  serious
      grounds of public policy and public security. She began her assessment
      by considering the what weight should be given  to  the  offence.  She
      referred to Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations 2016 and had  regard  to
      the serious nature of the offence [34].

4.    The judge went on to consider  whether  the  appellant  represented  a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
      fundamental interests of society with reference to the  evidence.  She
      noted that the OASys assessment from February  2017  was  not  a  full
      assessment. The risk of harm to the public was assessed  as  'medium'.
      The report stated that this meant that the offender had  potential  to
      cause serious harm but was unlikely to do so unless there is a  change
      in circumstances such as  a  return  to  previous  lifestyle  of  drug
      dealing. She took into account the fact that the  appellant  had  been
      assessed as 'low' risk of reconviction [35].

5.    The judge also considered a letter from  the  HM  Prison  &  Probation
      Service from January 2018, which stated that  the  appellant  was  not
      thought to require a full OASys assessment. The letter went on to say:
      "This is positive news and this letter is confirmation that  you  have
      been assessed as posing a low risk of  harm  to  all  sectors  of  the
      community. A review has been completed by the Offender Management Unit
      to confirm your low risk and this requires  no  intervention  with  an
      Offender Supervisor from the OMU. Due to the low risk you pose to  the
      community you do not require a sentence plan and therefore  will  have
      no objectives to complete." [36].

6.    The  judge  then  considered  the  expert  evidence  of  a  Consultant
      Forensic Psychologist dated June 2019, whose assessment supported  the
      probation assessment [37]. The Consultant Forensic Psychologist  noted
      that there was no evidence to support the respondent's assertion  that
      the appellant's offending was linked to drug use. There was no  record
      to show that the appellant was addicted to drugs or that  his  offence
      was linked to him using drugs. The motivation for the offence was  for
      financial gain during a period when he was out of  work  due  to  ill-
      health [38].

7.    The First-tier Tribunal then his prison record and other  evidence  to
      explain why the appellant would not have been  offered  rehabilitation
      programmes given the low risk assessment [39-40]. She also  considered
      the appellant's evidence [41-47]. Having considered  the  evidence  in
      the round she accepted that this was the appellant's first  conviction
      and that he had learned from it. He was aware of  the  impact  of  his
      behaviour and was motivated not to reoffend. She took into account the
      fact that he continues to see his family on a regular basis [48].  She
      concluded that there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant represented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society and  that
      his removal could not be justified on serious grounds of public policy
      [49-50].

8.    The respondent's grounds of appeal make general submissions,  and  are
      not clearly particularised, but the  following  three  points  can  be
      discerned.

      (i)   The judge failed to give sufficient weight to the length of  the
           sentence. The respondent asserts that the appellant did not take
           responsibility for the offence and  there  was  no  evidence  of
           remorse.

      (ii)  The appellant was assessed to pose  a  medium  risk  of  causing
           serious harm to the public. The judge  failed  to  consider  the
           fact that past conduct is a "key assessment and  carries  weight
           to future risk". The judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  to
           explain why the risk  of  reoffending  was  low  and  failed  to
           consider the seriousness of  the  consequences  of  reoffending:
           Kamki v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1715 referred.


      (iii) The appellant's immigration history, including the use of  false
           documents  and  absconding  were  also  "indicative  of  adverse
           conduct" which was relevant to the  assessment  of  whether  the
           appellant posed a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
           threat.  The  judge   erred   in   only   considering   criminal
           convictions.

Decision and reasons

9.    The grounds have no merit and fail to disclose any errors of law  that
      would have made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

10.   With reference to the first point, the judge  clearly  considered  the
      length of the sentence and made specific reference to  Schedule  1  of
      the EEA Regulations 2016 [34]. The key assessment under  European  law
      was whether, at the date of the hearing, the appellant  represented  a
      genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
      fundamental interests  of  society.  Article  27(3)  of  the  Citizens
      Directive makes clear that justifications that are isolated  from  the
      particulars of the case or that  rely  on  considerations  of  general
      prevention shall not be accepted.

11.   In so far as paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
      purports to make a general assertion that the longer the sentence  the
      greater is the  likelihood  that  the  person  represents  a  genuine,
      present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat,  the  statement  outlines
      Secretary of State's position. A judge is required to have  regard  to
      this statement, but as a general principle, it is not determinative of
      the individual assessment of risk  that  the  judge  was  required  to
      undertake. The length of the sentence  and  any  previous  history  of
      criminal convictions might be relevant to  that  assessment,  but  the
      focus of the assessment  under  European  law  is  on  the  facts  and
      evidence relating to the individual concerned.

12.   The judge considered the length of the sentence  and  recognised  that
      it was a serious offence. However, she was  obliged  to  consider  the
      professional risk assessments relating to  this  particular  case.  Mr
      Singh struggled to point to any evidence to support the assertion made
      at paragraph 27 of the  decision  letter  that  the  OASys  assessment
      concluded that the appellant "posed a medium risk of serious  harm  to
      the  public".  The  information  contained  in  the  truncated   OASys
      assessment does not appear  to  make  any  such  statement.  Mr  Singh
      referred to copy  of  email  correspondence  dated  01  November  2018
      between a case owner at the Criminal Casework  Team  and  an  Offender
      Manager at the National Probation Service (NPS), which stated:

           "There  is  only  a  basis  OASys  assessment   which   is   the
           responsibility of HMPS to complete  whilst  he  is  in  custody.
           Given the offence of Possession of class A [drug] with intent to
           supply his risk of harm to the public would be considered  at  a
           medium level - there are  identifiable  indicators  of  risk  of
           serious harm. The offender has the potential  to  cause  serious
           harm but is unlikely to do  so  unless  there  is  a  change  in
           circumstances such as a return to  previous  lifestyle  of  drug
           dealing. He has  also  been  assessed  at  a  low  risk  of  re-
           conviction."

13.   By the time the judge heard the appeal the  NPS  risk  assessment  had
      changed. The judge was required to consider the most  recent  evidence
      relating to the risk the appellant was likely  to  represent.  At  the
      date of the hearing, the judge considered evidence from the NPS  which
      showed that, despite the length of the  sentence,  the  appellant  now
      represented a  'low'  risk  of  serious  harm  and  a  'low'  risk  of
      reoffending. The assessment was supported by the  expert  evidence  of
      Lisa Davies, a Consultant  Forensic  Psychologist.  The  Secretary  of
      State's reliance on an  earlier  risk  assessment  is  inaccurate  and
      unsustainable. It is not arguable that the judge erred in  considering
      the most recent evidence, which showed a  reduction  in  the  risk  of
      serious harm to 'low'. It matters  not  that  the  consequences  of  a
      similar offence would, in general terms, be serious if  the  appellant
      had been assessed as only representing a 'low' risk of serious harm or
      of reconviction.

14.   The third point is equally weak. The issue  of  the  appellant's  past
      illegal entry into the UK using a false document was not raised  as  a
      reason that might be relevant to the assessment of current risk in the
      decision letter. Nor is there any evidence  to  suggest  that  it  was
      argued at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. At the  hearing,
      Mr Singh sought to expand this point to include an argument  that  the
      judge failed to take into account the previous findings of the  First-
      tier Tribunal in 2017 with reference to the Devaseelan principles. The
      point has no merit. First, it is distinct from the  general  assertion
      made in the  grounds  and  should  have  been  particularised  if  the
      Secretary of State intended to rely on it. No application was made  to
      amend the grounds and permission has not been  granted  to  argue  it.
      Second, the First-tier Tribunal in 2017 did not have  the  benefit  of
      the professional risk assessments that were available  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal in 2019. It would have been open to the  judge  to  make
      the findings she did regardless of the findings made in 2017.

15.   Past conduct might inform an  assessment  of  likely  future  conduct.
      However, this case involved a single albeit very  serious  conviction.
      The sentencing  judge  noted  that  this  was  the  appellant's  first
      conviction. There was no evidence to suggest a pattern of  convictions
      for similar offences. The OASys report made clear that the offence was
      financially motivated. There was no evidence to suggest  that  it  was
      motivated by an addiction to drugs as claimed in the decision  letter.
      Removal can only  be  justified  under  European  law  if  the  person
      represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  one
      of the fundamental interests of society. It is understandable that the
      Secretary of State  disagrees  with  the  decision,  but  the  judge's
      findings were unarguable  open  to  her  on  the  evidence  given  the
      professional  risk  assessments  of  the  probation  service  and  the
      consultant forensic psychologist.

16.         I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  did  not
      involve the making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  shall
      stand.

DIRECTION

17.   At the hearing, Mr Fripp indicated that he  wanted  to  apply  for  an
    order for costs based on the unreasonable behaviour of the Secretary of
    State in bringing this appeal. As  indicated  by  my  preliminary  view
    given at the hearing (subject to more detailed argument), the appellant
    might  want  to  consider  the  additional  costs  of  making  such  an
    application, the fact that permission was granted to argue the case and
    the difference between weak grounds of appeal and unreasonable conduct.
    If the appellant still wishes to make an application, it must  be  done
    in writing and on notice to the Secretary of State.

       i) If the appellant still wishes to make an application for costs it
          should be served in writing within seven days of  the  date  this
          decision is sent.

      ii) If the appellant makes an application for costs, the Secretary of
          State shall serve a reply within  seven  days  of  the  date  the
          application is made.

     iii) The Upper Tribunal will determine any application on  the  papers
          thereafter.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand
Signed   [pic]   Date 04 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
