
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00357/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 June 2019                        |       On 25 June 2019                |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THORNTON DBE (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER
                                  TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Arturas Vasiljevas
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant/ Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr N
                 Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Tilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference we shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant
    as he was before the First-tier Tribunal throughout this decision. This
    is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-Tier Tribunal promulgated on 08 March 2019 allowing the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    issue a deportation order pursuant to Regulation 23(6)(b) Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016, following a lengthy history
    of criminal convictions.
 2. The Appellant is a Lithuanian citizen. His date of birth is 19 March
    1988.

 3. We need only summarise the Appellant's immigration history for the
    purposes of this decision. His parents arrived in the UK in 2002 and he
    was granted leave to remain in the UK as a dependent until December
    2006. In 2004, Lithuania acceded to EU membership.

 4. The Appellant's criminal history, very much distilled, is that between
    2006 and 2017, he accumulated 11 convictions for motoring offences and
    violent crime.   Letters were twice sent on behalf of the Secretary of
    State to the Appellant on 01 June 2007 and 24 March 2014 referring to
    his criminality and warning him about the risk of deportation.

 5. On 06 October 2017, the Appellant was convicted of making false
    representations to obtain a driving licence and sentenced to 15 months
    imprisonment. In her sentencing remarks, the Sentencing Judge stated as
    follows:


         "I am afraid the time has come, when your actions have tipped over
         the balance. This was a very clever fraudulent set of documents and
         I nurse the virtual certainty, that the driving licence was so that
         you could get behind the wheel of a car again and not be caught for
         driving whilst disqualified..."


 6. The Secretary of State subsequently served the deportation order dated
    12 May 2018, which the Appellant successfully challenged before the
    First- Tier Tribunal. Permission was granted by DUTJ Mandalia on 2 May
    2019 on a narrow issue only; that it was arguable that the Judge did
    not have sufficient regard to the OASys assessment. The matter comes
    before us to decide whether the FTT decision contains a material error
    of law.

The legal framework

 7. The deportation of EEA nationals is subject to the regime set out in
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('The EEA
    Regulations') which were made under section 2 of the European
    Communities Act 1972 by way of implementation of Directive 2004/38 on
    the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and
    reside freely within the territory of Member States.   The Directive
    sets conditions that must be satisfied before a Member State can
    restrict the rights of free movement and residence provided for by EU
    law.

 8. Pursuant to Regulation 23(6)(b) the Secretary of State may deport an
    EEA national from the UK where it is decided that the person's removal
    is justified on the grounds of public policy. The relevant section of
    Regulation 23 is as follows:


             "(6)     Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an EEA national
             who has entered the United Kingdom or the family member of
             such a national who has entered the United Kingdom may be
             removed if -


               a) that person does not have or ceases to have a right to
                  reside under these Regulations;


                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public
                  security or public health in accordance with Regulation
                  27; or


                  (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
                  removal is justified on grounds of misuse of rights under
                  Regulation 26(3)."


 9. Any such deportation is required to be in accordance with Regulation 27
    which provides that an EEA National who has a right of permanent
    residence in the UK may only be deported on 'serious grounds' of public
    policy and an EEA national who has resided in the UK for a continuous
    period of at least 10 years prior to the deportation decision may only
    be deported on 'imperative grounds' of public security. In this case,
    the Secretary of State took the view that neither of these provisions
    for enhanced protection applied because of the spells of imprisonment
    and this has not been challenged.

10. Accordingly, Regulation 27(5) is the applicable provision. It provides:


         "The public policy and public security requirements of the United
         Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by these
         Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-


          a) The decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;


          b) The decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;


          c) The personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
             fundamental interests of society, taking into account past
             conduct of the person and that the threat does not need to be
             imminent;


          d) Matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify
             the decision;


          e) A person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
             justify the decision;


          f) The decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in the
             absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person."


11. Regulation 27(6) provides:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
         and public security in relation to a person ('P') who is resident
         in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take account of
         considerations such as the age, state of health, family and
         economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin."

12. The deportation regime for EEA nationals is separate from that for non-
    EEA nationals. The following cases consider the regime with respect to
    the predecessor 2006 Regulations.  However Mr Bradshaw, on behalf of
    the Appellant, submitted that the same approach should apply under the
    2016 Regulations and this was not disputed by Mr Bramble:


         "in an EEA case, governed by the 2006 Regulations and reflecting
         the requirements of EU law, a decision to remove had to be based
         exclusively on the personal conduct of the person concerned; that
         conduct had to represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
         society; and in the case of a person resident in the United
         Kingdom, a range of individual considerations had to be taken into
         account before the decision was taken" (R)(Connell) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1329


13. In Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294
    (IAC), it was confirmed that the burden of proving that a person
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society under Regulation 21(5)(c)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 rests on
    the Secretary of State, on the balance of probabilities.

14. In MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC), the
    Tribunal confirmed that:


         "It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned is
         found to represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
         threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society
         (Regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider whether
         the decision is proportionate, taking into account all the
         considerations identified in Regulation 21(5)-(6)."



The decision of the FTT

15. The Judge set out the Appellant's immigration and offending history and
    the Secretary of State's decision to deport before turning to the
    Appellant's evidence. He heard evidence from the Appellant, his
    partner, his mother, his cousin and his aunt. The witnesses were
    questioned on behalf of the Secretary of State.   The Judge began his
    reasoning as follows:


         "After considering all the evidence before me I have been troubled
         with the issue as to whether the appellant posed a present risk.  I
         would have to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
         respondent had established that the appellant by reason of the
         various elements of his past conduct identified above, considered
         individually or as a whole, represented a genuine, present and
         sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
         interests of the United Kingdom society.   If I were satisfied on
         the balance of probabilities that the appellant represented a
         present threat I would have no hesitation dismissing this appeal
         because the appellant's criminal record is appalling" [85].


16.  The Judge recounted the Appellant's convictions before continuing:


             "85   .... The question I have to ask is whether the appellant
             is sincere in his intention never to reoffend and has overcome
             his problems with alcohol following his release from
             detention, the time when he did not have access to alcohol.


             86   I was impressed with the evidence of his partner his
             mother and in particular his aunt who obviously thinks highly
             of the appellant who has treated her kindly, giving up his
             time to decorate her flat in circumstances where she had no
             money to pay for decorators. There is obviously a good side to
             the appellant that could come to the fore if he was allowed to
             rehabilitate in the United Kingdom.


             87   I remind myself that under the EEA regulations 2016 the
             decisions of the court must not be solely based on the
             appellant's previous convictions. These are to be taken into
             account in assessing future risk. On the face of the
             appellant's criminal record the record itself does not augur
             well for the future: but against that I have the evidence that
             the appellant is a changed man. This is finely balanced. I
             find I can just tip this the appellant's way to enable the
             appellant to rehabilitate in the United Kingdom to keep his
             family together. However, I emphasise that this decision
             should not be taken as an insurance policy to prevent the
             appellant from being deported if he reoffended again. If his
             offending behaviour continued I cannot see that the appellant
             would have any argument against a further deportation decision
             made under the EEA regulations 2016, regardless of the
             appellant's family circumstances."

Conclusions

17. The Secretary of State submitted that the Judge's reasons did not refer
    to the OASys assessment which concluded that the likelihood of
    reoffending was assessed at 47% in year 1, increasing to 65% and that
    the Appellant posed a medium risk of harm to the public. The Tribunal's
    failure to have regard to the assessment in determining whether the
    Appellant posed a present risk in an appeal that was finely balanced
    was such that the Judge failed to have sufficient regard to material
    evidence that was capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

18. In his oral submissions before us, Mr Bramble, on behalf of the
    Secretary of State also contended that the Judge failed to have regard
    to Schedule I of the Regulations, contrary to the requirement of
    Regulation 27(8).

19. We are not persuaded that the Judge fell into error.   His reasons are
    succinct but not unlawful.   The Judge begins his reasoning by asking
    himself the key question, given the legal framework and the facts
    before him, of whether the Appellant presents a genuine, present and
    sufficiently serious threat (Reg 27 (5) (c).  His analysis acknowledges
    the history of criminality and he gives careful and cogent reasons as
    to why he considered that the threat posed by the Appellant was not
    present.  The Judge heard evidence from the witnesses, including the
    Appellant, his partner, his mother and particularly his aunt (paragraph
    86). He was impressed with their evidence.

20. We are not persuaded that the Judge failed to consider the OASys
    assessment. In detailing the evidence before him and submissions he
    refers to the OASys assessment at paragraphs 45, 73, 74, 78 and 81 of
    his judgment. At paragraph 80 he refers to the skeleton argument
    produced by Mr Bradshaw on behalf of the Appellant, which considers the
    OASys assessment. Both representatives made submissions on the OASYs
    assessment. Moreover, whilst the Judge did not expressly refer to OASys
    assessment in his reasons, on a proper reading of the decision as a
    whole, we find that the question whether the Appellant would reoffend
    was clearly at the centre of the Judge's analysis.


21. We note that the Secretary of State does not challenge the Judge's
    direction at paragraph 87 that under the EEA Regulations his decision
    must not be based solely on the criminal convictions. A different
    approach to that taken by the Judge would, in any event, be contrary to
    the EEA Regulations.

22. The Judge was aware of the extent of the Appellant's criminality and
    the OASys assessment. The effect of the Judge's reasoning is that he
    departed from the assessment of the probation officer in the OASys
    report. The weight to be attached to the assessment was a matter for
    the Judge. The appeal took place almost a year after the OASys
    assessment. The Judge had the benefit of oral evidence from the
    Appellant and family members.  She found the witnesses to be credible.
    What weight to attach to that evidence was a matter for the Judge. It
    was wholly open to the Judge to conclude that the Appellant had turned
    a corner. The finding is grounded in the evidence and adequately
    reasoned.

23. There is no legal authority before us to support a proposition that an
    OASys assessment is binding on a Judge.  The case of MA (Pakistan)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 163 is relied on by the Secretary of State, in
    particular the comment by Elias LJ that:


         "..... what may be an assessment of low risk for the purposes of
         criminal sentencing is not necessarily to be considered a low risk
         when looking at the future behaviour of this applicant. A risk of
         17% re-offending over a 2-year period is not, in my judgment, in
         the context of a deportation case a matter which can be treated as
         insignificant. It is a good reason for supporting a decision to
         deport" [19]


24. This was said in the context of the Upper Tribunal departing, in that
    case, from the assessment and concluding that there was a serious risk
    of the commission of further offences.

25. It seems to us that if any proposition can be said emerge from the MA
    decision as to the approach to an OASys report, the case may be said to
    establish that a Tribunal can depart from the conclusions in an OASys
    assessment providing there is a proper analysis of the evidence and
    adequate reasons are given. The Judge in this case did both.

26. Furthermore, we are not persuaded that the absence of reference to
    Schedule I of the Regulations amounts to an error. Paragraph 3 of
    Schedule I provides that:


         "Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA national has
         received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the more numerous the convictions, the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present and sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interest of society."


27. This issue was not raised in the Secretary of State's grounds. In any
    event, we are not satisfied that the judge failed to take into account
    paragraph 3 of Schedule 1, the content of which is, in our view,
    axiomatic. The Judge was wholly aware of the Appellant's history of
    offending. The task before the Judge was to assess risk at the time of
    the appeal taking into account any changes since the expulsion
    decision. The Judge evaluated risk after proper consideration of the
    evidence. The question whether the Appellant presented a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat was at the heart of the Judge's
    reasoning. In our view the grounds of challenge amount to a
    disagreement with the sustainable findings of the Tribunal. The Judge
    properly directed herself and applied the law. In the absence of
    irrationality, which is not raised by the Secretary of State as a
    ground of appeal, the appeal falls to be dismissed.

Notice of decision

28. The Secretary of State's appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
    The First-Tier decision allowing the Appellant's appeal is to stand.




Signed        The Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton DBE       Date 20 June 2019




