
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00359/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2014                          |On 6 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR KAG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J A D Dinh of Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge Canavan, promulgated on  22  September  2014
    whereby she allowed the appellant's appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to make a deportation order against him under  Section
    32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") following his conviction
    for robbery in 2010.  In respect of that conviction he was sentenced to
    three years' custody.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.
    On this appeal the Secretary of State asserts that the  judge  did  not
    properly  balance  the  public   interest   against   the   appellant's
    circumstances and so fell into material  error  of  law.   Reliance  is
    placed on SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550, in particular at paragraph 41.

3.   The facts can be shortly summarised.  The appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Trinidad and Tobago whose date of birth is 25 August  1983.   He  first
    entered the United Kingdom in 2008 with entry clearance as  a  visitor.
    He returned to Trinidad and Tobago in February  2009  before  his  visa
    expired.  He then  came  back  in  April  2009  and  stayed  here  with
    clearance as a visitor.  He went on to knowingly overstay  his  visitor
    visa.  He met his wife S in Trinidad in 2004.  They had a  relationship
    on and off between 2006 and 2009.  Around  this  time  he  also  had  a
    relationship with another woman in the United Kingdom with whom he  had
    a  child  in  April  2010  (J).   The  appellant  is  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with this woman but he does have regular contact  with  J.
    The appellant has lived with S and her two  children  in  this  country
    since December 2009.  S had a 15 year old daughter and a ten  year  old
    son, M.  She is a British-born citizen as are  the  three  children  to
    whom we have just referred.  The appellant himself also has a  10  year
    old son, N, who lives with his mother in Trinidad.  The appellant and S
    married in June 2013.  As at August 2014 S was pregnant with his child.

4.   In 2010, as we have recorded, the appellant was convicted  of  robbery.
    On 6 January 2011 he  was  sentenced  to  three  years'  custody.   The
    offence had the aggravating feature of being a group attack on a single
    lone man leading to relatively serious injuries  on  the  victim.   The
    sentencing judge when passing sentence commented that he did not  think
    that his continued presence in this country was  to  the  public  good.
    The appellant was released on immigration bail and licence on 21  March
    2012 since which time he has not reoffended.  He has  also  since  then
    been living with S and her children as well as seeing J  on  a  regular
    basis.

5.   In the meantime on 4 February 2011 the Secretary of State notified  the
    appellant of his liability to deportation and asked him to  complete  a
    questionnaire.  There were various communications between the Secretary
    of State and the appellant's lawyers in 2011.   It  was  not  until  30
    January 2014 that the Secretary of State signed  a  deportation  order.
    The reasons given were that the appellant's  removal  would  amount  to
    interference with family life and it might not be in the best interests
    of the children but it was deportation to be ordered in accordance with
    the legitimate aim of the prevention of disorder  and  crime.   Neither
    Immigration Rules 399 or 399A applied.   No  exceptional  circumstances
    existed.  The appellant had had children and married in full  knowledge
    that he had no leave at the time to remain.  Although he had  committed
    only one offence, it was a serious offence.

6.   In her judgment the judge set out the relevant legal framework, see  in
    particular at paragraphs 14 to 18 of the judgment.

7.   Section 32(5) of the Borders Act 2007  states  that  the  Secretary  of
    State must make a deportation order in relation to a  foreign  criminal
    who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  twelve
    months subject to any of the exceptions set out in Section  33  of  the
    Act.  Section 33(2) provides an exception to deportation where  removal
    of the foreign criminal in  pursuance  of  a  deportation  order  would
    breach the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
    would  be  incompatible  with  his  rights  under  the   Human   Rights
    Convention.  Section 32(4) of the Act demonstrates that Parliament  has
    placed special weight on the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  as  a
    matter that is conducive to the public  good.   Even  if  an  exception
    applies the general principle is still deemed to  apply,  see  (Section
    33(7)).   Paragraph  397  of  the  Immigration  Rules  states  that   a
    deportation order will not be made if the person's removal pursuant  to
    the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations under  the  Refugee
    Convention or  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   If  an  appellant  was
    convicted of an offence for which he was sentenced to a period of  less
    than four years but at least twelve  months  he  may  be  eligible  for
    consideration under of  the  Article  8  exceptions  contained  in  the
    Immigration Rules in paragraph  399(a),  (parental  relationship),  and
    399(b), (partner) or paragraph 399A, (private life).

8.   As the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  16  of  her  judgment,  if  the
    appellant does not satisfy the  requirements  of  those  exceptions  it
    would only be in "exceptional circumstances" that the  public  interest
    in deportation would be outweighed by other factors.  The judge went on
    to refer to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  where
    it was found that the Rules provided a complete code to the  assessment
    of Article 8 in deportation  cases,  and  a  reference  to  exceptional
    circumstances  was  made.   Nevertheless   it   should   still   be   a
    proportionality exercise in accordance with Strasbourg principles.  All
    factors relevant to the assessment of proportionality are to  be  taken
    into account and weighed in the balance although there would still need
    to be very compelling  reasons  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

9.   In paragraph 37 of her judgment the judge  expanded  her  consideration
    of the relevant tests to include consideration  of  "unduly  harsh"  as
    well as "exceptional circumstances" or "very compelling circumstances".

10.  At the hearing below the appellant and his wife attended and both  gave
    evidence in English.  At the conclusion of the hearing and the evidence
    in giving her ruling, having  set  out  the  relevant  law,  the  judge
    identified  the  best  interests  of  the   children   as   a   primary
    consideration.  Although considerations relating to the best  interests
    of the child form part of the overall balancing exercise  the  decision
    in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
    UKSC 4 makes it clear that there is a distinct assessment to be made in
    this regard without reference to public policy considerations  such  as
    immigration control.  That is an exercise which the judge carried  out.
    Taking into account  relevant  statutory  guidance  and  after  careful
    consideration of the facts and the evidence she concluded that  it  was
    in J's best interests to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  for  the
    appellant to remain here with him in order to provide him with  ongoing
    practical and emotional support.   She  rejected  the  submission  that
    modern channels of communication from abroad would  be  adequate.   She
    found that whilst not caring for J on a day-to-day basis the  appellant
    was present in J's life and an important influence  as  a  father.   He
    spent time with J at weekends and on the holidays and his mother wished
    for the appellant to be there for J whilst he grows up.

12.  The judge also found that, whilst the case for  A  and  M  was  not  so
    strong, the appellant was now an integral part of  the  family  and  it
    would be in their best interests too for him to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom to provide them with de facto parental support.  There  was  of
    course also the unborn child to consider in whose  interests  it  would
    normally be for both parents to be involved.

13.  The judge then went on to consider whether the necessary  circumstances
    existed that would show that the public  interest  in  deportation  was
    outweighed under paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  Again,  in  a
    full and careful reasoned judgment, she concluded that they did.

14.  An appeal to this Tribunal only relies  on  the  basis  of  a  material
    error of law.  It was common ground below  and  remains  common  ground
    here that paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not
    apply.  It would therefore only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  as
    considered and explained by the  judge  in  paragraphs  35  and  37  in
    particular that the public interest in deportation would be  outweighed
    by other factors.

 15. Despite the careful submissions of Mr Kandola for  the  respondent  we
      are not persuaded that any material error of law  exists.   The  judge
      identified the correct legal principles.  She paid due regard  to  the
      public interest in maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration
      control and to the public interest in deporting foreign  criminal  for
      the prevention  of  disorder  and  crime.   She  did  acknowledge  the
      significant weight given by Parliament to this public  interest  :  we
      refer in particular to paragraphs  30  to  35  of  her  judgment.   At
      paragraph 35 she went out of her way to consider in  some  detail  the
      nature of the appellant's offending and the risk of  his  reoffending.
      Against this background she was in our judgment entitled to take  into
      account the fact that the appellant speaks English and is  capable  of
      finding work and earning a legitimate income to support his family and
      the fact that he had known his future wife for some  time  before  his
      immigration  status  became  precarious.   Her  finding  that,  whilst
      serious, the robbery offence was not at the most serious  end  of  the
      scale of offence was in our judgment one open to her.   The  appellant
      was otherwise of good character.  He had been  released  on  bail  for
      over two years and not reoffended.  He had settled  into  family  life
      with his wife and children and presented a low  risk  of  reoffending.
      Finally, she was entitled to take into account her  findings  that  it
      was in the best interests  of  the  children,  a  primary  though  not
      paramount consideration, for the appellant to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom to continue to be involved closely in their upbringing.

  16. We are not persuaded that her  decision,  having  considered  all  the
      circumstances of the case, that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
      appellant's partner and children to be separated on a long-term  basis
      can be impugned.  This was a difficult balancing  exercise  which  the
      judge carried out by reference to the correct principles  and  on  the
      basis of findings of fact that she was entitled to make.


  17. We do not find any error of law in  her  conclusion  that  deportation
      would amount to a disproportionate interference into his  family  life
      under Article 8 of the European Convention.  In short, this was in our
      judgment an adequate ruling.

Decision

The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision allowing the appeal shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Carr






