
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 8th March 2016                         |on 31st March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     T M

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Miss L Irvine, Advocate; Drummond Miller Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as above, but for consistency and ease of reference the
    rest of this decision refers to them as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. An anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  is
    confirmed below.

 3. In his decision promulgated on 21st December 2015  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  D'Ambrosio  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  "insofar  as  the
    appellant seeks protection against breach of his Article 3 and 8 rights
    related to his private life (health issues  including risk of suicide)"
    (paragraph 145(3)), and dismissed it on other grounds.

 4. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

           1. ... when considering the risk of suicide at paragraphs 132  to
             141  the  judge  failed  to  address  the  six  considerations
             expressed at paragraphs 26 to 31 in J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ
             629 (the passage is quoted in the grounds).

           2. The judge was directed to ... J ... by the Presenting Officer,
             specifically paragraphs 30 and  31.   However  the  judge  has
             failed to  make  any  findings  whether  there  are  effective
             mechanisms in both the UK and Sri Lanka which would reduce the
             risk of suicide and his failure to do so is a misdirection  in
             law.

           3. ... this is especially pertinent given the  finding  that  the
             appellant's fear is not well-founded and at paragraphs 123 and
             124 regarding the availability of treatment in Sri  Lanka  and
             the appellant's ability to socially reintegrate.

 5. Mrs Saddiq firstly drew attention to paragraphs 124 to 127 of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision:-

         124. The Appellant's depression is moderate.   His  depression  and
             PTSD symptoms have been kept under reasonable control by drugs
             ... mentioned in the medical reports.  There  is  no  reliable
             evidence ... that  such  drugs  are  very  difficult  or  very
             expensive to obtain in Sri Lanka.  He should be able to obtain
             them via a GP in Colombo, where he normally lived since he was
             about 7 years old.  His depression and PTSD symptoms  are  not
             in themselves life threatening.

           125.    If  he  were  deported  ...  the  medicines  and  medical
             treatment available ... would not be  so  inadequate  that  he
             would suffer the equivalent of Article 3 ill-treatment.

           126.   Provided there is not a real  risk  that  he  will  commit
             suicide (which I later consider) the appellant's general state
             of health related to his depression and PTSD symptoms  is  not
             of itself life threatening.

 6. (The emphasis is in the original.)   The  judge  then  returns  to  the
    matter:-

         136. I have considered the suicide claim very carefully ... I  have
             reasonable cause to believe that there is a real risk that the
             appellant will commit suicide rather than be deported  to  Sri
             Lanka ... for the following reasons.

 7. The judge goes on to consider a consultant psychiatrist's report, dated
    12th November 2015, describing frequent suicidal  thoughts,  despite  a
    year of weekly psychological therapy  and  full  therapeutic  doses  of
    antidepressants.  The prognosis is that symptoms will continue and that
    absent regular skilled psychological and drug treatment his  depression
    symptoms would considerably worsen.  Paragraph 31 of  the  report  says
    the risk of suicide would be "significantly increased if he was  to  be
    removed to Sri Lanka.  This  risk  of  suicide  would  be  very  likely
    increased from the time he received any news of removal to Sri Lanka".

 8. The judge next refers to two  clinical  letters  from  the  appellant's
    psychiatrist, dated 15th September 2014 and 26th May  2015,  regarding
    the appellant's fragile psychological state, and the clarity and  logic
    of his willingness to take his own life.  A further medico legal report
    is to similar effect.

 9. The judge then says:

        140.  Between them, those three medical  sources  show  that  their
        authors (all experienced and competent professionals) consider that
        the appellant has little motivation to live.  His  paternal  family
        and his close friend ... have all disappeared and may be  dead  ...
        Three times he was kidnapped because he was  wrongly  suspected  of
        being a Tamil separatist ... on each occasion he suffered agonising
        torture.  Whatever this tribunal may decide about  risk  of  future
        torture ... he is not prepared to take any  such  risk.   He  would
        prefer to die...he has told [his psychiatrist] that he has ... made
        plans for that eventuality.

        141.  ... the very severe adverse effects which his deportation  is
        likely  to  cause...(intended  suicide)  and  his   mental   health
        generally are sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  ...  his
        deportation will breach his article  8  rights  to  the  article  3
        standard because it will cause a real risk of suicide.

10. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the two passages are self-contradictory,  and
    that the judge artificially compartmentalised the issues.  Having found
    the  appellant's  depression  and  PTSD  not  to   be   of   sufficient
    seriousness, he went wrong on the specific point of suicidal risk.   He
    had found that the appellant  had  only  a  moderate  and  controllable
    illness, not presenting a threat to  his  life,  and  that  drugs  were
    available.  Applying J, the judge should have found that there  was  no
    suicide risk and the appeal should have failed.

11. A rule 24 response for the appellant argues that  effective  mechanisms
    for treatment cannot be limited to the  availability  of  drugs  alone.
    Country guidance, GJ and others [2013] UKUT 00319, shows that there  is
    no appropriate care for the mentally ill in Sri Lanka.   The  appellant
    requires more than pharmacological treatment.  The evidence  about  his
    intentions was clear and the judge was entitled to accept it.

12. The rule 24 response makes a  second  argument.   The  judge  finds  at
    paragraph 142 that the appeal is to be allowed under Article 8,  framed
    separately from the outcome at paragraph 143 by reference to Articles 3
    and 8 private life health and suicide issues.  The respondent  has  not
    challenged the Article 8 finding, and that alone is a reason to dismiss
    the appeal to the UT.

13. In her submissions Miss Irvine took the latter point first.   She  said
    it was clear from the formulation of the Secretary of  State's  grounds
    that the challenge went only to the Article 3 and not to the Article  8
    conclusion.

14. Miss Irvine said that the judge's findings were not self-contradictory.
     The first passage could not be read separately so as to show that  the
    second could not stand.  It was subject to  the  condition  emphasised.
    The judge went on to reason out his conclusion that although there  was
    no objective justification for the appellant's fears of torture and ill-
    treatment on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  those  fears  were  subjectively
    genuine.  The judge had been referred not only to J but  also  to  Y  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362, [2010] INLR 178.  Once it was  accepted  that
    the appellant held a genuine subjective fear, the  judge's  conclusions
    naturally followed.  The SSHD's grounds complained of failure to  refer
    to mechanisms available in Sri Lanka, but the  evidence  about  medical
    treatment in Sri Lanka, including that set out in the country guidance,
    was such that the same result must have been reached.

15. Mrs Saddiq in response said that the thrust of the SSHD's  grounds  was
    clearly intended to cover also the separate conclusion under Article 8.
     The grounds should be understood as broad enough to  incorporate  that
    challenge.  Alternatively, she sought permission to amend.  She adhered
    to her submission that the  passages  in  the  determination  were  not
    capable of being reconciled.  She accepted that  the  country  guidance
    regarding dearth of facilities in Sri Lanka was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  However, she pointed out that J  requires  consideration  of
    the effectiveness of mechanisms both in the UK and in Sri  Lanka.   The
    country guidance did not go so far as to justify the  present  outcome.
    This appellant's circumstances were different from those of  GJ.   Each
    case turned on its own facts, so there was material inadequacy  in  the
    determination.

16. As this was a developing debate, I permitted Miss Irvine another reply.
     She said that it was too late now to seek  to  construct  cases  about
    availability of care mechanisms in the UK or in Sri Lanka.  Even if  it
    were to be accepted that the respondent  has  adequate  mechanisms  for
    managing suicide risks through the removal process, that removal has to
    take place at some point.  If there is a risk in Sri Lanka,  management
    in the UK is not an answer.  There was a  clear  absence  of  any  such
    mechanism in Sri Lanka.

17. I reserved my determination.

18. The point for the appellant about the outcome on Article 8 grounds only
    is shrewdly taken, but I think  it  is  over-acute.   The  decision  at
    paragraph  142  in  the  appellant's  favour  on  Article  8  does  not
    explicitly say the reason for which that outcome is reached, but it  is
    plain enough that it depends on the suicide risk which is the  explicit
    reason for allowing the appeal under Articles  3  and  8  in  the  next
    paragraph; and compare the summing  up  of  the  decisions  reached  at
    paragraph 145.  I do not think there is any basis on which the  Article
    8 outcome could stand separately.   The  respondent's  attack  is  wide
    enough to present an overall challenge.

19. Alternatively, I would have permitted amendment to the grounds to state
    that they are directed also against the outcome so far as expressed  in
    terms of Article 8 alone at paragraph 142.

20. I do not uphold the SSHD's analysis that the passages in  the  decision
    at paragraphs 123 to 126 and at 136 to 141 are self-contradictory.  The
    judge has simply found that the appellant's mental  ill-health,  absent
    any risk of suicide, would not make out his case, and has then  reached
    conclusions on the specific issue on which the appeal turned.  There is
    nothing in the first passage which undermines the second.   The  second
    is based not on an artificial separation of the evidence but  on  close
    consideration of strong medical evidence from well qualified sources.

21. The judge did not go into  any  consideration  of  evidence  about  the
    mechanisms in the UK and in Sri Lanka to reduce suicide risk.  However,
    it does not appear that he was directed in submissions to any  evidence
    which might have led him to a different conclusion.  Although it may be
    assumed without enquiry that the respondent has  in  place  appropriate
    mechanisms to mange risk throughout the removal process,  the  evidence
    is that similar care is lacking in Sri Lanka.  As Miss Irvine said, the
    appellant must in the end, if deportation proceeds, be exposed to  that
    risk.

22. The SSHD's grounds and submissions do  not  disclose  any  error  which
    requires the determination of the First-tier Tribunal to be set  aside,
    and it shall stand.

23. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           [pic]


                           15 March 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
