
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00654/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd April 2013                             |On 6 June 2013               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              mr lina dia bavi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Duncan, Solicitor of Duncan, Moghul Solicitors
& Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo born  on
    26th November 1975.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on 27th April  2003.
     He claimed asylum, that claim was  refused  and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed on the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  an  untruthful  and
    unreliable  witness.   His  appeal  rights  became  exhausted  on  23rd
    February 2004.

3.   He did not leave the United Kingdom.  In June 2004 he  made  some  form
    of application or approach to the Home Office using  a  different  name
    and identity.  It was accepted in his oral evidence before the Tribunal
    that he used a false passport in 2004.  He said that he used it  for  a
    few months to obtain work until he was arrested and it was  taken  away
    from him.

4.   In 2006 he met his current partner who is a national of  Senegal.   She
    came to the United Kingdom with her child Oumar on 6th  December  2005.
    She was granted indefinite leave to remain on 16th November 2010.

5.   Although the appellant and Miss Ndongo started  their  relationship  in
    2006 they did not commence living  together  until  2009.   A  daughter
    Therese was born on 13th March 2007.  A daughter Miriam  was  born  2nd
    March 2008.  Blessing was born on 6th June 2010 and Ahmad born on  16th
    July 2012.

6.   In 2008 the appellant acquired a Belgian identification document  which
    he used to obtain employment.  He worked for a year.  He was discovered
    in July 2009 and was arrested and subsequently charged with  an  office
    possessing a false document and  making  dishonest  representations  in
    connection with his employment.

7.   On 17th February 2010 the appellant was sentenced to a total of  twelve
    months' imprisonment.

8.   A decision to deport the appellant  under  the  provisions  of  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 was made on 15th September 2012.

9.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway and Mr  Getlevog,  non-legal
    member on 1st November 2012.  His appeal was dismissed in all respects.

10.  The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision  contending  that
    it was made in error of law on the basis that it had given undue weight
    to irrelevant considerations and had failed to  make  findings  on  key
    issues.

11.  Leave to appeal was granted on that basis.

12.  Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that leave.

13.  Mr Duncan, who represents the appellant,  invited  my  attention  to  a
    bundle of documents prepared for the purposes of the appeal including a
    skeleton argument.

14.  In essence it is contended that the Tribunal focused unreasonably  upon
    the appellant's failed asylum claim and had failed to take into account
    the appellant's current record.   The  appellant  is  living  with  his
    family and partner and has not reoffended despite having been  released
    on bail on 9th September 2010 some 26 months before  the  hearing.   It
    noted that the appellant received credit for  pleading  guilty  at  the
    earliest opportunity and there  are  references  that  he  had  been  a
    worthwhile member of the community.  It was contended therefore that it
    was unreasonable of the Tribunal to find that the appellant will offend
    again.

15.  Further complaint is made as to the behaviour of the respondent in  two
    respects. The first being that she made an arbitrary  decision  not  to
    release the appellant upon  the  completion  of  his  sentence  thereby
    delaying  the  appellant's  release  by  five  months.   Further   that
    notwithstanding directions  requiring  the  production  of  presentence
    reports  and  parole  reports  and  other  documents  relating  to  the
    appellant's period of custody, these had not been presented.

16.  In essence, therefore, it is submitted that balancing the impact  which
    removal will have upon the five children  against  the  fact  that  the
    appellant only appeared on one occasion being  convicted  on  a  guilty
    plea, her decision to remove was disproportionate if not perverse.

17.  It is submitted that the approach of the  Upper  Tribunal  towards  the
    appellant's failed asylum claim and his use of false documents was,  in
    the circumstances, unreasonable and distorted the proper balance.

18.  Reliance was placed upon the decision of the Tribunal in MF, which  was
    a case of similar nature  and  way  the  appeal  was  allowed.   It  is
    submitted that the Tribunal ought in  all  the  circumstances  to  have
    followed MF rather than taken  the  draconian  step  of  upholding  the
    Secretary of State's decision to deport.

19.  Mr Jarvis, on behalf of  the  respondent  invited  my  attention  to  a
    number of authorities which he submitted clearly supported the approach
    taken by the Tribunal.  The starting point for any consideration  being
    that the offence itself was by Statute deemed to be  serious  and  that
    the Tribunal were indeed entitled to put that serious matter within the
    overall immigration context.  The Statute clearly  indicated  where  in
    the public scale of interest this offence  should  properly  fall.   He
    invited me to find  that  the  Tribunal  had  properly  considered  all
    relevant matters and that essentially the argument that was  before  me
    was less a matter of error of law but rather an argument  as  to  merit
    balance.  He invited me to find that there was error  of  law  in  this
    case.

20.  The determination is detailed and I so find a careful and a  structured
    one.

21.  In terms of the family  context  some  time  is  spent  in  considering
    whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's partner
    and children to return with him to the Congo.  That matter is  analysed
    at some considerable length.  It is apparent that the Tribunal  accepts
    that it would not be reasonable for the family to relocate.  Indeed for
    the purposes of the balancing exercise it was accepted that  they  were
    either British or were likely to acquire British status because of  the
    leave of the mother.

22.  At paragraph 59 in particular the Tribunal look  at  the  interests  of
    the five children.  It is the conclusion of the Tribunal that it was in
    their best interest to have their father in the United Kingdom, but  if
    he were deported, they would  nevertheless  continue  to  benefit  from
    their own status in the United Kingdom.  It was accepted  that  contact
    was maintained between the appellant and  his  partner  throughout  his
    period of imprisonment and that he fulfils the normal role of father to
    all his children, including Oumar - his  partner's  first  child.   The
    only further information that  would  seem  to  be  considered  was  in
    respect of Amin Blessing was born on 6th June 2010.  She would seem  to
    be receiving some medical treatment for burns which received  and  that
    will require some further plastic surgery.  She is now 2 years old.

23.  There was no other evidence as to  any  particular  emotional  need  or
    attachment other than those that would be reasonable to be expected  of
    children with their father.  There were no social  reports  as  to  any
    emotional or eventual trauma that  arose  during  the  absence  of  the
    appellant in custody  or  relating  to  any  proposed  removal  of  the
    appellant from the family.  No such features have been  highlighted  in
    the skeleton argument in any event.  That matter was specifically noted
    by the Tribunal at paragraph 52 of the decision.

24.  So far as the appellant's offending is concerned that was noted as  was
    the context  of  the  appellant's  general  immigration  history.   The
    appellant had accepted that he obtained a false passport  in  2004  and
    had used it to obtain employment.  Although he  was  not  charged  with
    that offence there seems to be no reason at all why that matter  should
    not be borne in  mind  by  the  Tribunal.   Essentially  the  appellant
    arrived illegally, had worked illegally and had used false documents in
    2004 and more particularly in 2008 resulting in his conviction.

25.  I find that it was open to the Tribunal also to bear in mind the  issue
    of a false claim for asylum, though perhaps not  the  most  significant
    feature.  Nevertheless it is to be borne in mind that  the  appellant's
    overall behaviour demonstrated a disregard for immigration  control  or
    Regulations, precisely the sort  of  conduct  which  would  merit  some
    response from the immigration authorities to secure his removal.

26.  In terms of the appellant's return to the Democratic Republic of  Congo
    the Tribunal also noted the absence  of  family  members  or  at  least
    contact with them.

27.  Looking at the factual matrix I can  find  nothing  suggestive  of  any
    misunderstanding of a material fact or an  exclusion  of  any  relevant
    fact within this proper context for consideration.

28.  Mr Duncan places  consideration  reliance  upon  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new Rules Nigeria) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC).
     This was a decision of the Tribunal to  give  a  guidance  as  to  the
    proper approach to be taken to deportation in  the  light  of  the  new
    Immigration Rules (HC 194) introduced on 9th  July  2012.   Essentially
    the two stage approach is still to be followed namely  a  consideration
    of the Immigration Rules themselves.  Secondly to consider  Article  8.
    It is to be noted that although the Rules themselves import the concept
    of "exceptional circumstances" that is not the  correct  criterion  for
    Article 8 which  remains  to  be  determined  as  has  been  judicially
    defined.  The Tribunal stressed that the new Rules do not furnish a new
    complete code for dealing with Article  8  claims  they  do  themselves
    leave considerable scope for individual assessment.

29.  Significantly however for the current purposes the Tribunal  in  MF  at
    paragraph 42 set out as follows:

         "42. There is, however, at least one important respect in which the
             new Rules  affect  the  second  stage  Article  8  assessment.
             Previously Judges' understanding of the weight  the  Secretary
             of State attaches to the public interest side of the Article 8
             balancing  exercise  had  largely  to  be  gleaned  from   the
             submissions of the Secretary of State in  leading  cases.   It
             has fallen very much to the judicial system to  give  it  form
             and content.  In deportation cases involving foreign criminals
             Section  32  of  the  2007  Act   gave   clear   Parliamentary
             expression to the particular importance the Secretary of State
             attached to their deportation ... now more generally,  greater
             specificity is given in the new Rules as to what circumstances
             are seen to attract the greatest  weight  in  respect  of  the
             public interest; the Secretary of State has now  herself  told
             us what factors she considers relevant and what weight at  the
             general level she attaches to them.   In  particular,  in  the
             context of deportation of foreign criminals, the new Rules set
             out thresholds of criminality (by reference to length of terms
             of imprisonment) so that the Article  8  private  life  claims
             brought by foreign criminals can only  succeed  (unless  there
             are exceptional circumstances) if they not only  have  certain
             periods of residence but can also show their  criminality  has
             fallen below these thresholds.


         43.  "That must and should properly inform our Article 8 assessment
             made in compliance with our Section 6  obligations  under  the
             HRA.  Whereas previously it has been open  to  Judges,  within
             certain limits, to reach their own view  of  what  the  public
             interest is and the weight to be attached to it, the scope for
             doing so is now more limited."

30.  The Tribunal went on at paragraph 48 to say as follows:

         "Thus in our view provisions of the new Rules dealing with  Article
         8 claims have two functions:


         (a)  they create new provisions which must be  given  legal  effect
             all that is left is a matter for the Tribunal  of  the  courts
             whether their application is contrary to a person's Article  8
             rights; and


         (b)  they operate to enhance judicial understanding of the  "public
             interest" side of the scales."

31.  The Tribunal in the case before me has adopted the two stage  approach.
     It considered paragraphs 398 and 399 as  to  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances which would arise such that the appellant and
    or the children would benefit from those Rules.  The Tribunal concluded
    that those Rules did not assist the appellant.

32.  The Tribunal went on to consider Article 8 and bore in  mind  what  was
    said in MF concerning the importance  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in the light of  those  Rules  indeed  in  the  light  of  the
    statutory framework in any event.  That is seen at paragraph 65 of  the
    determination.

33.  It has long been held that deportation of a foreign  criminal  reflects
    three facets of the  public  interest.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in  RU
    (Bangladesh) [2011] EWCA Civ 603  at  paragraph  33  highlighted  those
    matters by reference to OH (Serbia).  The facets as identified are:

         "(a) the risk of reoffending by the person concerned;


         (b)  the need to deter foreign nationals  from  committing  serious
             crimes by leading them to understand that whatever  the  other
             circumstances one consequence of them may be deportation;


         (c)   the  role  of  deportation  as  an  expression  of  society's
             revulsion at serious crimes and in building public  confidence
             in the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have  committed
             serious crimes."

34.  The Court of Appeal went on at  paragraph  34  to  recognise  that  the
    effect of Sections 32(1)-(3) of the UKBA must be that if a person meets
    the  conditions  which  bring  him  within  the   definition   "foreign
    criminal", then his deportation is deemed by Statute to be conducive to
    the public good.  As Parliament has stated that it is conducive to  the
    public good to deport "foreign criminals".  It is therefore not open to
    the person to argue that his deportation is not conducive to the public
    good, nor is it necessary for the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department to prove that it is.

35.  In the absence of the appellant coming  within  the  Immigration  Rules
    themselves the proper route is clearly one of Article 8  to  show  that
    removal would infringe the potential deportation  for  deportees'  ECHR
    rights and that it would be disproportionate in all  the  circumstances
    for that removal to take effect.

36.  In Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 the Grand  Chamber  highlighted  the
    importance to be attached to the specific circumstances in each case in
    matters particularly affecting  young  adults  relevant  considerations
    include;-

    -    the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
         appellant;


    -    the length of the appellant's stay in the country from which he or
         she is to be expelled;


    -     the  time  elapsed  since  the  offence  was  committed  and  the
         appellant's conduct during that period;


    -    the solidity of social, cultural and family  ties  with  the  host
         country with the country of destination.

37.  Generally speaking those have been considered by the Tribunal.

38.  The issue has been taken with the conclusion of the  Tribunal  that  in
    the  light  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history  the   risk   of
    reoffending cannot be excluded.  It is contended that little regard has
    been had to his lack of offending since  his  release.   It  is  to  be
    recognised in that connection that upon his release the appellant would
    have been subject to licence restrictions for a period in any event.

39.  However risk is only but one of  the  three  facets  that  fall  to  be
    considered.  Due consideration must be given to where the Secretary  of
    State considers that the public interest should lie.

40.  The  Tribunal  in  paragraph  66  came  to  the  conclusions  that  the
    appellant  had  embarked  upon  a  protracted   period   of   deception
    encompassing a false asylum claim, a false asylum appeal, remaining  in
    the UK unlawfully for a number of years and the use more than  once  of
    false  documents  to  obtain  illegitimate  employment.   That  was   a
    substantial package of troubling behaviour.  As I have indicated it  is
    not necessary for the Tribunal to embark upon  whether  that  behaviour
    came and met the threshold because under Statute  it  has  been  deemed
    that it did.

42.  In essence the  heart  of  the  appeal  lies  the  contention  that  in
    balancing the interests of five children and a partner on the one  hand
    and a one year sentence for false documents on the other it is perverse
    of the Tribunal to have come  to  the  conclusion  which  it  did  that
    removal was proportionate.

43.  In that connection reliance is placed upon the similarity of  facts  in
    MF and the fact that in that case the Tribunal allowed the appeal.   In
    that case the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  1998  as  an
    illegal entrant.  In 2009 he was convicted of handling stolen goods and
    possessing a false instrument for which he was  sentenced  to  eighteen
    months'  imprisonment.  Effectively  however  he  committed  all  those
    offences between late October  and  late  November  in  2005.   He  had
    obtained a certificate of approval to marry and had a daughter  born  a
    British citizen.

44.  It was a relevant consideration in that case  that  the  appellant  had
    committed the offence many years before.  It was also considered by the
    Tribunal in paragraph 80, that the Secretary of State had not  actively
    pursued the appellant's deportation earlier, which she could have  done
    if his asylum claim had been timeously processed.  There is a danger in
    seeking to make comparisons to fact specific cases.  The Tribunal in MF
    were remaking the decision for themselves whereas in this case it is  a
    question as to whether or not the Tribunal erred in law in the approach
    which it took.  Thus different considerations clearly should apply.

45.  In that connection care must be taken that I do not seek to  substitute
    what I might consider to be the merits for those of the Tribunal unless
    and until there is determined an error of law.

46.  A period of twelve months' imprisonment or dishonestly for  having  and
    using false documentation is a serious offence.  The Rules indicate the
    way in which the Secretary of State considers that public  interest  to
    be reflected.  It would not be open to the Tribunal to disregard  those
    matters without good reason.

47.  As the Court of Appeal indicated in JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ  10  at
    paragraph 22, there is only limited value in drawing  comparisons  with
    the outcome in other cases.  All such cases are highly fact  sensitive.
    As I have indicated the Tribunal are perfectly  entitled  not  only  to
    consider the offence itself, but the context in which the appellant has
    lived in the United Kingdom.

48.  As was made clear in paragraph 30 of JO where a person  to  be  removed
    is the person unlawfully present in this country was also committing  a
    criminal offences, a decision to remove him may pursue  a  double  aim,
    namely the prevention of disorder or crime as well the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control.  As the court went on to say as follows:

         "But if reliance is placed only on effective  immigration  control,
         it is difficult to see how  a  person's  criminal  offending  would
         relate to that aim or, therefore,  count  as  a  factor  positively
         favouring removal.  On the  other  hand,  it  might  still  have  a
         significant effect on the proportionality balance by  reducing  the
         weight to be placed on the person's family or private life."

49.  In this case there is not only the criminal  offence  itself  which  is
    deemed to be  serious  but  also  the  pattern  of  a  more  widespread
    disregard of Immigration Rules and controls.  It  is  readily  apparent
    therefore that not only is his deportation deemed appropriate  for  the
    criminal offence itself but there are wider considerations  which  have
    been borne in mind by  the  Tribunal  in  the  conclusion  and  in  the
    decision on proportionality which they have embarked upon.

50.  It is clear that a detailed and thorough proportionality  consideration
    has been made, the Tribunal coming to the conclusion that it would  not
    be disproportionate in the  light  of  the  appellant's  offending  and
    immigration history for him to be deported notwithstanding  the  effect
    that that might have upon his family.  It seems to me  and  I  so  find
    that that is an approach properly undertaken by the Tribunal.  Although
    it is perhaps a hard decision bearing in mind the  five  children  that
    will be deprived of  their  father  nevertheless  it  is  difficult  to
    describe such decision as perverse or Wednesbury  unreasonable  in  all
    the  circumstances,  particularly  bearing  in   mind   the   statutory
    considerations that have to be applied and those set out in MK.

51.  I do not find any material error of law in the  decision.   Accordingly
    the appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
