
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: da/00138/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2015                             |On 16 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               HASMUKH CARSANE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in the proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department.  I shall refer herein to Mr
    Carsane as the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal, born on 22  February  1970.   He
    asserts that he arrived in the United Kingdom in 1999.   The  Secretary
    of State indicates that whilst she has no information relating  to  the
    date of the claimant's arrival here  she  does  accept  that:  (i)  the
    claimant was working here on 7 June 2001, (ii) he made  an  application
    for an EEA residence permit in October 2001, (iii) he was  issued  with
    an EEA residence permit for a five year period on 24 January 2002,  and
    (iv) he was  provided  with  document  confirming  his  entitlement  to
    permanent residence in the United Kingdom  -  with  his  wife  and  two
    children as dependants - which was valid until 17 July 2012.

 3. Unfortunately, the claimant's stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been
    interspersed with criminal offending.  I need not set out  the  history
    of such offending in this decision save for the following, briefest, of
    terms. The claimant was most recently convicted on 27 October  2014  at
    Harrow Crown Court of common assault, affray and threats to kill -  for
    which he was sentenced to a total  of  21  months'  imprisonment  (this
    sentence including within it the activation of a nine  month  suspended
    sentence of imprisonment imposed  earlier  in  the  same  year).   This
    offending behaviour led the Secretary of State to make  a  decision  to
    deport the claimant on 1 April 2015, and  it  is  this  decision  which
    underpins the current proceedings.

 4. The claimant appealed the aforementioned  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge I. Ross
    on 10 August 2015. Judge Ross allowed the appeal in a  decision  of  14
    August 2015, to the extent that the Secretary of State's  decision  was
    found to be not in accordance with the law.  The crux of the  reasoning
    for such decision is encapsulated in the following  extracts  from  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination:

         "6.  ...On the sole basis of the evidence provided by the appellant
             in his wife's application, the Respondent did not accept  that
             he had been continuously resident in  the  UK  for  10  years.
             Accordingly the Respondent only considered whether there  were
             serious reasons for the making  of  a  deportation  order  and
             failed to  consider  at  all  whether  there  were  imperative
             reasons for the making of an order required by Regulation 19.

         8.   Ms Ferguson accepted that the Secretary of State ought to have
             considered the appellant's position as an EEA national who has
             lived continuously in the UK for 10 years,  particularly  when
             it was accepted that he obtained permanent residency in 2007.

         9.   I am satisfied that the current decision is not in  accordance
             with the law, being inconsistent with  the  appellant's  known
             immigration history."

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  the  aforementioned
    decision was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  in  a
    decision of 8 September 2015. Thus the matter came before me.

 6. For the reasons that follow it is plain that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contains an error of law requiring it to be set aside - and  I
    do just that.

 7. The inference to be drawn from reading paragraphs 6 to 9 of  the  FtT's
    determination is that it was of the understanding that,  without  more,
    if the claimant had demonstrated that he had been continuously resident
    in the UK for a period of 10 years or more then he would  be  entitled,
    as a matter of law, to the enhanced protection afforded  by  regulation
    21(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 i.e.  that  a  relevant
    decision may not be taken against him except on imperative  grounds  of
    public security.

 8.  This  though  is  to  completely  misunderstand  the  application   of
    regulation 21(4) and also its kindred  article  in  Directive  2004/38,
    article 28.

 9. Regulation 21 of the 2006 Regulations provides:

          1. In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA decision
             taken on grounds of public policy, public security  or  public
             health.

          2. A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends

          3. ...

          4. A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                    a. Has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                       period of 10 years....

10. Article 28 of the  Directive  states,  under  the  heading  "Protection
    against expulsion", as follows:

          1. Before taking an  expulsion  decision  on  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security, the host Member  State  shall  take
             account of considerations such  as  how  long  the  individual
             concerned has resided on its territory, his/her age, state  of
             health, family and economic  situation,  social  and  cultural
             integration into the host  Member  State  and  the  extent  of
             his/her links with the country of origin.

          2. The host Member State  may  not  take  an  expulsion  decision
             against union citizens or their family  members,  irrespective
             of nationality, who have the rights of permanent residence  on
             its territory, except on serious grounds of public  policy  or
             public security.

          3. An expulsion decision may not be taken against union citizens,
             except if the decision  is  based  on  imperative  grounds  of
             public security, as defined by Member States, if they:

                   a) have  resided  in  the  host  Member  State  for  the
                      previous ten years; or

                   b) are a minor..."

11. The provisions of articles 27 and 28 of the Directive reflect  what  is
    also set out in the Directive's preamble, paragraphs 23 and 24  stating
    as follows:

         "23. Expulsion of  Union  Citizens  and  their  family  members  on
             grounds of public policy or public security is a measure  that
             can seriously harm persons who, having availed  themselves  of
             the rights and freedoms conferred on them by the Treaty,  have
             become genuinely integrated into the host Member  State.   The
             scope  of  such  measures  should  therefore  be  limited   in
             accordance with  the  principle  of  proportionality  to  take
             account of the degree of integration of the persons concerned,
             the length of their residence in the host Member State,  their
             age, state of health, family and economic  situation  and  the
             links with their country of origin.

         24.  Accordingly, the greater the degree of  integration  of  Union
             Citizens and their family members in the  host  Member  State,
             the greater the degree of protection against expulsion  should
             be.   Only  in  exceptional  circumstances,  where  there  are
             imperative grounds of public  security,  should  an  expulsion
             measure be taken against Union Citizens who have  resided  for
             many years in the territory  of  the  host  Member  State,  in
             particular  when  they  were  born  and  have  resided   there
             throughout  their  life.   In   addition,   such   exceptional
             circumstances should also apply to an expulsion measure  taken
             against minors."

12. The question as to  the  correct  approach  to  article  28(3)  of  the
    Directive was raised in MG (Portugal) [2014] 1 WLR 2441, which arose as
    a consequence of a reference from this  Tribunal.   The  questions  the
    court had to determine in MG (Portugal) were as follows:

        1. Does a period in prison following sentence for commission  of  a
           criminal offence by a Union Citizen break the  residence  period
           in the host Member State required for  that  person  to  benefit
           from the highest  level  of  protection  against  expulsion  and
           Article 28(3)(a) of the Directive or otherwise preclude a person
           relying on this level of protection?

        2. Does reference to "previous ten years" in Article 28(3)(a)  mean
           that the residence has to be continuous in  order  for  a  Union
           Citizen to  be  able  to  benefit  from  the  highest  level  of
           protection against expulsion?

        3. For the purposes of Article 28(3)(a) is the requisite period  of
           10 years during which a Union Citizen must have resided  in  the
           host Member State calculated -

           (a)    by counting back from the expulsion decision, or

           (b)     by  counting  forward  from  the  commencement  of   the
           citizen's residence in the host Member State?

        4. If the answer to question 3(a) is that  the  10-year  period  is
           calculated by counting backwards then does it make a  difference
           if the person has accrued 10  years'  residence  prior  to  such
           imprisonment?

13. The conclusion in relation to the second and third questions is  to  be
    found in paragraph 28 of the judgment, in which it is stated:

         "In the light of all the foregoing, the answer to Questions 2 and 3
         is that, on a proper construction of Article 28(3)(a) of  Directive
         2004/38, the 10-year  period  of  residence  referred  to  in  that
         provision must, in principle, be continuous and must be  calculated
         by counting back  from  the  date  of  the  decision  ordering  the
         expulsion of the person concerned."

14. In later considering the answer to the first and fourth  questions  the
    Court  decided,  in  paragraph  38,  that  article  28(3)(a)  must   be
    interpreted so as to mean:

         "...that a period of imprisonment is, in principle, capable both of
         interrupting the continuity of the  period  of  residence  for  the
         purposes of that provision and of affecting the decision  regarding
         the grant of the enhanced protection provided for thereunder,  even
         where the person concerned resided in the host Member State for the
         10-years prior to imprisonment. However, the fact that that  person
         resided in the  host  Member  State  for  the  10  years  prior  to
         imprisonment may be taken into consideration as part of the overall
         assessment required in order to determine whether  the  integrating
         links previously forged  with  the  host  Member  State  have  been
         broken."

15. It is to be observed that each reference made by the CJEU to the effect
    of  periods  of  imprisonment  on  the  continuity  of   residence   is
    foreshadowed by the phrase "in principle". This was clearly  deliberate
    and intended to  indicate  that  a  period  of  imprisonment  will  not
    automatically mean that the highest level of protection is  lost  -  an
    interpretation favoured by the Upper Tribunal in  its  decision  in  MG
    [(prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal  [2014]  UKUT
    00392] upon its return from the CJEU.

16. Consequently, when determining whether a  person  is  entitled  to  the
    enhanced level of  protection  afforded  by  article  28(3)(a)  of  the
    Directive and regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations  it  is  plainly
    necessary to consider the whole of  the  history  of  the  individual's
    residence in this country. This  includes,  inter  alia,  whether  such
    person has resided in this country for a period of at least  ten  years
    before any  sentence  of  imprisonment,  and  whether  he  or  she  has
    integrated into the country so as to fulfil the requirements set out in
    the preamble  to  the  Directive.  The  question  of  whether  enhanced
    protection should be available despite the fact of  imprisonment  is  a
    question which must be made on an overall assessment of an individual's
    situation at the precise time when the question of expulsion arises and
    that is the question  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to  have
    addressed.  It did not do so and as a consequence it plainly fell  into
    error.

17. For these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contains an error of law  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. It was agreed, given that the claimant has not yet had  a  fair
    and proper determination of his appeal in the First-tier Tribunal, that
    the case should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  This  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 14 October 2015

