
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00521/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2015                              |On 27 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kerr, Counsel instructed by Karis Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge John Jones QC.  For reasons given
    in his determination following a hearing  on  23  September  2014,  the
    judge allowed the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision that
    s.32 (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied to the respondent (referred
    to as the claimant).

 2. The claimant is a national of  Kosovo.   He  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 15 and after successive periods  of  leave  to
    remain on a discretionary basis was granted indefinite leave to  remain
    on 7 March 2012.  His partner is a British national and they have a son
    just over 3 years old.  In the light a child being  affected  by  these
    proceedings, I make an order  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify him.

 3. The trigger to the deportation order was the claimant's conviction on 2
    October 2013 of attempted robbery for which  he  was  sentenced  on  23
    October to eighteen months' imprisonment.  The claimant had pleaded not
    guilty to the offence which had occurred on 13 November  2012;  he  was
    found guilty by a majority of the jury.

 4. The Secretary of State relies on two letters  giving  reasons  why  she
    contended s.32  (5)  applied.   The  first  dated  12  March  2013  was
    accompanied by the deportation order dated 7  March.   It  records  the
    claimant's immigration history (he had first  claimed  asylum  but  was
    then granted exceptional leave to remain in  2003).   The  letter  also
    lists two previous convictions which I refer to in more  detail  below.
    The Secretary of State explained that as the claimant  had  not  raised
    any Article 8 grounds there were therefore no barriers to his  removal.
    The claimant did not have an in-country right of appeal as he  had  not
    responded to a One-Stop Warning to give reasons  why  s.32(5)  did  not
    apply.  This was reviewed following representations from the claimant's
    current  solicitors  explaining  that   he   had   not   received   the
    correspondence.   Accordingly  the  Secretary   of   State   issued   a
    supplementary   letter   dated   14   April   2014   which    addresses
    representations made on 19 and 20 March 2014 based on his  relationship
    with a British national and their child.   Medical  grounds  were  also
    raised based on a diagnosis of right nephrocalcinosis (kidney stones).

 5. The Secretary of State did not accept that the claimant's removal would
    be in breach of Article 3 and Article 8.  As to the family life, it was
    considered that removal would give rise to interference and may not  be
    in the best interests of the child, the Secretary of State nevertheless
    considered that such interference was justified.   In  the  absence  of
    evidence of paternity it was not  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his son for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 399(a) of  the  Immigration  Rules.   As  to  the  claimant's
    partner, the Secretary of State did not accept there was a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship for the purposes  of  paragraph  399(b)  taking
    account of events  in  2010  when  application  had  been  made  for  a
    certificate of approval for marriage.  Paragraph  399A  was  considered
    but did not avail the claimant as he had not lived in  the  UK  for  at
    least half his life preceding the date of the signed deportation order.
     Discounting the time he had spent in prison he had  been  resident  in
    this country for around ten years and nine months.  Furthermore it  was
    not considered there were any  exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    outweigh the public interest.

 6. The grounds of appeal are dated 25 March  2014  and  so  predating  the
    supplementary letter.  These address the assertion  that  the  claimant
    had an in-country right of appeal and furthermore  state  that  removal
    would be in breach of  his  human  rights,  although  not  without  any
    particularity.

 7. The appellant gave evidence in English before  the  judge  as  did  his
    partner.  He noted that the Secretary of State had not challenged  that
    the claimant had a son and that they were in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The family had only lived together since  May  2014  but
    the judge was satisfied that the claimant,  his  partner  and  his  son
    comprised a family  unit.   Applying  the  Immigration  Rules,  he  was
    satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for the son to live in  Kosovo,
    that it is in the best interests of the child to live with  his  father
    as well as his mother and that it would be unduly harsh for the son  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the claimant.  The judge was  also
    satisfied  that  the  claimant  had  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his partner for ten years but it was unnecessary  for
    him to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for  her  to  move  to
    Kosovo or remain in the United Kingdom in the light of his findings  in
    respect of their son.

 8. The judge also considered that in the light of these findings, it would
    be unduly harsh for the parents to have to endure their child suffering
    and furthermore he did not  consider  it  reasonable  to  expect  a  UK
    citizen to relocate outside the United Kingdom.  He also addressed  the
    public  interest  with  reference  to  Part  5A  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in considering the public interest  and
    concluded that the offence was not an extremely serious offence in  the
    eyes of the criminal law.  The judge did not consider that the previous
    offences were capable of significantly tipping the balance against  the
    claimant.  He found that in applying the Immigration Rules, the  public
    interest did, on the facts of the case, particularly in  the  light  of
    the  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the  child,   favour
    deportation.  On this basis he allowed the appeal under the  Rules  and
    as a consequence did not consider it was necessary for him "to consider
    any  freestanding  claim  under  Article  8  considered   outside   the
    Immigration  Rules  nor  the  human  rights  claim  arising  from   the
    [claimant's] health problems".

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on  a  renewed  application  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb.  The grounds were twofold.  The  first  was  that
    the judge had made a material misdirection of law under the Rules.  The
    conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's son to live
    in the United  Kingdom  without  him  was  fundamentally  flawed.   The
    relationship had only been since May 2014  and  that  relationship  was
    fundamentally "normal" in all regards.  The judge's assessment did  not
    disclose any factors  to  establish  undue  harshness.   There  was  no
    challenge to the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for  the  son
    to live in Kosovo.

10. The second ground relates to the public interest.  It is asserted  that
    the correct approach is not whether the offence is extremely serious in
    the eyes of criminal law but rather the correct approach is to consider
    the sentence imposed, the circumstances  of  the  offence,  the  public
    interest and the will of Parliament as to where the balance lies within
    primary legislation.  Due regard had not been given to  the  weight  in
    favour of deportation.  The scales weigh in favour of that and must  be
    tipped in the claimant's favour, not against him.

11. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb considered it was  at
    least arguable that merely assessing the impact on  the  child  in  the
    abstract was  insufficient  to  determine  undue  harshness.   He  also
    granted permission on the second ground since the Article 8  assessment
    would arguably be irrational if the finding on  undue  harshness  could
    not stand.  It was difficult to see  why  the  judge  had  gone  on  to
    consider Article 8 within the "complete code" at paragraph 398.

Part 5A of the 2002 Act and the Relevant Immigration Rules

12. Part 5A of the 2002 Act introduced by the Immigration Act  2014  is  in
    these terms:

                                  "PART 5A

            Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

         117A Application of this Part

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts -

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                  tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English -

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons -

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to -

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

             (1)  In this Part -

                    .  'Article  8'  means  Article  8  of   the   European
                      Convention on Human Rights;

                    . 'qualifying child' means a person who  is  under  the
                      age of 18 and who -

                      (a)  is a British citizen, or

                      (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                           period of seven years or more;

                    . 'qualifying partner' means a partner who -

                      (a)  is a British citizen, or

                      (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the
                           meaning of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section
                           33(2A) of that Act).

             (2)  In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                      offence, and

                  (c)  who -

                      (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                           of at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                           serious harm, or

                      (iii)    is a persistent offender.

             (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject
                  to an order under -

                  (a)  section 5 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                      1964 (insanity etc),

                  (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                      1995 (insanity etc), or

                  (c)  Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                      Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted  of
                      an offence.

             (4)  In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of a certain  length
                  of time -

                  (a)  do not include a person who has received a  suspended
                      sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the
                      sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to
                      take effect);

                  (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of that length of time only by
                      virtue of being sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
                      amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                  (c)  include a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or
                      ordered or directed to be detained, in an institution
                      other than a  prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
                      hospital or an institution for young  offenders)  for
                      that length of time; and

                  (d)  include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment  or
                      detention, or ordered or directed to be detained, for
                      an indeterminate period, provided that  it  may  last
                      for at least that length of time.

             (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of this  Part  as
                  to whether a person is a British citizen, it  is  for  the
                  person asserting that fact to prove it."

13. The immigration decision was made before the changes to the Immigration
    Rules relating to deportation that came into force  on  28  July  2014.
    The judge heard the appeal after that date and applying the  principles
    in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292, the judge  was  obliged  to
    apply the 2014 Rules despite the decision having been undertaken  under
    the previous rules.  The judge did not set out the  relevant  rules  in
    his decision. These are:

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398.    These rules apply where:

                (a)    foreign criminal liable to  deportation  claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law,

                    The Secretary of State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
                    it does not, the public  interest  in  deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
                if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported; or

                (b)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen
                    or settled in the UK, and

                    (i)    the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the
                        person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their
                        immigration status was not precarious; and

                    (ii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
                        in the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                        deported, because of compelling circumstances  over
                        and above those described  in  paragraph  EX.2.  of
                        Appendix FM; and

                    (iii)  it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                        remain in the UK without the person who  is  to  be
                        deported.

         399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported.

         399B.    Where an Article 8 claim from a foreign criminal is
                successful:

                (a)    in the case of a person who is in the  UK  unlawfully
                    or whose leave to enter or remain has been cancelled  by
                    a deportation order, limited leave may  be  granted  for
                    periods not exceeding 30  months  and  subject  to  such
                    conditions  as  the   Secretary   of   State   considers
                    appropriate;

                (b)    in the case of a person who has not been served  with
                    a deportation order,  any  limited  leave  to  enter  or
                    remain may be curtailed to a  period  not  exceeding  30
                    months and conditions may be varied to  such  conditions
                    as the Secretary of State considers appropriate;

                (c)    indefinite leave to enter or remain  may  be  revoked
                    under section 76 of the 2002 Act and  limited  leave  to
                    enter or remain granted for a period  not  exceeding  30
                    months subject to such conditions as  the  Secretary  of
                    State considers appropriate;

                (d)    revocation of a deportation  order  does  not  confer
                    entry clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  or  re-
                    instate any previous leave."

Did the Judge Err in Law?

14. Both parties relied on skeleton  arguments.   The  Secretary  of  State
    begins with reference to the judgment of Richards LJ in JO  (Uganda)  v
    SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 10 at [27]  as  applied  in  instructions  to  her
    caseworkers  when  considering  whether  the  effect  on  a  child   of
    deportation of a foreign criminal is unduly harsh. It is argued that it
    is entirely obvious that the term "unduly harsh"  imports  a  balancing
    exercise taking the effect of deportation on the child on the one  hand
    and  weighing  this  against  the  offending  of  the  claimant.    The
    presumption in favour of deportation is not rebuttable by the claimant.
     The judge had concluded that the impact on the claimant's son was that
    he would be "very upset" and that the relationship would cease  day-to-
    day.  This was in the context of the judge's observation at [42]:

         "Other things being equal, it is in the best interests of the child
         to live with a father as well as a mother."

15. In addition it is argued that other things were not equal in the  light
    of the serious robbery committed by  the  claimant  for  which  he  had
    continued to deny responsibility.  The offence had led  to  a  sentence
    sufficient to pass the threshold set by Parliament  in  the  2007  Act.
    The judge's views on the seriousness of the offence being  reduced  was
    not a finding that was open to him.  The public interest in deportation
    which included the seriousness of the offence and  the  fact  that  the
    antecedents showed persistent offending and a marked escalation must be
    weighed against the best interests  of  the  child  when  coming  to  a
    conclusion under paragraph  399(a).   The  seriousness,  frequency  and
    escalation  of  the  offending  were  plainly  not  outweighed  by  the
    relationship or by the fact that this would cause upset to  the  child.
    In the alternative it is pleaded that the determination was  irrational
    in reaching its finding given the statutory context of deportation.

16. Mr Shilliday developed these points in his oral submissions emphasising
    that criminality can result in the  fracture  of  the  family  unit  as
    considered in AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348.  He  argued  that  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions had been approved by the Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at [14] and [16]  in
    the context of its conclusion that it was "... difficult  to  see  what
    scope there is for any consideration outside the new Rules:  i.e.  they
    provide a complete code."  Mr Shilliday  argued  that  the  Rules  were
    underpinned by s.117C.  He maintained his argument that the  judge  had
    failed to  assess  the  effect  of  the  index  offence  being  further
    criminality which indicated clear escalation.

17. Mr Kerr's skeleton interprets  the  first  ground  as  contending  that
    because the relationship between the claimant  and  his  son  had  been
    brief and normal there were no factors leading to the  conclusion  that
    it would be unduly harsh for the son to live in  the  UK  without  him.
    Because the parties could enjoy their relationship remotely deportation
    was not unduly harsh.  Furthermore the judge had failed to engage  with
    paragraph 399(b) of the Rules.

18. By way of response it is argued that the judge had provided cogent  and
    ample reasoning for his conclusion that  it  would  have  unduly  harsh
    consequences for the son to remain without  his  father.   The  grounds
    provided a misleading summary as  to  the  extent  and  length  of  the
    relationship between them.  It was not the case that  the  relationship
    had only existed since May 2014.  There was unchallenged evidence  from
    the claimant, his partner and his  mother  as  to  the  extent  of  the
    relationship which included  evidence  of  prison  visits  and  regular
    contact prior to conviction.  The judge had made clear findings  as  to
    the consequences of substituting a remote and intermittent relationship
    with his son and the grounds were therefore merely a disagreement  with
    the conclusions.  As to whether the harshness was  "undue",  the  judge
    had provided comprehensive and cogent reasons going further than simply
    considering the impact of deportation  on  the  son.   There  had  been
    consideration  of  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  and  the  public
    interest.  Specifically the judge had in mind the questions  elucidated
    in the provisions of s.117B and C.  A  comprehensive  analysis  of  the
    competing interests in the light of the statutory provisions  had  been
    provided and the judge had not minimised the seriousness of the offence
    but merely considered the wording of the sentencing judge.  Thus it  is
    argued that the judge did consider the seriousness of the offence  when
    deliberating whether  the  harshness  to  the  son  of  the  claimant's
    deportation was "undue".

19. As to the second ground in the light of Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT
    90 (IAC) the judge was duty-bound to consider the provisions of  s.117.
    In the light of the sentencing judge's remarks the judge had considered
    the more serious the offence committed the greater the public interest.
     The complaint that the normal circumstances which  swayed  matters  in
    the claimant's favour was not evidence of an error of  law  but  merely
    disagreement with the conclusions.  The reference by the judge  to  the
    other offences which had not resulted in custodial sentences was not  a
    misdirection.

20. In the course of his submissions, Mr  Kerr  argued  that  he  read  the
    determination as the judge not confining himself to a limited  analysis
    of the undue harshness but carrying out a proportionality exercise over
    a number of paragraphs and then a brief Article 8 analysis on a  Belton
    basis.  The balancing  exercise  undertaken  pointed  to  an  interplay
    between the Rules and the statute and he argues the  judge  firmly  had
    this in mind.  The provisions in Part 5A were  therefore  part  of  the
    balancing exercise under paragraph 399(a).

21. In the ensuing discussion Mr Shilliday argued it was irrational for the
    judge to say the offence was not serious in the context of  its  nature
    and the escalating element.  Mr Kerr maintained that the attack was  on
    conclusions and did not show error.

My Analysis

22. The first question is whether the judge made the  correct  approach  in
    reaching his finding that it would be unduly harsh for  the  claimant's
    son to remain without his father.  It is clear to me that  any  enquiry
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the  United
    Kingdom without the person who is to be deported  (paragraph  399(a)(b)
    (preserving the somewhat bizarre layout of the Rule))  is  an  exercise
    that requires reference to the factor that renders something which  may
    be harsh as unduly harsh.  There can be no doubt that the separation of
    a child from his parents is harsh where, as  in  this  case,  the  best
    interests lie in the family unit being preserved.   The  factor  to  be
    considered is the criminal offending which informs the public interest.
     The claimant is in the category of offending  resulting  in  sentences
    between one and four years.  That will include a range of offences some
    of which will be more serious than others.  It is  the  seriousness  of
    the  offence  and  other  associated  factors  such  as  the  risk   of
    reoffending and the impact of the offence on others which will lead  to
    a correct analysis of whether a harsh result is unduly reached or  not.
    In other words, this is the proportionality exercise  required  by  the
    Rules.  I accept Mr Kerr's argument that  the  provisions  of  Part  5A
    applies to that exercise within the Rules.  S.117A(2)  makes  it  clear
    that the  court  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the  provisions.
    S.117C(1) and (2) make it clear that deportation of  foreign  criminals
    is in the public  interest  and  that  the  more  serious  the  offence
    committed the  greater  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
    criminal.  The greater the public interest therefore  the  greater  the
    harshness that can  result  in  the  impact  on  others  of  a  foreign
    national's removal.

23. In my view the application of primary legislation to the approach under
    the  Rules  does  not  significantly  alter  the   comprehensive   code
    principles confirmed by Sales LJ in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    1636.  The Act does not replace or provide  an  alternative  basis  for
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.  This  was  clearly  in  the
    mind of Aikens LJ in YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292  where  at
    [56] he observed in respect of the disposal of the appeal:

         "But for the reasons that I have set out above, in my view the 2012
         Rules will not apply to any further  decision  on  YM's  Article  8
         rights.  Both the new statutory provisions and the 2014 Rules  must
         be applied.  In those circumstances, I would allow  the  appeal  on
         the Article 8 ground, set aside the UT's decision  and  remit  this
         matter to a differently constituted UT to reconsider the facts  and
         make the necessary findings and evaluations in the light of the new
         statutory provisions and the 2014 Rules."

24. As observed by the Tribunal in Dube

         "judges are required statutorily to take into account a  number  of
         enumerated considerations.  Sections 117A-117D are not,  therefore,
         an a la carte menu of considerations that it is at  the  discretion
         of the judge to apply or not apply.  Judges are duty-bound to 'have
         regard' to the specified considerations."

25. Article 8 considerations of foreign national criminals have  a  special
    category under the Rules.  The Court of Appeal in successive  decisions
    has made it abundantly clear that those Rules  provide  a  complete  or
    comprehensive code.   The  principles  of  proportionality  feature  in
    implementation of that code and Part 5A makes it clear how  aspects  of
    proportionality are to be approached.

26. Turning to the judge's decision, I am not persuaded that he reached his
    conclusion regarding the unduly harsh impact on the son remaining  here
    without  his  father  by  carrying  out  the  correct   proportionality
    exercise.  At [40] to [42] the judge explains why he considers it would
    be unduly harsh for the son to live in Kosovo or for him to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom without his father  without  any  reference  to  the
    criminal offending that has brought these possibilities about.  Instead
    his focus was on the negative aspects on the son's development.  Whilst
    I accept the judge was correct to identify those factors which rendered
    either option harsh, there is no  consideration  of  why  it  would  be
    unduly harsh.

27. The question of the public interest in deporting the  claimant  is  not
    considered until after these conclusions have  been  reached  at  [45].
    This and the succeeding paragraphs make no reference to the Immigration
    Rules but instead appear to be an impermissible  exercise  outside  the
    Rules solely with reference to general Article 8  principles  and  Part
    5A.

28. In my view, therefore, the first ground of challenge by  the  Secretary
    of State is more than  a  disagreement.   It  identifies  an  error  of
    approach by the judge in separating the considerations of unduly  harsh
    from the factors relied on for the claimant's deportation.  The  second
    ground attacks aspects of the  separate  and  impermissible  Article  8
    analysis of whether deportation of the claimant  is  justified.   I  do
    find some force in  the  criticism  of  the  judge's  dilution  of  the
    seriousness of the offence,  principally  because  he  failed  to  have
    regard to the rules.  I also consider the judge erred  in  relation  to
    issue of the risk of reoffending evidenced by  the  way  in  which  the
    criminal offending has developed.  The judge's observation at [49] that
    "the facts of those offences  are  not  known  nor  relied  on  by  the
    respondent" does not reflect  the  correct  analytical  approach.   The
    offences were referred to  in  the  supplementary  letter  and  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to take them into account particularly in  the
    light of the sentencing remarks which included the observation that the
    claimant was not of good character.

Remaking the Decision

29. Although both parties indicated that they were content for me to remake
    the decision based on the material before me I am  not  satisfied  that
    the findings of the judge provide a sufficiently complete  picture  for
    me to do so.  The evidence recorded at [21] indicates that the claimant
    moved in with his partner in May 2014 and that this was the first  time
    they had been properly living together.  Mr  Kerr's  skeleton  argument
    takes issue with the grounds  of  application  arguing  that  they  had
    provided a misleading summary as  to  the  extent  and  length  of  the
    relationship between the claimant and his son.   I  have  to  say  this
    aspect is not entirely clear.  Whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    claimant's son to remain without  his  father  in  the  United  Kingdom
    requires careful analysis of all the competing factors and  I  consider
    therefore further evidence is necessary on this aspect.

30. In the circumstances as further fact-finding  is  necessary,  the  case
    will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for   its   further
    consideration.   That  reconsideration  will  not  be   required   with
    reference to the claimant's health problems there being no challenge to
    the judge's decision not to deal with this aspect.

Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent the decision is set aside and  the  case
remitted  for  reconsideration  by  a  differently  constituted   First-tier
Tribunal.



Signed                                  Date 24 April 2015
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson





