
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00379/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 1 October 2013                               |On 9 October 2013          |
|Prepared 1 October 2013                         |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             Valentine Obera OBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M. Nollet, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-Tier Tribunal (First-
    Tier Tribunal  Judge  Britton  and  Mrs  J  Holt  [non-legal  member]),
    promulgated on 1 May 2013, dismissing an appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department of 12 February 2009 that
    section 32(5) or the UK Borders Act 2007 applies to this appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born 13 January 1992.  He  first
    entered the United Kingdom  on  25  July  2005,  with  his  mother  and
    brother, Chukwudi  Lawrence  Obi,  on  a  lawfully  issued  visit  visa
    conferring leave to enter until  6  January  2006.  At  this  time  the
    appellant's mother returned to Nigeria, leaving the appellant  and  his
    brother in United Kingdom.

 3. At some point thereafter that the  appellant's  brother  was  diagnosed
    with having severe renal problems. Both the appellant and  his  brother
    claimed asylum on  6  August  2007.  The  appellant's  application  was
    refused on 24 October 2008 and a decision was made to remove  him  from
    the United Kingdom. First-Tier Tribunal Judge Moore allowed  an  appeal
    brought against this decision, in a determination of 3 June 2010;  this
    being on the basis that the appellant was the  primary  carer  for  his
    sick brother. The appellant was subsequently granted  leave  to  remain
    until 6 June 2015.

 4. On 6 August 2010 the appellant was convicted at Snaresbrook Crown Court
    of an offence of violent  disorder,  and  was  sentenced  to  51  weeks
    imprisonment wholly suspended for 18 months. On 15  December  2011  the
    appellant was convicted at Winchester  Crown  Court  of  conspiracy  to
    supply a controlled drug (Class A- heroin) and was sentenced  to  three
    years and nine months in a Young Offenders Institution. It was pursuant
    to this  latter  conviction  that  the  Secretary  of  State  made  the
    immigration decision that now underlies this appeal.

 5. The appellant's pleaded grounds, in summary, challenge the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on the following basis;

      i) the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to carry out  a  two-stage
         assessment of the article 8 ECHR grounds by failing to consider the
         application of article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules;

     ii)  alternatively,  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  consider   the
         application of article 8  outside  of  the  Rules,  it  misdirected
         itself as to the relevant legal threshold;

    iii) the tribunal erred in failing to have regard to, and treat  as  its
         starting point, the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Moore;

     iv) the tribunal erred by failing to make a finding as to  whether  the
         appellant has a family life with his brother;

      v) the tribunal's conclusion, on the issue of  whether  the  appellant
         would donate a kidney to his brother, was speculative;

     vi) the tribunal erred in failing to come to a conclusion on the  issue
         of whether the appellant had established a  family  life  with  his
         daughter;

    vii) the tribunal erred in failing to provide reasons as to why it would
         not be  in  the  appellant's  daughter's  best  interests  for  the
         appellant to remain in United Kingdom.

 6. I shall consider these grounds in turn.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal set out its conclusions, between paragraphs  33
    to 41 of its determination; under the heading "findings". It is  clear,
    when these paragraphs are considered as a whole, that the tribunal gave
    detailed consideration to the application of article 8 ECHR outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 8. The tribunal gave specific consideration  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    appellant's past offending [39] and the risk of him  reoffending  [35].
    It also assessed the truthfulness of his assertion that  he  wishes  to
    donate a kidney to his brother [37], and considered the best  interests
    of his minor daughter [38].

 9. Although such considerations are of relevance to  a  decision  made  in
    relation to paragraph 398 of the Rules, in that they  play  a  part  in
    determining whether 'exceptional circumstances' exist,  they  are  also
    relevant to an assessment of the issue of proportionality  in  relation
    to article 8 ECHR consideration outside of the Rules.

10. In paragraph 41 of its  determination  of  the  tribunal  concluded  as
    follows;

         "[W]e find that any interference with the appellant's  private  and
         family  life  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aims  by  the
         immigration policy of United Kingdom."

11. This is a conclusion that can only have relate to  a  consideration  of
    article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

12. Given that which I say above, I reject the contention that the tribunal
    erred in failing to consider, or come to a  conclusion  on,  article  8
    ECHR outside of the confines of the Immigration Rules.

13. It was submitted, in the alternative,  that  the  tribunal  applied  an
    unlawfully high threshold to its consideration of article 8 outside  of
    the Rules, i.e. whether there were any 'exceptional  circumstances'.  I
    do not accept this is so. Although  the  structure  of  the  conclusory
    paragraphs of the determination could have been clearer,  it  is  plain
    that the tribunal's conclusion, in paragraph 39 of  the  determination,
    that there were no 'exceptional circumstances' was a  finding  made  in
    relation to paragraph 398 of the Rules.

14. Mrs Nollet reminded  the  tribunal  that  the  appellant  had  made  no
    assertion  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  satisfied   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. Nevertheless, it  was  incumbent
    on the tribunal to identify whether such had  been  met,  and  this  is
    exactly what it did in paragraph 39  of  its  determination.  When  the
    determination is read as a whole I find that the tribunal did not apply
    an impermissibly high threshold to  its  considerations  of  article  8
    outside of the Rules.

15. During the course of the hearing Mrs Nollet further submitted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to give consideration  to  the
    Maslov criteria. Upon being asked to identify which particular features
    of the appellant's case it was said the tribunal had failed to consider
    Mrs Nollet made reference to three;  (i)  the  risk  of  the  appellant
    reoffending, (ii) the features of the  appellant's  relationships  with
    his brother and daughter and (iii) the appellant's social, culture  and
    family ties United Kingdom.

16. As to the former, the tribunal summarised the  pre-sentence  report  in
    its conclusions [35], the author of which had concluded that there  was
    a low risk of the appellant offending and a low risk of him harming the
    public. Despite Ms Nollet's  attention  being  drawn  to  this  passage
    during the course of submissions, she maintained  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to take such matters into consideration when coming
    to its conclusion. I do not accept this to be the case. The  First-tier
    Tribunal summarised the PSR under its heading  'findings'.  Nowhere  in
    the determination does the tribunal indicate a  disagreement  with  the
    views of the author of the PSR and, in such circumstances, I find  that
    it can be taken to have (i) agreed with such views and (ii) have  taken
    them into account when coming to its conclusions.

17. As to the appellant's social and cultural ties to United Kingdom, there
    was limited evidence given in relation  to  these,  the  focus  of  the
    hearing being on the family/private life ties the appellant claimed  to
    have with his brother, partner and daughter.

18. After discussion with the tribunal Mrs Nollet accepted that in order to
    be successful on her 'Maslov ground', she  would  need  to  demonstrate
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  its  consideration  of  the
    appellant's various relationships. For the reasons follow,  I  conclude
    that it did not err in this respect.

19. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the appellant  genuinely
    intended to donate a kidney to his brother [37]. Complaint is  made  by
    Mrs Nollet that in making such finding the tribunal failed to  take  as
    its starting point the conclusion of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore
    that the bond between the appellant and his brother was of  significant
    strength [reference being made to the starred  decision  in  Devaseelan
    [2002] UKAIT 00702].

20. The First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of the earlier  determination
    of Judge Moore. It made reference  to  there  having  been  an  earlier
    appeal [8] and it stated in paragraph 33 of its determination  that  it
    had given consideration  to  all  of  the  evidence  before  it,  which
    included Judge Moore's determination. Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not specifically refer to Judge Moore's findings as to the strength
    of the appellant's relationship with his brother, the fact that it  did
    not do so does not, in my conclusion, amount to an error of law.   Even
    if I am wrong in this  conclusion,  it  is  not  an  error  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

21. The tribunal's disbelief of the appellant's evidence that he  genuinely
    intended to donate a kidney to  his  brother  was,  in  my  conclusion,
    clearly and cogently reasoned. I find that such conclusion was open  to
    the tribunal on the available evidence.  In  any  event,  even  if  the
    appellant does have a genuine intention  to  donate  a  kidney  to  his
    brother, the fact remains that it is still not known whether  he  is  a
    match and therefore whether such a donation is  feasible.  Absent  such
    knowledge,  only  a  very  limited  weight  can  be  attached  to   the
    appellant's intentions; such weight being insufficient to  disturb  the
    tribunal's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would   be
    proportionate.

22. It was further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing
    to make a finding as to whether family life  currently  exists  between
    the appellant and his brother; a material matter given the  conclusions
    of Judge Moore.

23. Whilst it is correct to say that  the  tribunal  did  not  specifically
    identify whether the  appellant  and  his  brother  share  family  life
    together (within article 8(1)), they do identify the relevant  features
    of such relationship. Whether this is to be labelled as family life, or
    as part of the appellant's private life, is, on the facts of this case,
    a  matter  of  irrelevance.  It  is  the  nature  and  degree  of   the
    relationship that it is of importance to the tribunal's considerations.



24. The determination of Judge Moore was promulgated on  3  June  2010  and
    reflected the circumstances that existed as of that date. At  the  time
    of Judge Moore's determination the appellant was his brother's  primary
    carer. The appellant has been in detention for a lengthy  period  since
    that date. Inevitably, the relationship he shares with his brother  has
    undergone a significant change  as  a  consequence.  The  appellant  no
    longer fulfils the role of his brother's carer. The evidence  discloses
    that during the appellant's detention, he and his brother speak two  or
    three times per week  and  the  appellant  provides  his  brother  with
    unparticularised emotional support over the telephone.

25. When  looked  at  as  a  whole  the  tribunal's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his brother, and its relevance  to  their
    conclusions,  is  adequately  dealt  with  in  the  determination.  The
    tribunal set out the relevant features of the relationship and come  to
    rational and reasoned conclusions based on such findings.

26. I turn now to the grounds which relate to the appellant's  relationship
    with his British citizen daughter, who, at the time of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, was just 19 months old.

27. The tribunal concluded that the appellant was  not  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the mother of his daughter.  This  finding
    has not been the subject  of  substantive  challenge.  It  is  in  this
    context that the tribunal's conclusions, in relation to the appellant's
    daughter, must be viewed.

28. Although the tribunal do not specifically set out its  finding  on  the
    issue of whether the appellant's relationship with his daughter amounts
    to family life,  it  does  set  out  the  nature  and  degree  of  such
    relationship. This is a decision of a specialist tribunal and it  would
    have be well aware of the extensive case law to the effect  that  there
    is a presumption of family life between a minor child and its  parents,
    and that it is only in very exceptional and limited circumstances  that
    such a presumption can be rebutted. Those exceptions  clearly  have  no
    place on the facts of this case.

29. In my  conclusion,  the  tribunal  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant does share a family life with  his  daughter,  but  that  the
    extent of such family life was limited. In such circumstances I do  not
    accept that the First-tier Tribunal erred as the manner claimed.

30. I turn finally  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's daughter's best  interests.  Mrs  Nollet  relied,  in  this
    regard, on the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  (President  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor) in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197,  which,  when
    summarising the judicial learning  in  regard  to  the  application  of
    section 55 UK Borders and the Citizenship  Act  2009,  identified  that
    "[a]s a starting point it is in the best interests of  children  to  be
    with both their parents". Azimi-Moayed was a case involving the removal
    two minor children and both of their parents.

31. In the instant case the appellant and his daughter would not be  living
    together in the United Kingdom, even if the appellant were  allowed  to
    remain here.  As  also  identified  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant's relationship with his daughter was very limited. There  can
    be no doubt that it is in the appellant's daughter's best interests  to
    remain living in the United Kingdom. She was born here and is a British
    Citizen. It is also beyond doubt that it would be in her best interests
    to remain living here with her mother, who has brought her up since her
    birth and who is also a British Citizen.  It  has  not  been  asserted,
    neither could it be, that it would be  in  the  appellant's  daughter's
    best interests to live with the  appellant  (rather  than  her  mother)
    either in the United Kingdom or in Nigeria.

32. The benefit to the appellant's daughter's best interests of having  the
    appellant living in the United Kingdom, as opposed to in his  homeland,
    is at best marginal given the findings of the First-tier Tribunal as to
    the nature of the appellant's relationship with his  daughter  and  her
    mother. In these circumstances I find that it was open  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to conclude that it was in  the  best  interests  of  the
    child to remain living in the United Kingdom with her mother.

33. Even if the tribunal did err in  failing  to  conclude  that  the  best
    interests of the appellant's daughter would be served by the  appellant
    remaining in the United Kingdom, given its other findings there  is  no
    basis upon which it could have concluded  that  the  child's  interests
    would have been so much better served by the allowing the appellant  to
    remain in this country, such that deportation of  the  appellant  would
    not be proportionate.

34. In my conclusion  looked at as a whole the reasons given by the  First-
    tier Tribunal for dismissing the appellant's appeal are  clear,  cogent
    and rational and its determination does not contain an error  requiring
    it to be set aside.

35. For the sake of completeness I observe that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination was promulgated shortly before the handing  down  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in SS Nigeria [2013] EWCA  Civ  550.  It  is
    clear to me that in light of the decision in SS the First-tier Tribunal
    placed insufficient weight, when coming  to  its  conclusions,  on  the
    public interest in deporting foreign criminals. This error operated  in
    the appellant's favour and, as a  consequence,  does  not  require  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination to be set aside. Given what is said
    in SS, in my conclusion, even taking the facts of this  case  at  their
    highest, there is not even the remotest possibility  of  the  appellant
    succeeding in his assertion that the interference caused to his private
    and family life, by his deportation, would not be proportionate to  the
    public interest pursued.

36. I find that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  does  not  contain  an
    error on a point of law requiring it to be set  aside,  and  it  is  to
    remain standing.

Decision

For the reasons given above we find that the  determination  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal does not contain an error on a  point  of  law  such  that  it
ought to be set  aside.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  is  to
remain standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 7 October 2013



