
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00150/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             ISHMAEL MUSA KAMARA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Professor Rees, instructed by Chris & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. In a decision promulgated on 28  August  2019  the  Upper  Tribunal
         found a judge of the First-Tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  in  a
         manner material to its decision to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
         against the order for his deportation from the United Kingdom.
      2. The matter comes back before the Upper Tribunal today for a Resumed
         Hearing after which this Tribunal shall substitute  a  decision  to
         either allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


      3. Mr Tufan confirmed there is no factual dispute between the parties.
         There was therefore no  need  for  oral  evidence  from  either  Mr
         Kamara, his stepfather, or mother. The matter proceeded by  way  of
         submissions only.
      4. Mr Kamara was born in Sierra Leone on 10 May  1993  but  is  now  a
         citizen of Belgium and therefore a European national.
      5. Mr Kamara lives with his family at the address provided  in  London
         and claims to be totally dependent upon his parents as  he  is  not
         working or in full-time education.
      6. Mr Kamara is the subject of an order for his deportation  from  the
         United Kingdom as a result of his criminality.
      7. Mr Kamara's PNC printout discloses the use of three alias, an alias
         date of birth, and two convictions for two offences.
      8. On 16 July 2015 at the  Basildon  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
         convicted of Grievous Bodily Harm with intent on 6 February 2015 to
         which he pleaded guilty. The appellant was  sentenced  to  8  years
         imprisonment and ordered to pay a victim surcharge of �120.
      9. The second conviction, on 8 June 2016 at Norfolk Magistrates Court,
         is for the offence of 'Without authority possessing inside a prison
         an item specified in s40D(3b)' for which, on 30  January  2016,  Mr
         Kamara pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 4 weeks imprisonment,  a
         victim  surcharge  of  �115,  and  the  items  made  subject  to  a
         forfeiture and destruction order.
     10. The prison sentence of 8 years clearly reflects the serious  nature
         of the offence. In  his  sentencing  remarks  handed  down  at  the
         Southend-on-Sea Crown Court on 16 July 2015 Mr  Recorder  Gallagher
         stated:

             "Ishmael Kamara, will you please stand. I have to sentence you
             for an offence of wounding with intent, contrary to Section 18
             of the Offences Against  the  Person  Act  1861.  You  pleaded
             guilty, and pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity, to the
             commission of the offence, the offence having taken place on 6
             February of this year, when you struck and  wounded  Nathaniel
             Maboo with an 11 inch kitchen knife, and  that  is  a  kitchen
             knife with a serrated edge and a 7 inch blade.


             It gives me no pleasure whatsoever to  be  sentencing  you,  a
             young man some 22 years of age. I have listened to  what  your
             Advocate has said on your behalf, and I take it  into  account
             all that she submits to me. I have also read a letter sent  by
             your great-uncle, and  have  read  the  detailed  pre-sentence
             report, dated 13 July 2015.


             When all is said and done, however, this was a villainous  and
             murderous attack upon a wholly innocent  citizen  going  about
             his lawful business. By that I mean  travelling  on  the  same
             train, because this offence took place on the late-night train
             from Fenchurch Street to Southend, and it is, I have  to  say,
             by the grace of God alone that you are not facing a very  much
             more serious charge.


             You struck with murderous intent. That you were deflected from
             your design and that your blow was deflected from  its  target
             was because, by good fortune, Mr Maboo, the victim, managed to
             throw his hands up as you struck. The result was that the blow
             was  partially  deflected  but  Mr  Maboo's  hand  was   quite
             literally skewered and impaled by the force  of  the  downward
             thrust of the blow that you delivered. One  of  the  witnesses
             who treated him immediately after the blow said that she could
             see right through his hand afterwards.


             It must have been a terrifying  incident  for  Mr  Maboo,  and
             indeed for all the other lawful travellers on the  train  that
             night. I have little  doubt  that  Mr  Maboo  was  not  merely
             frightened, but that he was left in great pain, and  doubtless
             sustained considerable physical and psychological injuries.


             I do not accept any version put forward on your  part  to  the
             extent that you are not looking  for  trouble.  You  were  out
             looking for trouble. Mr Maboo, who as far as I  am  aware,  do
             you did not know, was entirely innocent of any wrongdoing, who
             did not seek to get involved with you. Indeed, you had to  go,
             I think it was, through at least one railway  carriage  before
             you reached the carriage that he was in.


             You have said in the report that I have before me,  and  I  am
             quoting from page 3, that you initially were angry because you
             felt your victim was disrespectful towards you. I don't accept
             that. You showed absolutely no respect for your  fellow  human
             being. You did not even have the guts or courage to face up to
             him man-to-man. In your what I can  only  describe  as  abject
             cowardice, you armed yourself with a weapon and went back  and
             struck what I have described as a  murderous,  or  potentially
             murderous blow, and indeed sought to do more than that.


             You became  involved  in  the  first  place  by  attacking  or
             assaulting Mr Maboo when he was sitting down in that carriage.
             That attack was without any warning or justification, and  was
             indeed, in itself, cowardly, supported, as it was, by  others.
             Unable to achieve your ends, and quite possibly bested by  the
             initially seated Mr Maboo, you went back to  get  your  knife.
             There were a number of people  on  the  train  who  sought  to
             prevent or break up any violence, and  Mr  Maboo,  as  I  have
             indicated, showed no desire to get involved  in  a  fight.  He
             made no move to come  after  you  or  to  behave  aggressively
             towards you.


             What you did was to go and  get  a  knife  from  one  of  your
             friends. You must have known  that  knife  was  there,  it  is
             abundantly clear to anyone viewing  the  CCTV  that  you  went
             straight up to Mr Oseboti, who had a knife  in  his  rucksack,
             which was on his back. You remove the knife and then  returned
             to  the  carriage  in  which  Mr  Maboo  was  sitting.  It  is
             abundantly clear that you had  one  thought  and  one  thought
             alone in your mind, and that was to cause really serious  harm
             to Mr Maboo.


             It is worth recalling the words of witnesses  present  on  the
             occasion. One of them describes you, when getting  the  knife,
             as moving with  purpose,  completely  focused.  Another,  when
             describing you going back  with  the  knife,  which  was  held
             behind your back so as to be concealed, he described you as "a
             man with rage in his eyes, he was so angry, a serious look  on
             his face I'll never forget. His eyes were wild and bulging, he
             was charging down the aisle, a man intent on a mission".


             Having viewed the CCTV, I can  understand  exactly  why  those
             witnesses described you in those terms.  What  is  visible  to
             anyone seeing that CCTV confirms precisely that evidence.


             It is also clear that alarm was caused to the passengers.  One
             passenger described pushing his wife out of the way because he
             feared for her safety.  He feared also for his. He was  a  man
             who in fact tried to persuade you not  to  engage  further  in
             violence, but to no avail.


             Having got that knife, you returned back up the train, to  the
             carriage in  which  Mr  Maboo  was  sitting.  Again,  you  are
             supported by others who were following you, a number of  them,
             pulling up their hoods as  they  went.  You  ignored  everyone
             trying to restrain or divert you, and  struck,  and  tried  to
             strike at Mr Maboo. In fact, on this occasion you also  failed
             because you are unable to get sufficiently  close  to  him  to
             deliver a blow. As it happened, the train stopped.  Even  then
             you did not desist, quite the reverse.  You  got  out  of  the
             train at the door nearest to you, then re-entered via the next-
             door up, so that you are now close to Mr Maboo, and  you  then
             struck the blow, subject to this charge.


             This was, as I have indicated, and must be clear from  what  I
             have said, a  deliberate,  sustained  and  determined  vicious
             attack upon an unarmed  and  defenceless  individual.  It  was
             carried out in public,  on  a  train,  without  the  slightest
             regard for either the individual you attacked or indeed anyone
             else on the train.  It  seems  that  you  are  concerned  with
             respect, I have to say you showed none."

     11. The Sentencing Judge finds it was a sustained and repeated  assault
         on the  same  victim,  that  there  was  a  significant  degree  of
         premeditation to the extent Mr Kamara went down the train after the
         first assault, obtained a knife, and then returned  to  his  victim
         determined to strike with the use of a particularly  nasty  weapon,
         with an intention to commit  a  more  serious  harm  than  actually
         resulted from the offence. The Judge found Mr  Kamara  caused  more
         harm  than  was  necessary  for  the  commission  of  the   offence
         deliberately targeting a vulnerable victim. Factors increasing  the
         seriousness were also found to be  the  location  in  public  on  a
         train, a late-night train, where there were a number of members  of
         the public present. The Judge also notes an attempt to  conceal  or
         dispose of the evidence in what is described in an  attempt  by  Mr
         Kamara to conceal himself as  when  he  got  on  another  train  he
         changed his clothes although having got off the train and after the
         doors close the Sentencing Judge noted Mr Kamara actually tried  to
         get back on again to continue the assault against Mr Maboo but  was
         unable to do so.
     12. The Sentencing Judge notes the starting point for the offence is  a
         period of 12 years in custody, the category range of 9 to 16 years,
         for which discount was given to Mr Kamara for his plea resulting in
         a sentence of 8 years imprisonment.
     13. The comments of the Sentencing Judge paint a clear picture  in  the
         mind of anybody reading them of a  violent  unprovoked  attack.  Mr
         Kamara, whilst minimising culpability for this and  events  leading
         to adjudications in prison, blames the fact he  suffers  from  PTSD
         and has anger management issues.
     14. It was found the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in  law  by
         speculating as to whether Mr Kamara had received  anger  management
         counselling and in suggesting that in  light  of  the  history  the
         Probation Service would have been more than likely to address  this
         in their work with him; which was not a finding  supported  by  the
         evidence available at that date.
     15. It was found at [11] of the Error of Law decision  that  there  are
         three aspects to the appeal which need to  be  properly  considered
         the first relating to the fact Mr Kamara does not appear to  accept
         responsibility for his actions, the second being the nature of  any
         services or support available to Mr Kamara and whether he has  made
         use of the same  and,  third,  whether  the  available  support  or
         intervention/assistance will make any  difference  in  relation  to
         identifying and mitigating the issues  of  concern;  sufficient  to
         enable a finding to be made that Mr Kamara does  not  pose  a  real
         risk in the future.
     16. Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal including those in the
         following terms:


               a) The appellant shall no later than Friday, 28 October  2019
                  file with the Upper Tribunal and send to the  respondent's
                  representative  a  consolidated,  indexed,  and  paginated
                  bundle containing all the evidence upon which  he  intends
                  to rely,  including  an  expert  report  from  a  Clinical
                  Psychologist  specialising  in  anger  management  issues.
                  Witness statements in the bundle must  be  signed,  dated,
                  and contain a declaration of truth and shall stand as  the
                  evidence in chief of the maker who shall  attend  for  the
                  purposes of cross-examination (if any)  in  re-examination
                  only.
               b) Applications for evidence such as the CCTV referred to  by
                  the Sentencing Judge for use at the forthcoming hearing or
                  for disclosure to the Clinical Psychologist must  be  made
                  without delay to ensure appropriate  arrangements  can  be
                  made by the appropriate party.



The evidence



     17. Mr Kamara has filed a number of witness statements  in  support  of
         his appeal, the original of which is dated 15 April 2019.  In  that
         Mr Kamara confirmed his stepfather is the sole breadwinner  in  the
         family unit in the United Kingdom.  Mr Kamara confirms he lives  in
         the property with two of his three  siblings,  both  of  whom  have
         special educational needs,  and  that  his  parents  care  for  his
         sister's child as a result of her own health issues.
     18. Mr Kamara states he entered the UK in December 2011 prior to  which
         he lived with his family in  Belgium.  The  appellant  had  entered
         Belgium with his two younger brothers who were 11 and 14  years  of
         age on 10 July 2010 to join their parents prior to which they lived
         in Freetown, Sierra Leonne, Mr Kamara's place of birth.   Prior  to
         coming to the United Kingdom Mr  Kamara's  stepfather  had  already
         applied for him to be issued with a Belgian passport which  he  was
         able to collect in July  2012.  Mr  Kamara  claims  that  since  he
         returned to Belgium to collect the passport he has not been back to
         that country.
     19. Mr Kamara claims he has lived in the United Kingdom since  December
         2011 and only lived in Belgium for about 18  months  in  total  and
         that he was just over 17 years of age when he joined his parents in
         Belgium.
     20. Mr Kamara states that whilst in  Belgium  his  mother  suffered  an
         horrific injury from which, while she has physically recovered, she
         has never fully recovered from the trauma.
     21. Mr Kamara confirms that his family visited  him  at  least  once  a
         month and sometimes more frequently whilst he was in prison.
     22. Mr Kamara claims he had never been in trouble  before  he  came  to
         Europe and that when he arrived he was struggling to cope as he was
         not particularly happy most of the time, did not know how to handle
         things, and had no one to talk to about his situation. Since  being
         granted immigration bail Mr Kamara states he has been able to  meet
         with his Probation Officer and talk about his life which  has  been
         helpful. Mr Kamara claims that if  he  is  given  more  counselling
         sessions where he could talk more about his life it  would  make  a
         lot of difference to how he views his life and will help  him  cope
         with the demands upon him. The  siblings  have  severe  autism  and
         mental health problems which Mr Kamara claims can be demanding.
     23. In relation to his criminal behaviour the Mr Kamara states:

             '14.     I have no history of aggressive criminal behaviour to
                  the level which led to my  conviction.  Whilst  I  was  in
                  prison, I had time to think about what happened. I  accept
                  that I could have managed  the  situation  far  better.  I
                  regret my actions and I  sincerely  hope  the  victim  has
                  fully  recovered  from  the  injury.  I  would   like   to
                  personally apologise to him for my  action.  My  solicitor
                  has suggested that if possible, I should try and  write  a
                  letter of apology to my victim expressing my  remorse  but
                  advised that I should not try to look for him  as  he  may
                  not want to see me. He has advised that I  should  discuss
                  this with my Probation Officer before doing anything.


             15.  There are issues in my life which I would like to discuss
                  with a Counsellor so that I could get assistance  to  deal
                  with those issues. I would like the opportunity  to  start
                  with a clean slate and to try and rebuild my life  in  the
                  UK. My solicitors advised that if there are issues  in  my
                  family which I  do  not  feel  able  to  discuss  with  my
                  parents, that I should speak to my Probation Officer or my
                  GP so that I could get help with Counselling.


             16.  I feel that I have let down my  siblings  as  I  was  not
                  there to look after them. I want to be able to continue to
                  be there for them. I worry that their  condition  may  get
                  worse and they  may  never  get  better.  That  is  why  I
                  particularly do not want to be deported because that  will
                  mean being separated again from my  family  especially  my
                  siblings for which they will always need  help.  My  [sic]
                  mother alone will not be able to cope.'

     24. In relation to work undertaken in prison Mr Kamara confirms he took
         part in many courses both to address his anger and to equip him for
         the labour market. English is his main language and  he  claims  he
         will be able to lead a far better and productive life in the UK. At
         [18] Mr Kamara states:

             '18.     I  do  not  particularly  believe  that  my  criminal
                  conviction will remain for long a barrier to my ability to
                  start afresh. I do  believe  that  if  I  am  deported  to
                  Belgium, I would be separated from my family who  are  all
                  here in the UK. Since leaving Belgium,  my  stepfather  no
                  longer has family ties there. Although he has lived  there
                  with my mother for longer period, my father was working in
                  the UK and I believe he would prefer to continue  to  make
                  his life here.'

     25. Mr Kamara claims he believes he has a better chance  of  rebuilding
         his life in the UK than in Belgium claiming he does not  speak  the
         Belgium language having lived there for less than two years and not
         having strong social or economic ties to Belgium.
     26. Mr Kamara has been in education at Lambeth College in London  since
         arriving in the United Kingdom and worked in a restaurant part-time
         and states he would like to return to employment.
     27. In relation to risk of future offending Mr Kamara states:

             '21.  My solicitor has suggested that I must keep  in  contact
                  with my Probation Officer that I must continue  to  report
                  to an Immigration Officer as I am required to do.  I  have
                  realised my mistake and I am working on my anger  so  that
                  in future if and when I find myself in the same  situation
                  which led to my imprisonment, I would be able to handle it
                  better. That is why I need to remain with my family  as  I
                  need their ongoing support to help me get better.  Without
                  their support which they showed me while I was in  prison,
                  I will not be able to manage on my  own.  That  is  why  I
                  believe that deportation is not an option in my situation.
                  I am redeemable and I need  the  support  of  the  British
                  Government to help me in my rehabilitation.


             22.  I have  produced  in  my  appeal  bundle  copies  of  the
                  certificates which I was awarded for the  courses  that  I
                  attended whilst I was in  prison.  I  do  have  a  genuine
                  desire to  turn  my  life  around.  But  I  cannot  do  so
                  successfully if I am deported or made to feel  that  I  am
                  not wanted in this country.'

     28. In his supplementary statement dated  4  November  2019  Mr  Kamara
         spends a lot of time complaining about the fact he is  not  allowed
         to work. Mr Kamara also confirms he has seen a Psychologist,  whose
         report is discussed further below, and claims he is going  to  need
         help. At [8-18] he states the following:

             '8.  I sincerely believe that it would help if I  am  able  to
                  access counselling therapy so that I  can  at  least  talk
                  about my home situation. I love my family but I do need  a
                  break. It would be nice to be able to take a break from my
                  home life. I am 26 years old still  living  at  home,  not
                  working. I am old enough to have a place  of  my  own  and
                  making plans for my future. That is not happening  and,  I
                  am not sure where I am heading. I am scared  of  what  the
                  future holds for me right now and I don't have someone  to
                  talk to, someone to listen to how I feel.


             9.   I do believe that how I feel gets bottled up inside of me
                  and I do not understand how to process this in a  sensible
                  and safe manner. I am  not  a  danger  to  members  of  my
                  community. But I do need the authorities to understand  my
                  situation.  It  is  frustrating  that  I  am  labelled   a
                  potential risk to society. I am not a danger to society. I
                  do need the authorities to understand and appreciate  what
                  I am going through and to provide me with support.


             10.  I have been explained what it means to be deported. First
                  of all, I do not have private or family life  in  Belgium.
                  My family moved to the UK and we all live here. I did  not
                  live long enough in Belgium to form a life of  my  own.  I
                  had my family  but  I  did  not  establish  roots  in  the
                  community in Belgium to be able to live on my  own.  I  do
                  not speak nor  understand  the  language.  I  was  granted
                  Belgian citizenship on the platform of my father under the
                  European law. The decision to deport me to Belgium because
                  of my criminal offence has been explained to me.  However,
                  I do not believe that Home Office has fully considered  my
                  family  circumstances  sufficient   to   appreciate   that
                  deporting me to Belgium is  likely  to  cause  me  and  my
                  family more harm than good. I  urgently  need  support  to
                  help me cope with my family situation.


             11.  The Psychologist's report has been prepared after I had a
                  meeting with the Psychologist and reading  through  papers
                  which were prepared by the  Prison  -  the  OAsys  report.
                  Through discussion with the Psychologist,  I  believe  she
                  was able to understand my family situation  and  the  root
                  cause of my anger problem. If I do get the opportunity  to
                  talk about my situation, I believe it would help me. I  do
                  believe also that my anger is an expression of what I feel
                  inside. That is why I am here asking the authorities about
                  the Home Office and the Social Services to help me. I need
                  a job. I need to work


             12.  If my appeal is not successful and I am to  be  deported,
                  my absence from my family will cause  serious  disruption.
                  For example my brother [A]  needs  me  to  care  for  him.
                  Details of his condition were included in my appeal bundle
                  which the Home Office and  the  Tribunal  read  before  my
                  appeal was heard and the Tribunal allowed my appeal. I  do
                  believe the Home Office is doing its job  -  to  kick  out
                  foreign nationals with criminal convictions or convictions
                  to represent risk of harm to the British public. The  Home
                  Office is already aware  of  my  family  situation  and  I
                  believe it should  understand  how  my  deportation  could
                  adversely affect my family life and  those  of  my  family
                  members. I believe that consideration has not  been  given
                  to what is likely to happen to my family if I am deported.
                  I do believe that my deportation would cause a rupture  to
                  my family life sufficient to violate my human  rights  and
                  the rights of my family members. I have been punished  for
                  my criminal offence with  prison  sentence.  I  am  not  a
                  repeat offender I have not been in any further trouble.  I
                  deserve to be given  every  opportunity  to  rehabilitate.
                  Preventing me from taking employment whilst my  appeal  is
                  ongoing is a violation of my human rights.


             13.  If the  Home  Office  has  properly  considered  all  the
                  evidence which is contained in my appeal bundle,  it  will
                  see that deportation is not the answer  to  deal  with  my
                  situation. I believe the answer to my  situation  is  that
                  the authorities should come to my rescue  by  arranging  a
                  package of support including Counselling Therapy. I am  in
                  pain and I need help. Making a deportation  order  against
                  me is like kicking me whilst I am already on the floor  in
                  agony. I need a helping hand, not a kick  in  the  head  -
                  which is what the Home  Office  is  doing  to  me  and  my
                  family.


             14.  I do not deny that I made a mistake and that I regret  my
                  actions. But I have been  punished  with  imprisonment.  I
                  should be allowed to rehabilitate and  provided  with  the
                  necessary support  to  help  my  rehabilitation.  I  would
                  expect the Court to be independent and be willing to  look
                  at my situation and to ask serious  questions  about  what
                  arrangements  have  been  put  in   place   to   help   me
                  rehabilitate. I am already here as a European  citizen.  I
                  believe that  this  country  has  the  means  to  help  me
                  rehabilitate if it genuinely wishes to  do  so.  Making  a
                  deportation order against me as a quick fix  which  leaves
                  more pains and harm in my family. I do  believe  that  the
                  Home Office should consider the likely impact on each  and
                  every member of my family.


             15.  My family can hardly afford  the  costs  of  pursuing  my
                  appeal. My father is the only one in  the  family  working
                  and meeting the financial needs of  the  family.  I  asked
                  that I am given the opportunity to rehabilitate  that  the
                  authorities should assist me by putting in place  measures
                  which would help me move on from my  mistake.  It  is  not
                  helping my situation. If I have been diagnosed with  anger
                  management problems, I think the question should be  asked
                  as to what leads to the anger in the first place. There is
                  no point discussing managing my anger when  the  cause  of
                  the anger remains unchecked removed.


             16.  By denying the right to take employment, the Home  Office
                  is making worse my situation. At 26 years of age  with  no
                  disability, I should not be made to feel like an  invalid,
                  and outcast.


             17.  I believe the Home Office may  be  acting  unlawfully  by
                  refusing to allow me to take employment as an EU  citizen.
                  Even though I have worked before, I am not  receiving  any
                  financial support  from  the  State  even  though  I  made
                  National Insurance Contributions in my previous employment
                  in the UK.


             18.  By refusing to allow me  to  take  employment,  the  Home
                  Office is deliberately pushing me  into  depression  as  I
                  feel worthless, unproductive and irrelevant in  a  society
                  where I wish to be long and  contribute  as  a  productive
                  member of society.'

     29. Of concern in the statement is what appears to  be  an  attempt  to
         blame others for his misfortune. Mr Kamara  is  the  subject  of  a
         deportation order as  a  result  of  his  offending.  There  is  no
         challenge to  the  lawfulness  of  the  deportation  order  or  the
         lawfulness of the respondent's decision not to permit his  to  work
         in the United Kingdom. It was accepted by Professor Rees that  such
         decisions are lawful, which is factually  correct.  The  statements
         also hint of a person asserting their rights as if  the  same  were
         determinative without accepting the responsibility that  goes  with
         being a member of the community of the United Kingdom.
     30. Before the First-Tier Tribunal the appellant was cross examined. In
         relation to his offending First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach  in  the
         decision of the 11 June 2019, which although the conclusion was set
         aside still stand as a record of the evidence  Mr  Kamara  gave  to
         that Tribunal, records:

             "11.     In cross-examination, the appellant said that on  the
                  day of the offence he had been to a party. He said that he
                  went to the party with  his  friend  and  friends  of  his
                  friend. He said that he only  knew  one  of  these  people
                  well. The appellant agreed that they were asked  to  leave
                  the party but then said that they were never told  to  go.
                  He said that  he  thought  that  it  was  because  it  was
                  overcrowded so they had to  leave.  The  appellant  agreed
                  that one of his group had a knife in his backpack. He said
                  that he found out about this knife when they were  on  the
                  train going to Southend to get  the  next  train  back  to
                  London. He said that they were coming back from the party.
                  The appellant agreed that the man showed him the knife. He
                  was asked why the man would do this and said that  it  was
                  not like the man showed him the knife for him to  use  it.
                  He said that they were talking and he heard the  man  said
                  that he had a knife in his bag. The  appellant  said  that
                  this was how he knew and that he did not intend to use it.
                  He said that this happened a few minutes after he  got  on
                  the train.


             12.  The appellant said that at the time of the offence he was
                  drunk. He said that he had an altercation with the  victim
                  then returned to get the knife. The appellant said that he
                  could not remember whether  he  asked  for  the  knife  or
                  whether he just took it. He said that he was drunk at  the
                  time. The appellant said that he had drunk half  a  bottle
                  of brandy from the start of the evening. He said  that  it
                  was a 1 L bottle that belonged to him and he bought it  to
                  share with his friend. He said that  he  and  his  friends
                  drank half a litre of brandy between them.  The  appellant
                  said that he was so drunk that he  suffered  blackouts  in
                  his memory. He said that he could not remember  what  part
                  his memory failed but that even his friend was telling him
                  to stop. He said that he  did  not  remember  the  initial
                  attack but that he saw the footage on CCTV and his  memory
                  came back. The appellant denied putting the  knife  behind
                  his back. He said that he  was  clenching  the  knife.  He
                  agreed that it was hidden and that he  remembered  someone
                  shouting that he had a knife. The appellant agreed that he
                  changed his clothing after the incident but denied that he
                  was trying to conceal evidence. He said that he  took  his
                  jacket off because he was hot. The appellant said that the
                  Judge was wrong when he stated  that  he  had  undoubtedly
                  tried to conceal himself. He said that he had never  tried
                  to hide the evidence. The appellant  said  that  he  still
                  maintained that he was not in control of his  actions.  He
                  said that he was not looking to start a fight and is not a
                  violent person. The appellant said that the victim  had  a
                  problem with one of his friends. He said  that  they  were
                  talking and that the person said that the victim had  been
                  saying bad things about him. The appellant said that  this
                  is why he went to speak to the victim.  He  said  that  he
                  thought that the victim was  going  to  punch  him  so  he
                  punched the victim first and then the victim  punched  him
                  so hard he thought that he was going to fall over. He  was
                  referred to the Judge's comments  which  stated  that  the
                  Judge did not accept that the appellant  was  not  looking
                  for trouble. The appellant said that the Judge  was  wrong
                  about this.


             13.  The appellant was referred to the adjudication  regarding
                  an assault on a prisoner. He said that he  was  there  but
                  that he did not take part. He  said  that  there  were  20
                  people  there  and  they  all  got  an  adjudication.  The
                  appellant was referred to  the  adjudication  regarding  a
                  mobile phone. He said that  he  was  struggling  with  not
                  speaking to his mother and so he got the  phone.  He  said
                  that it was the first time the he had been in  prison  and
                  he wanted to speak to his mother urgently and so he bought
                  the phone to speak to her. The appellant  agreed  that  he
                  knew that it was against the rules but that he  had  still
                  done it.


             14.  The appellant denied being  found  in  possession  of  an
                  herbal wrap. He said that this was on the second  occasion
                  of the phone which was in the TV and that it was not  just
                  him. He said that they found the wrap  in  his  cell.  The
                  appellant said that he was not on an adjudication for this
                  and never lost any privileges but that the wrap was  found
                  on his side. The appellant  said  that  this  adjudication
                  took place in October related to  the  same  time  as  the
                  second phone incident. He said that  it  was  a  different
                  date because he wanted a Solicitor  and  the  adjudication
                  had been adjourned."

     31. Witness statements have also  been  provided  by  the  Mr  Kamara's
         mother and stepfather confirming the family  history,  composition,
         and health issues appertaining to Mr Kamara's two younger siblings.
         Similar comments are made regarding Mr Kamara's inability to  work.
         It is clear these family members  clearly  support  Mr  Kamara  and
         object to his deportation from the  United  Kingdom  especially  in
         light of the problems that will be caused to the  remaining  family
         members. The statements refer to the view of  the  family  that  Mr
         Kamara will benefit from the support he is likely to  receive  from
         the family if he is allowed to stay in the United Kingdom.
     32. Two OASys reports have been prepared the first dated the 1  October
         2018. The analysis of the offence recorded in section  2.1  of  the
         report is in the following terms:

             "Mr Kamara was  sentenced  to  8  years  imprisonment  for  an
             offence  of  GBH  (Sec.18).  I  have  had  sight  of  the  CPS
             documents, which states that on the 6.2.15  Mr  Kamara  and  a
             group of friends boarded a train at  Leigh  on  Sea,  where  a
             fight commenced between Mr Kamara, a number of other males and
             victim, Mr Mbu. The first attack lasted  for  a  few  seconds,
             then the group  Mr  Kamara  was  in  walked  back  to  another
             carriage. On CCTV Mr Kamara is then seen walking back into the
             carriage, where he is seen by a number  of  witnesses  take  a
             wooden handled 7-inch serrated blade out of his  rucksack.  Mr
             Kamara was seen punching Mr Mbu, in the company of two others.
              He then goes back into another carriage, where  he  goes  and
             gets the knife again, however could not get to  Mr  Mbu  [sic]
             because people were fighting on  the  train.  Mr  Kamara  then
             proceeds to get off the stationary train and re-enters,  where
             he is seen to hold the knife  high  above  his  head,  with  a
             witness describing it as being with a terrific force.  Mr  Mbu
             puts his hand up in a defensive gesture, which resulted  in  a
             knife going straight through the centre of Mr Mbu's hand.


             Mr Kamara generally agrees  with  the  version  of  events  as
             presented by  the  prosecution  and  pleaded  guilty  to  this
             offence.


             .....


             Mr Kamara stated that the group went to a party where he drunk
             a quantity of alcohol and he told me in an interview  that  he
             was drunk at this time. He then explained that the group  were
             kicked out of the party and he then intended to make  his  way
             back home. He explained that  the  group  saw  the  victim  at
             Benfleet station and I understand that once on the train,  two
             girls who were with Mr Kamara's group went to join the  victim
             in another carriage. Mr Kamara explained that, two individuals
             left the group following the two girls  and  returned  shortly
             after, explaining to him that the girls had 'ditched them' for
             the victim and that the victim had been 'disrespectful'.


             Mr Kamara stated that he  went  to  the  victims  carriage  to
             discuss the situation with the victim and 'calm  things  down'
             though he told  me  that  the  discussion  became  heated  and
             resulted  in  a  physical  confrontation.  Mr  Kamara   admits
             punching the victim stating that he was drunk; as he felt  the
             victim was also disrespectful; this alteration was  caught  on
             CCTV. Mr Kamara submits that he does not remember  much  after
             this point as the anger  and  alcohol  clouded  his  judgement
             though he accepts that  he  subsequently  stabbed  the  victim
             through the hand with a knife."

     33. The impact upon the victim in  section  2.5  is  recorded  as  "the
         victim received stab wound to the left  hand  that  penetrated  the
         centre of his hand and exited the flesh at the back.  I  understand
         that he had to receive surgery on the hand. It is expected that the
         victim suffered significant psychological harm as a result of being
         a victim of a  stabbing,  alongside  the  physical  harm  described
         above."
     34. At section 2.8 discussing why the incident occurred to  the  author
         of the OASys report writes:

             "It appears that this offence was  triggered  by  Mr  Kamara's
             group, having their advances, on the two  girls  in  question,
             rejected. The group  harboured  umbrage  towards  the  victim,
             likely as a result of the two girls  going  to  sit  with  the
             victim. Mr Kamara states that he also felt that the victim was
             disrespectful towards him and states that alcohol  consumption
             affected  his  decision-making.  I  discussed  with  him   the
             presence of the knife and he reported that  an  individual  in
             the group had informed him that he had a knife in his bag when
             the two  members  of  the  group  returned  from  the  victims
             carriage before Mr Kamara went  to  confront  the  victim.  Mr
             Kamara denies having any prior knowledge of the weapon  before
             the offence and denies that this was a planned attack or  that
             it was gang related in any way.


             It is my assessment that Mr Kamara has on this occasion  shown
             a clear lack of consequential thinking skills. He reports that
             he is not normally a violent individual and presents at a loss
             to explain his actions, citing alcohol as a  disinhibitor.  He
             was clearly frustrated with this situation  and  exhibited  an
             extreme form of violence  and  there  is  little  evidence  to
             dispute this.  Therefore  it  is  considered  that  Mr  Kamara
             responded poorly to a difficult situation  failed  to  realise
             the seriousness of his actions, demonstrating thinking  skills
             deficits."

     35. There is also a second OASys which is dated 19  February  2019.  In
         relation to the adjudications whilst in prison, which Mr Kamara has
         sought to minimise, the  OASys  report  records  four  such  events
         being:


             26/03/2017 -  assault of another prisoner.
             05/10/2016 -  possession of 1 x wrap of herbal substance.
             31/06/16 -    possession of mobile phone and charger.
             03/01/16 -    possession of mobile phone.


     36. In assessing risk of serious harm, section R10.1-6, the  author  of
         the OASys report identifies the  nature  of  risk  to  be  risk  of
         physical harm resulting from assault with the  use  of  weapons  in
         addition to the psychological harm that one would  experience  from
         being the victim of an attack with a weapon. The effect is assessed
         to be serious long lasting and could possibly result in  death.  In
         relation to when the risk is at its greatest and  whether  imminent
         or not, it is found the risk of harm is  not  imminent  because  Mr
         Kamara was at that time in custody although it is found he presents
         as an impressionable individual and as a result was  assessed  that
         should he be subjected to negative influences in custody  there  is
         potential for him to resort to risky behaviour. The authors  report
         assessed that the risk is likely to be greatest when Mr  Kamara  is
         associated with negative peers who are in possession  of  a  weapon
         and that should he choose to engage in  confrontational  situations
         whilst under the influence of alcohol  this  would  make  the  risk
         immediate.
     37. The author, when considering circumstances likely to  reduce  risk,
         states that should Mr Kamara disassociate with negative peers  that
         would reduce the risk of further offences and that in  addition  he
         should be able to address his thought process in regard to  violent
         behaviour and managing  his  emotions  which  should  significantly
         reduce the risk of violent offending.
     38. At paragraph 10.6 assessing risk the report records:


         |Risk         |Risk in      |Risk in      |
|             |Community    |Custody      |
|Children     |Low          |Low          |
|Public       |High         |Low          |
|Known Adult  |Low          |Low          |
|Staff        |Low          |Low          |
|Prisoners    |             |Low          |


     39. In relation to existing support/controls at  section  R  11.12  the
         author of the report records that Mr Kamara has been assessed as  a
         high risk of harm to the public and low risk  in  other  categories
         with criminogenic features including lifestyle and associates, drug
         use and thinking behaviour.
     40. At 11.12.2 it is noted  that  Mr  Kamara  was  getting  support  in
         custody from his Offender Supervisor and a mental health worker who
         is monitoring his  emotional  well-being,  that  support  from  the
         Probation Service in the community will involve weekly  supervision
         appointments, referrals to agencies who will work with Mr Kamara on
         risk factors, that Mr Kamara receives a lot  of  support  from  his
         family who visit him regularly in prison, that Mr  Kamara  will  be
         subject to Licence which will mean conditions could  be  placed  on
         his Licence which may include noncontact condition and an exclusion
         zone, and that Mr Kamara will be managed by Lambeth MAPPA.
     41. Specific risks are identified as Mr Kamara's use  of  violence  and
         aggression such that he was not  assessed  as  being  suitable  for
         Resolve and therefore will need to undertake one  to  one  work  in
         relation to this in the community, that he required work looking at
         the negative and impact alcohol has on  his  behaviour  within  the
         community, and that he will need to give thought to whom he  spends
         time with having acknowledged  that  some  of  his  peers  are  not
         prosocial and that he  can  be  influenced  requiring  work  to  be
         undertaken with him around him being assertive.
     42. The later report records the details of the offence  and  offending
         as set out in the initial report, and records at section  7.5  when
         identifying lifestyle issues contributing to risk of offending  and
         harm,:

             "While Mr Kamara may deny that there are any  issues  in  this
             area, I would note that he spends the  majority  of  his  time
             'out with friends' one of whom was present at the offence.  He
             spoke positively of his associates though stated that only one
             of those with him at the time of the offence was  his  friend,
             submitting that he had only met the others  in  the  group  on
             that night. In interview he reported that his friends  do  not
             normally get into trouble although accepted that if his friend
             had  introduced  him  to  these  new  individuals  and   these
             individuals were getting into trouble then it was likely  that
             his friend also was. In addition there  were  reports  on  the
             same night as the  index  offence  that  the  group  had  been
             involved in a Robbery. Mr Kamara stated that he had heard that
             some members of the group had been involved in a fight but  he
             stated that he was at a nearby shop at the time  and  did  not
             see what had happened. Mr Kamara also reported that  he  would
             smoke Cannabis with his friends  and  therefore  it  could  be
             considered that they are not wholly positive influences.


             It is not considered that Mr Kamara  was  the  leader  of  the
             group though it is considered that he escalated the  situation
             being the one whom went to  get  the  knife.  In  addition  he
             reported that one of the group made him aware of the  presence
             of the knife and did not appear to object to him obtaining and
             using the weapon, possibly alluding to them being  in  support
             of his behaviour. I would assess that Mr Kamara is  influenced
             by his peers however it is difficult to  gauge  the  level  of
             this as this  is  the  only  evidence  of  negative  behaviour
             relating to associates. I would highlight that Mr  Kamara  has
             not previously come to the attention of police for  antisocial
             behaviour. Despite this it is concerning that  Mr  Kamara  has
             made the choice to associate with individuals who carry knives
             and as a result I would assess that this area is linked  to  a
             risk of serious harm and offending behaviour."

    43. At section 10.8 referring to whether issues of emotional well-being
        contributing to the  risk  of  offending  and  self-harm  had  been
        identified it is written:

             "Mr Kamara did not disclose any significant issues relating to
             emotional well-being outside of his current circumstances.  In
             his self-assessment questionnaire  we  did  highlight  feeling
             stressed and depressed though it was clear  that  this  was  a
             consequence of his currently being in custody and the prospect
             of a custodial sentence. Mr Kamara reported that he  is  often
             described as a likeable person and was adamant that the  index
             offence was 'out of character'. He told me that his biological
             father passed away previously and his  mother  and  stepfather
             often argue and I would assess that these  events  would  have
             had an effect on his emotional well-being. He told me he  does
             not like being at home and alluded to having some difficulties
             coping. When I investigated this area with Mr Kamara  he  told
             me that he believes he can sometimes have a quick  temper  but
             does not believe that he has any psychiatric problems.


             From his presentation and interview I am  inclined  to  accept
             his reports, he presented as an anxious though other than this
             his current issues appear to revolve around  the  consequences
             of the offence, namely being in custody. Mr Kamara stated that
             he was recently put on antidepressants and that  he  has  been
             seeing the mental health nurse. His low  mood  appears  to  be
             linked to circumstances, which include being  in  custody  and
             the fact he could be deported."

     44. Section 11.10 the author records "while this is the  only  evidence
         of Mr Kamara displaying violent behaviour I have  assessed  him  as
         having temper control issues as a result of this  offence  and  his
         own reports. Mr Kamara told me that he thinks  that  he  has  anger
         management issues, stating that he does not have patience for a lot
         of things that he thinks he has a short temper. I  assess  that  an
         example of this can be seen within the index offence given that  he
         resorted to physical violent when he thought that  the  victim  was
         'disrespectful'. Mr Kamara was open to receiving assistance in this
         area, though stated that the index offence has opened his  eyes  to
         this behaviour and that he stated that he  would  never  behave  in
         this way in the future.
     45.  The  author  records  that  while  there  is  little  evidence  of
         persistent issues in this area he or she would  still  assess  that
         thinking and behaviour are linked to risk  of  harm  and  offending
         behaviour given the circumstances of  the  index  offence  and  the
         escalation of violence. It  was  noted  that  the  Thinking  Skills
         Programme was not suitable for Mr Kamara whilst he was in custody.
     46.  In  Section  12.8  the  author  of  report  records  a  number  of
         adjudications whilst in  prison  as  recorded  above.  Although  Mr
         Kamara's evidence appeared to  attempt  to  minimise  such  further
         aspects  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  incidence  as
         recorded, one of which led to further court appearance, are not  as
         noted in the report. The author  does  record,  in  addition,  that
         despite the adjudications the feedback from the prison is  that  Mr
         Kamara has a good relationship with the staff and was at that point
         on enhanced privileges.
     47. In relation to the likelihood of serious harm to others;  the  full
         risk of serious harm analysis remains as recorded above  with  high
         risk to members of the public in the  community  but  low  risk  in
         relation to all other specified groups. The Predictor Scores  %  is
         recorded as:


         |                                         |1 year |2 year |3 year |
|                                         |%      |%      |%      |
|OGRS 3 probability of proven reoffending |19     |33     |Low    |
|OGP probability of proven nonviolent     |10     |18     |Low    |
|reoffending                              |       |       |       |
|OVP probability of proven violent type   |11     |18     |Low    |
|reoffending                              |       |       |       |


     48. There is also within the  appellant's  bundle  a  letter  from  the
         National Probation Service dated 20 September 2019  written  by  Mr
         Kamara's Probation Officer in the following terms:

             "I have been asked to provide information  regarding  what  Mr
             Kamara has done to lower his risk of serious  harm  to  medium
             and his risk of reoffending. Whilst  in  custody  and  in  the
             community Mr Kamara has completed


                  Counselling and Anger Management


                  1 to 1 Anger Management in the community


                  Level 1 in IT, Maths, English and Painting and Decorating"

     49. Mr Kamara also relies upon a report prepared by a Tamara  Licht  of
         'Private Therapy' a clinic based at Harley Street in London dated 9
         October  2019  described  as  being   "Psychological   Report   for
         Immigration Case".
     50. It is not clear when the specific direction of the  Upper  Tribunal
         was  for  the  instruction  of  an  expert  Clinical   Psychologist
         specialising in anger management issues Tamara Licht was chosen. At
         1.01 of the report it is written:

             "I am Tamara Licht an HCPC  accredited  Clinical  Psychologist
             and Counselling Psychologist.  I  work  with  children,  young
             people  and  adults  medico-legal  reports   and   therapeutic
             interventions mostly under CBT and psychodynamic principles. I
             have experience working at IAPT and CAMHS services within  the
             NHS  and  also  provide  psychological  services  in   private
             settings."

     51. The website for the Private Therapy clinic describes  Tamara  Licht
         as a highly specialist child and adult psychologist.
     52. No issue was taken by Mr Tufan in relation to the expertise of  the
         author of the report and it accepted Psychologists can help  people
         recognize and avoid the triggers that make them angry and can  also
         provide  ways  to  help  them  manage  the  inevitable  anger  that
         sometimes flares without warning; but it  is  also  not  clear  why
         those instructing Tamara Licht to prepare the report appear to have
         provided her with such limited documentary evidence. Appendix 2  of
         the report listing documents  examined  records  "OASys  Assessment
         dated  on  19  February  2019".  It  is  not  explained   why   the
         Psychologist was not provided with copies of the Sentencing Remarks
         or asked whether she wished to see a copy of the CCTV footage taken
         in the train carriage of the actual offence. In particular it  does
         not appear a copy of the Error of Law finding of the Upper Tribunal
         was provided which set out the specific issues  it  was  hoped  the
         report would deal with. Questions also arise  in  relation  to  the
         quality of the instructions given to  the  expert  by  Mr  Kamara's
         solicitors. It was quite clearly stated in the Error of Law finding
         the type of issues a report was to address yet at section  1.02  Ms
         Licht writes:

             "The case concerns Mr Ishmael Kamara (D.O.B:  10/05/1993)  who
             is currently undergoing an immigration case as a result  of  a
             crime he committed in 2015.


             I have been instructed to carry out a psychological assessment
             on Mr Kamara and to provide a report exploring the following:


                   a. Provide a psychological assessment of Mr  Kamara  and
                      to


                   b. Comment on any support that Mr Kamara and his  family
                      may need to overcome the challenges they  face  as  a
                      family who is raising and living with  children  with
                      severe disabilities - autism."

     53. In relation to the index offence Ms Licht records at section 3.01:

             Mr Kamara  is  currently  taking  150  mg  of  Sertraline.  He
             indicated  he  had  brief   experience   with   Eye   Movement
             Desensitisation and Reprocessing (EMDR)  therapy  towards  the
             end of the time he served in prison. He  expressed  that  from
             the brief  course  of  EMDR  he  received,  some  symptoms  of
             emotional distress lessened. However, once out of  prison,  he
             had been left without any form of psychological support; thus,
             he  is  concerned  symptoms   of   emotional   distress   have
             reappeared.


             Mr Kamara indicated that when he  was  approximately  5  years
             old, he witnessed his father being killed 'in front  of'  him.
             Additionally, Mr Kamara's finger,  as  his  father  was  being
             killed, was cut (he showed me his index finger which lacks the
             proximal phalanx bone). This was back home in Sierra Leone. He
             expressed a feel  'scared  all  the  time'  and  indicated  he
             'doesn't want it to happen again' (referring  to  not  wanting
             anyone close to him to  be  hurt  or  in  danger).  Mr  Kamara
             explained that 'everything  recalled,  everything  came  back'
             (referring to his childhood trauma - his father  being  killed
             in front of him and his finger being cut) when he witnessed  a
             friend being stabbed. Mr Kamara also explained that  when  the
             stabbing took place he promised himself he  would  'never  let
             this happen to  me'  and  that  he  would  'protect'  himself.
             Furthermore, he indicated that the incident with the knife was
             fuelled by the thought that he should 'protect' himself  given
             his past childhood  trauma.  He  indicated  he  is  constantly
             'scared' for his 'life'."

         The Psychologist's opinion set out at Section 4 of the report is in
         the following terms:

             "It is my  professional  opinion  that  Mr  Kamara  meets  the
             criteria for 309.18 Post-traumatic Stress Disorder  (F  43.10)
             as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of  Mental
             Disorders Fifth Edition (DSM -V).


             In my  professional  opinion,  symptoms  associated  with  the
             diagnosis and named above and exposure to a scene of  conflict
             (dispute between him and his mates) may have revived traumatic
             events from his childhood. Individuals with PTSD may be quick-
             tempered and may  even  engage  in  aggressive  verbal  and/or
             physical behaviour with little or no provocation (APA,  2013).
             Furthermore, PTSD  is  often  characterised  by  a  heightened
             sensitivity to potential threats,  including  those  that  are
             related to the traumatic experience (APA, 2013). Given that Mr
             Kamara was exposed (during his early childhood) to a scene  of
             crime where blood and sharp object were present  (killing  his
             father and resulting in  his  finger  being  cut),  it  is  my
             professional opinion that a scene such as  a  dispute  between
             him and his mates may be considered a trigger to  past  trauma
             and  better  explain   his   defensive   behaviour   in   this
             circumstance.


             Additionally, it is my professional opinion that  Mr  Kamara's
             current  family  situation  (as  described  in  the  interview
             section of this report) further impacted  his  past  behaviour
             and continues to have a negative impact at present.


             Severe mental health conditions, such as the one that has been
             diagnosed in  Mr  Kamara,  affect  an  individual's  personal,
             family, academic  and  social  life.  These  factors  are  all
             interconnected and when well balanced, they contribute  to  an
             overall sense of well-being. However, in Mr Kamara's case, his
             personal  (childhood  trauma),  family   (carer's   role   and
             dysfunctional family dynamic) and social (adjusting to  a  new
             culture and environment) spheres are and have been for a  long
             time in constant distress; and leading to severe psychological
             distress.


             It is my  professional  opinion  that  psychological  distress
             affects the way an individual overcomes  the  challenges  they
             may face in  life.  Therefore,  in  my  opinion,  Mr  Kamara's
             behaviour, which  led  him  to  serve  in  prison,  is  to  be
             considered a result of psychological distress. It is  also  my
             professional  opinion  that  because  Mr  Kamara  hasn't  been
             formally  diagnosed  with  any  mental  or   physical   health
             conditions, the family and Mr Kamara himself put  pressure  on
             him in order to contain the whole family.  The  aforementioned
             is unsustainable and, in my professional  opinion,  nearing  a
             severe mental and physical breaking point for  Mr  Kamara  and
             his family.


             It is my professional opinion that Mr Kamara  and  his  family
             could  do  with  support  from  Social  Services   and   other
             professional bodies who may be able to establish  a  healthier
             family dynamic by reallocating the roles  of  each  individual
             and supporting each family  member  with  their  own  personal
             struggles.


             PTSD is associated with poor social and  family  relationships
             (APA, 2013). Family therapy will also be beneficial  in  order
             to establish  new  and  healthier  patterns  of  communication
             between all family members  in  favour  of  preventing  future
             psychological distress. It is  my  professional  opinion  that
             although it is unlikely the family will be able to gain access
             to such support, it  is  a  valid  point  to  consider  is  Mr
             Kamara's conviction and possible deportation  is  putting  the
             whole family under severe mental and financial pressure. It is
             my professional opinion that Mr Kamara's family is at breaking
             point. The aforementioned may have serious  repercussions  not
             only on Mr Kamara's mental health but also on his siblings and
             mother's mental and physical health.


             Finally, in addition to  Sertraline,  it  is  my  professional
             opinion that Mr Kamara  may  greatly  benefit  from  more  Eye
             Movement Desensitisation Reprocessing (EMDR) sessions to  work
             through past childhood trauma experience.  After  symptoms  of
             PTSD lesson,  he  will  be  a  good  candidate  for  Cognitive
             Behaviour  Therapy,  and  symptoms  related  to  anxiety   and
             depression."

     54. Having undertaken  an  assessment  on  the  basis  of  the  limited
         documentary evidence and interview the psychologist  assesses  risk
         at 4.03 in the following terms:

             "In my professional opinion, given that Mr Kamara hasn't  been
             formally  diagnosed  with  any  mental  or   physical   health
             conditions, the family and Mr Kamara himself put  pressure  on
             him in order to contain the whole family.  The  aforementioned
             is unsustainable and, in my professional  opinion,  nearing  a
             severe mental and physical breaking point for  Mr  Kamara  and
             his family.


             It is also my professional opinion that the risk of presenting
             suicidal thoughts is high given the  degree  and  severity  of
             symptoms  associated  with  PTSD  presentation.   Furthermore,
             literature suggests that suicidal behaviour may be present  in
             individuals with PTSD (APA, 2013).


             Major depressive episodes and severe anxiety disorder may also
             emerge if symptoms related to PTSD are not  urgently  treated.
             The aforementioned will result  in  an  increase  of  suicidal
             risk."

     55. The report raises issues never previously considered in relation to
         this appeal and matters that have to be considered as part  of  the
         evidence as a whole. Mr Kamara in his earlier statement  refers  to
         support for his brothers within the family being shared,  with  his
         stepfather, and not falling upon his shoulders solely.
     56. The psychologist's assessment that Mr  Kamara's  actions  may  have
         been 'defensive' as a result  of  his  PTSD  contradict  the  clear
         aggressive proactive nature of his actions on the train, being  the
         perpetrator of the initial violence and  returning  to  obtain  the
         knife to prolong the attack. There was no evidence  of  any  direct
         threat to Mr Kamara that warranted such action.



Discussion



     57. Had this been a domestic deportation there is a strong  possibility
         Mr Kamara would have been deported from the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         result of the serious  nature  of  his  offence  and  the  sentence
         received. This is, however, the  deportation  of  an  EEA  national
         requiring  additional  consideration  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
         Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 Regulations').
     58. Regulation 27 is the relevant provision  which  concerns  decisions
         taken on grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
         health

             '27.-    (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision"  means
                  an EEA decision taken on the  grounds  of  public  policy,
                  public security or public health.


                  (2)  A  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  to  serve
                  economic ends.


                  (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a
                  person  with  a  right  of   permanent   residence   under
                  regulation 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy
                  and public security.


                  (4)  A relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except  on
                  imperative grounds of public security in respect of an EEA
                  national who-


                      (a)   has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for   a
                      continuous period of at least ten years prior to  the
                      relevant decision; or


                      (b)  is under the age  of  18,  unless  the  relevant
                      decision is in  the  best  interests  of  the  person
                      concerned, as provided for in the Convention  on  the
                      Rights of the Child adopted by the  General  Assembly
                      of the United Nations on 20th November 1989(17).


                  (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of
                  the United Kingdom include  restricting  rights  otherwise
                  conferred by these Regulations in  order  to  protect  the
                  fundamental interests of society,  and  where  a  relevant
                  decision is taken on grounds of public  policy  or  public
                  security it must also be  taken  in  accordance  with  the
                  following principles-


                      (a)  the decision must comply with the  principle  of
                      proportionality;


                      (b)  the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the
                      personal conduct of the person concerned;


                      (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the   person   must
                      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                      threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of
                      society, taking into  account  past  conduct  of  the
                      person and that  the  threat  does  not  need  to  be
                      imminent;


                      (d)  matters isolated from  the  particulars  of  the
                      case or which relate  to  considerations  of  general
                      prevention do not justify the decision;


                      (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do  not
                      in themselves justify the decision;


                      (f)   the  decision  may  be  taken  on  preventative
                      grounds, even in the absence of a  previous  criminal
                      conviction, provided the grounds are specific to  the
                      person.


                  (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of
                  public policy and public security in relation to a  person
                  ("P") who is resident in the United Kingdom, the  decision
                  maker must take account of considerations such as the age,
                  state of health, family and economic situation of  P,  P's
                  length of residence in the United Kingdom, P's social  and
                  cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
                  extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


                  (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds
                  of public health-


                      (a)  a disease that does not have epidemic  potential
                      as defined by the relevant instruments of  the  World
                      Health Organisation or is not  a  disease  listed  in
                      Schedule 1 to the  Health  Protection  (Notification)
                      Regulations 2010(18); or


                      (b)   if  the  person  concerned  is  in  the  United
                      Kingdom, any disease occurring after the  three-month
                      period beginning on the  date  on  which  the  person
                      arrived in the United Kingdom,


                  does not constitute grounds for the decision.


                  (8)   A  court  or  tribunal   considering   whether   the
                  requirements  of  this  regulation  are   met   must   (in
                  particular) have regard to the considerations contained in
                  Schedule  1  (considerations  of  public  policy,   public
                  security and the fundamental interests of society etc.).'

     59. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations reads:

             'SCHEDULE 1 CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY,  PUBLIC  SECURITY
             AND THE FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.


             Considerations of public policy and public security


             1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale  of  public
             policy  or  public  security  values:  member   States   enjoy
             considerable discretion, acting within the parameters  set  by
             the EU Treaties, applied where relevant by the EEA  agreement,
             to define their own standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.


             Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom


             2.   An EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national
             having extensive familial and societal links with  persons  of
             the  same  nationality  or  language  does   not   amount   to
             integration in the United Kingdom;  a  significant  degree  of
             wider cultural and societal integration must be present before
             a person may be regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.


             3.   Where an EEA national or the  family  member  of  an  EEA
             national has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.


             4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an
             EEA national or the family member of an  EEA  national  within
             the United Kingdom  if  the  alleged  integrating  links  were
             formed at or around the same time as-


                  (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;


                  (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests
                  of society;


                  (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA  national
                  was in custody.


             5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or
             the family member of an EEA national who is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.


             6.   It is consistent with public policy and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including-


                  (a)  entering, attempting to enter  or  assisting  another
                  person to enter or to attempt to enter, a marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or


                  (b)  fraudulently obtaining or attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.


             The fundamental interests of society


             7.   For the purposes of these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-


                  (a)  preventing unlawful  immigration  and  abuse  of  the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;


                  (b)  maintaining public order;


                  (c)  preventing social harm;


                  (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;


                  (e)  protecting public services;


                  (f)  excluding or  removing  an  EEA  national  or  family
                  member of an EEA national  with  a  conviction  (including
                  where the conduct of that person is likely  to  cause,  or
                  has in fact caused, public offence) and maintaining public
                  confidence in the ability of the relevant  authorities  to
                  take such action;


                  (g)  tackling offences likely to  cause  harm  to  society
                  where an immediate or direct victim may  be  difficult  to
                  identify but where there is wider societal harm  (such  as
                  offences related to the misuse of drugs or  crime  with  a
                  cross-border dimension as mentioned in  Article  83(1)  of
                  the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);


                  (h)   combating  the  effects  of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);


                  (i)   protecting  the  rights  and  freedoms  of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;


                  (j)  protecting the public;


                  (k)  acting in the best interests of  a  child  (including
                  where doing so entails refusing a child admission  to  the
                  United  Kingdom,  or  otherwise  taking  an  EEA  decision
                  against a child);


                  (l)  countering terrorism  and  extremism  and  protecting
                  shared values.

     60. The starting point is to assess the level of protection to which Mr
         Kamara is entitled as an EEA national. It is not disputed  that  Mr
         Kamara failed to establish an entitlement to  anything  other  than
         the lower level of protection namely that the Secretary of State is
         required to show that the person's  removal  is  justified  on  the
         grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
         accordance with regulation 27. Mr Kamara does not have a  permanent
         right of residence despite his time in the UK.
     61. The 2016 Regulations, Schedule 1, paragraph 3, state that where  an
         EEA national/family member has received a custodial sentence or  is
         a persistent  offender,  the  longer  the  sentence,  or  the  more
         numerous the convictions,  the  greater  the  likelihood  that  the
         individual's continued presence in the  UK  represents  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  the  fundamental
         interests of society.
     62. The public policy  ground  for  removal  is  an  exception  to  the
         fundamental principle of the free exercise of  EU  rights  and,  as
         such, has to be construed restrictively. In R v Bouchereau 1978  QB
         732 (ECJ) 760 it was said that  the  presence  or  conduct  of  the
         individual should constitute a  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat to public policy.
     63. It is not in dispute that the basis of the decision is  exclusively
         on the personal conduct of Mr Kamara. Mr  Tufan  referred  to  R  v
         Bouchereau (Case C-30/77) in which the Advocate General agreed that
         in exceptional cases, where the personal conduct of  an  alien  had
         caused deep public revulsion, public policy required  his  removal.
         There was an element of pragmatism in Bouchereau in the recognition
         of the right to deport those who had committed the most heinous  of
         crimes, which was at odds  with  the  principles  of  the  Citizens
         Directive.  The Court of Appeal in Secretary of the State  for  the
         Home Department v Robinson (Jamaica) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  85  decided
         that Bouchereau continued to bind the courts of this country albeit
         it was confined to the sort of  case  where  the  facts  were  very
         extreme as one was looking for a  threat  to  the  requirements  of
         public policy caused simply by past conduct which has  caused  deep
         public revulsion.
     64. An EEA national may also be expelled as a result  of  the  decision
         taken on preventative grounds provided the grounds are specific  to
         the person. Although Mr Kamara has one conviction  clearly  he  has
         the propensity to offend further if a similar situation arises.  It
         is unfortunate knife crime is not a rarity with  daily  reports  of
         individuals carrying knifes and stabbed in  London  and  elsewhere.
         Indeed by September 2019 there had been over 120 deaths as a result
         of knife -related acts of violence in the capital.  A  figure  that
         appears to be increasing year-on-year. The preventative and  public
         revulsion elements carry some weight on the  facts  of  this  case,
         albeit neither is determinative on its own.
     65. An important question this appeal is whether there is a  real  risk
         of a repeat of conduct that threatens  the  fundamental  interests.
         Any finding that there is such a threat  had  to  be  based  on  an
         assessment  of  the  personal  conduct  Mr  Kamara,   taking   into
         consideration the reasons for  the  deportation  decision  and  the
         factors on which that decision was based, particularly  the  nature
         and gravity of the crimes or acts, the  degree  of  his  individual
         involvement in them, whether there were any grounds  for  excluding
         criminal liability, and whether or not he has been convicted.
     66. Mr Kamara seeks to persuade the Upper Tribunal  there  will  be  no
         such repeat in the future. The difficulty for Mr Kamara is that the
         evidence he seeks to rely upon does not establish this  is  so.  Mr
         Kamara admits he has a problem with his temper  and  is  clearly  a
         person who will resort  to  serious  and  possibly  fatal  acts  of
         violence if he wishes to do so. The reason behind  his  failure  to
         control his temper and his general presentation  may  perhaps  have
         been explained for the first time by the psychologist  although  in
         the OASys report there is no  record  of  Mr  Kamara  raising  such
         issues and instead provided another explanation as recorded  above.
         What is also missing from the evidence is any indication as to  the
         success or otherwise of the  anger  management  and  other  courses
         undertaken with the Probation Services. The reference in the letter
         only being to the courses having been completed.
     67. Having considered all evidence relevant to this aspect  I  find  Mr
         Kamara represents a present threat by reason of a propensity to re-
         offend or an unacceptably high risk of re-offending. It  cannot  be
         found Mr Kamara has not offended since the index offence  as  noted
         by the adjudications received in prison and his further  conviction
         at the Norfolk Magistrates Court on 8 June 2016. It is again  clear
         that if it suits his intentions and/or desires Mr Kamara is willing
         to reoffend. The adjudications referred  to  in  the  OASys  report
         specifically refer to a further act of violence on 23 March 2017 as
         noted above.
     68. It was accepted by Professor Rees that the  evidence  provided  did
         not specifically address the issues referred to in the Error of Law
         finding but that no further report could be obtained as a result of
         a further sum of money being demanded for  the  same.  Mr  Kamara's
         stepfather in his statement refers  to  his  inability  to  provide
         further funds meaning the evidence that has been  provided  is  the
         best that we have.
     69. I find it has been established on the evidence that  whilst  he  is
         avoiding his peer groups and situations similar to those  that  led
         to his offending at the present time, which may  include  substance
         abuse, alcohol, and situations of conflict, which is understandable
         whilst Mr Kamara is subject to licence conditions and an order  for
         his deportation from  the  United  Kingdom,  I  find  the  evidence
         supports a finding that Mr Kamara presents a real and credible risk
         of reoffending in the future as a result of an act of violence. The
         assessment of real risk is 'High'  in  the  OASys  report  and  the
         percentage probability of reoffending also support such a  finding.
         I find the personal conduct  of  Mr  Kamara  represent  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society,  taking  into  account  his  past
         conduct. Such threat does not need to be imminent to  satisfy  this
         requirement.
     70. It was submitted on Mr Kamara's behalf  that  it  is  necessary  in
         addition to consider the proportionality of Mr Kamara's deportation
         to Belgium.
     71. Mr Kamara was born  in  Sierra  Leone  on  10  May  1993  where  he
         completed his secondary school and passed all examinations. In  the
         OASys it is stated he had been in the United Kingdom  for  about  4
         years. It is known from his own evidence that he entered the United
         Kingdom in December 2011. Mr Kamara told the  interviewing  officer
         he had lived in Belgium for 3 years meaning  that  must  have  been
         from approximately 2008 to 2011. Although Mr Kamara claims that  he
         would not be able to survive in Belgium having no knowledge of  the
         language or the way of life, he clearly lived with his  family  and
         would have had some knowledge albeit within the family context.  It
         was also not made out that Belgium as an advanced European  country
         is substantially different in the manner in which it functions from
         the UK even if there are language or historical  differences,  such
         that Mr Kamara will not be able to adapt.
     72. In relation to language issues, the de  facto  language  of  Sierra
         Leone is English although a number of other languages  are  spoken.
         The official languages of Belgium  are  Dutch,  French  and  German
         although English is also spoken.  Mr Kamara fails to make out  that
         he will not be able to benefit from the assistance of  interpreters
         used by the authorities in Belgium until his  own  language  skills
         improve when seeking to access public services.
     73. Case law relevant  to  the  prospects  of  rehabilitation  includes
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Arturas  Dumliauskas,
         Lukasz Wozniak and ME (Netherlands) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145  and  MC
         (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT 00520  (IAC)  it  was
         held that:

               i) Essa rehabilitation principles are specific  to  decisions
                  taken on public policy, public security and public  health
                  grounds under regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations;


              ii) It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned
                  is found to represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently
                  serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
                  of society (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes  relevant
                  to consider whether the decision is  proportionate  taking
                  into  account  all  the   considerations   identified   in
                  regulation 21(5)-(6);


             iii) There is no specific reference in the expulsion provisions
                  of either Directive 2004/38/EC or the 2006 EEA Regulations
                  to rehabilitation, but it has been seen by  the  Court  of
                  Justice as an aspect of integration, which is one  of  the
                  factors referred to in Article 28(1) and regulation  21(6)
                  (Essa (2013) at [23]);


              iv) Rehabilitation is not an issue to be  addressed  in  every
                  EEA deportation or removal decision taken under regulation
                  21;  it  will   not   be   relevant,   for   example,   if
                  rehabilitation has already been completed (Essa (2013)  at
                  [32]-[33]);


               v)  Reference  to  prospects   of   rehabilitation   concerns
                  reasonable prospects of a person ceasing to  commit  crime
                  (Essa  (2013)  at  [35]),  not  the  mere  possibility  of
                  rehabilitation. Mere capability of rehabilitation  is  not
                  to be equated with reasonable prospect of rehabilitation;


              vi) Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a factor
                  to be taken into account in the proportionality assessment
                  required by regulation 21(5) and (6) ((Dumliauskas [41]);


             vii) Such prospects are to be taken into account  even  if  not
                  raised by the offender (Dumliauskas [52]);


            viii) Gauging such prospects  requires  assessing  the  relative
                  prospects of rehabilitation in the host  Member  State  as
                  compared with those in the Member State of origin, but, in
                  the absence of evidence, it is  not  to  be  assumed  that
                  prospects are materially different in  that  other  Member
                  State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-[53] and [59]);


              ix) Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects  of
                  the rehabilitation of offenders include  family  ties  and
                  responsibilities,  accommodation,   education,   training,
                  employment, active membership of a community and the  like
                  (Essa (2013) at  [34]).  However,  lack  of  access  to  a
                  Probation Officer or equivalent in the other Member  State
                  should not, in general, preclude deportation  (Dumliauskas
                  [55]);


               x) In the absence of integration and  a  right  of  permanent
                  residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a
                  weighty factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even when such
                  prospects have significant weight they  are  not  a  trump
                  card, as what the Directive and the 2006  EEA  Regulations
                  require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic  assessment.   Both
                  recognise that the more serious the risk  of  reoffending,
                  and the offences that a person may commit, the greater the
                  right  to  interfere   with   the   right   of   residence
                  (Dumliauskas at [46] and [54]).

     74. Consideration of the prospects of rehabilitation as between the  UK
         and Belgium and awareness of the interest 'of the European Union in
         general have been factored into this decision.
     75. On the evidence provided I find Mr Kamara's  rehabilitation  is  at
         this time incomplete or uncertain in the United Kingdom.
     76. In SSHD v Arturas Dumliauskas, Lukasz Wozniak and ME  (Netherlands)
         [2015] EWCA Civ 145 Sir Stanley Burnton found at [54-55]:

             "54. Lastly, in agreement with what  was  said  by  the  Upper
                  Tribunal in Vasconcelos, I do not  consider  that  in  the
                  case of an offender with no permanent right  of  residence
                  substantial weight should be given  to  rehabilitation.  I
                  appreciate that all Member  States  have  an  interest  in
                  reducing criminality, and that deportation merely  exports
                  the  offender,  leaving  him  free  to  offend  elsewhere.
                  However, the whole point of deportation is to remove  from
                  this country someone whose offending renders him a risk to
                  the public. The Directive recognises that the more serious
                  the risk of reoffending, and  the  offences  that  he  may
                  commit, the greater the right to interfere with the  right
                  of residence. Article 28.3 requires the most serious risk,
                  i.e. "imperative grounds of public security", if  a  Union
                  citizen has resided in  the  host  Member  State  for  the
                  previous 10 years. Such grounds will normally  indicate  a
                  greater risk of offending in the country of nationality or
                  elsewhere in the Union. In other words,  the  greater  the
                  risk of reoffending, the greater the right to deport.


             55.       Furthermore,  as  I  mentioned  above,  a   deported
                  offender will  not  normally  have  committed  an  offence
                  within the State of his nationality. There is a real  risk
                  of his reoffending, since otherwise the  power  to  deport
                  does not arise. Nonetheless, he  will  not  normally  have
                  access to a probation officer or the equivalent. That must
                  have been obvious to the European Parliament  and  to  the
                  Commission when they adopted the Directive. For  the  lack
                  of such support to preclude deportation  is  difficult  to
                  reconcile  with  the  express  power  to  deport.  In   my
                  judgment, it should not, in general, do so."

     77. Having considered the 'Essa principles' as revised by the Court  of
         Appeal in Dumliauskas it is not open to a  Tribunal  re-making  the
         decision in an appeal  concerning  an  EEA  national  who  has  not
         acquired permanent residence to attach substantial  weight  to  the
         prospects of his rehabilitation.
     78. In the current case a number of factors weigh against Mr Kamara  in
         assessing the  proportionality  of  the  deportation  decision.  In
         addition to his having been found to pose a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests   of
         society, he has not been exercising Treaty rights for  five  years;
         although he has significant family relationships with  his  mother,
         step father and sibling in the UK, I find his alleged role  in  the
         family has been exaggerated and any family  ties  he  has  did  not
         prevent him from offending in the past and it is not made out would
         prevent the risk of him offending in the future.  Mr Kamara accepts
         he has anger management issues and alcohol featured in the  offence
         for which he was convicted. It is also  the  case  that  Mr  Kamara
         committed further offences  for  which  he  received  adjudications
         whilst in prison. The fact Mr Kamara was  aware  he  had  an  anger
         management issue yet appears to have done  nothing  to  resolve  it
         voluntarily prior to the commission of  the  index  offence  it  is
         noted.  In his latest witness statement Mr Kamara claims to have no
         history of aggressive criminal behaviour to the level which led  to
         his conviction which leaves open the question of earlier aggressive
         behaviour for which he was not convicted. The  picture  painted  by
         the factual analysis does not indicate this would be the first time
         Mr Kamara is likely to have lost his temple or resorted to violence
         although it is accepted it is the first time he used a knife.
     79. The factors weighing in favour of the Mr Kamara  include  the  fact
         that he has been in the UK over 8 years; that he  has  family  here
         and that in the time he has been here he  has  integrated  into  UK
         society in a number of ways, and the lack of continuing links  with
         Belgium.
     80. What is totally absence from the evidence prepared by Mr Kamara, or
         his representatives is any analysis of the facilities available  in
         Belgium to which he is entitled to access  as  a  citizen  of  that
         country to assist in rehabilitation. As noted in  MC  gauging  such
         prospects   requires   assessing   the   relative   prospects    of
         rehabilitation in the host Member State as compared with  those  in
         the Member State of origin, but, in the absence of evidence, it  is
         not to be assumed that prospects are materially different  in  that
         other Member State (Dumliauskas [46], [52]-[53] and  [59]).  It  is
         not made out the facilities available in Belgium will  be  markedly
         different from those in the United Kingdom. It is not made  out  Mr
         Kamara will not be able to  re-establish  himself  within  Belgium.
         Although it is accepted the  same  will  be  difficult  it  is  not
         established such problems make the  decision  disproportionate,  in
         all the circumstances.  Lack  of  ties  are  not  determinative  in
         preventing deportation as otherwise those with no ties can ever  be
         deported.
     81. I find in this appeal the factor of  rehabilitation  is  one  which
         neither significantly adds to the  factors  to  be  counted  in  Mr
         Kamara's favour or alters the overall  balance  of  considerations.
         Whatever the state of the relative prospects of his  rehabilitation
         in the UK as compared to Belgium such a factor cannot amount in his
         case to one which carries substantial weight.
     82. Considering the overall  family  it  is  interesting  to  note  the
         Psychologist was specifically instructed to consider  support  that
         Mr Kamara and his family may need to overcome the  challenges  they
         face as a family raising  and  living  with  children  with  severe
         disabilities. This was not an issue in the case per se  and  it  is
         not made out that of Mr Kamara is deported Social Services or other
         statutory bodies will be  unable  to  assist  as  the  Psychologist
         suggests.
     83. It accepted Mr Kamara's  mother  experienced  violence  herself  in
         Belgium, but she now lives in the UK and even though she  may  have
         fears as a mother for her son being returned Belgium that does  not
         arguably alter the proportionality assessment.
     84. As an observation, it is not made out the family could  not  return
         to Belgium if they wished to do so and seek help for  any  physical
         or psychological needs there.
     85. The family in the United Kingdom continued to function at the level
         they do whilst Mr Kamara was in prison. Whilst he  may  provide  an
         extra pair of hands and support whilst he is at  home  it  was  not
         made out the effect of removing Mr Kamara from the  United  Kingdom
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  this  family
         unit such as to tip the proportionality assessment in his favour.
     86. Whilst family ties and responsibilities, accommodation,  education,
         training, employment, active membership of a community are relevant
         factors,  and  have  been  taken  into  account,   they   are   not
         determinative in terms of the balancing exercise in this appeal. Mr
         Kamara committed a very serious offence for which he received  long
         prison sentence. He fails to counter the  argument,  when  weighing
         all the factors together, that the Secretary of State's decision to
         deport him is not contrary to  his  right  of  free  movement.  The
         Secretary of State has established on the  evidence  considered  in
         the round that deportation will  be  a  proportionate  interference
         with Mr Kamara's Treaty rights. Mr Kamara is a present  threat  and
         is likely to remain so in the future.  Prospects of  rehabilitation
         have not been shown to  constitute  a  significant  factor  in  the
         balance.
     87. In relation to Article 8  ECHR,  whilst  I  accept  proportionality
         under  the  EEA  Regulations  relates  the  proportionality  of  an
         interference with Treaty rights which is separate from the  factors
         applicable under Article 8, Mr Kamara fails to make out   there  is
         any material  basis  not  factored  into  the  EEA  proportionality
         assessment that is beneficial to him pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
     88. In light of the above, this appeal is dismissed.

Decision

     89. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


    Anonymity.


     90. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 December 2019





9


