
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00163/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 11th January 2017                |On: 13th January 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Andrez Mikalski
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Poland born on the 26th February  1985.
    On the 7th September 2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  R  Lloyd)
    allowed his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department's decision to deport him from the United Kingdom  under  the
    terms of Regulations 19 and 21 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ('the Regulations'). The Secretary of State  now
    has permission to appeal against that decision[1].


    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent's date of entry into the United Kingdom  is  not  known.
    He first came to the attention of the authorities in the United Kingdom
    on the 6th March 2014 when he was convicted of soliciting  another  for
    the purpose of obtaining their sexual services  as  a  prostitute,  and
    using threatening or abusive words and behaviour in a manner likely  to
    cause harassment or alarm. On the 11th March 2015 he was  convicted  of
    two counts of shoplifting.    It  came  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    attention that prior to his arrival in the United  Kingdom  he  had  in
    Poland served at least some of a six and half  year  sentence  for  two
    counts of robbery. The Secretary of State decided to make a deportation
    order against the Respondent. It would appear that the Respondent never
    received the notification of that decision since it was returned to the
    Home Office unopened. The deportation order was made on  the  7th  July
    2015.


 3. The Respondent was apprehended by police on the 3rd December  2015.  He
    was served with the deportation order. He  made  representations  which
    resulted in a supplementary refusal letter. The Respondent  launched  a
    judicial review, which resulted in him being released on bail, in March
    2016. The hearing of his appeal was listed on the 26th August 2016  and
    notices served on his last known address. The Respondent did not attend
    the hearing and it proceeded in his absence.

 4. The matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
    Respondent should be deported, in light of the factors set out  in  the
    Regulations. The Tribunal found that since his robbery  conviction  the
    Respondent has not been sent  back  to  prison,  having  received  non-
    custodial sentences for the "minor" offences committed  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It further found that he had not been convicted of any  crime
    since the last shoplifting offence in October 2014.  On  the  basis  of
    these facts, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the deportation of the
    Respondent was justified on grounds of public policy  or  security.  It
    was not satisfied that the Respondent presents a serious threat to  the
    fundamental interests of society by his personal conduct.  The Tribunal
    noted the Respondent's assertion that he has a partner and a  child  in
    the United Kingdom. It could not make any finding about whether he  was
    exercising treaty rights since there was no evidence of this.   Overall
    the  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the  deportation   would   be
    proportionate.  The appeal was accordingly allowed.

 5. The Secretary of State appeals on the following grounds:

              i) The Respondent provided no evidence that he was working  or
                 otherwise exercising treaty rights. In those  circumstances
                 it was difficult to see how he could resist deportation. He
                 is not a qualified person under the Regulations.  His  lack
                 of legal status was not a matter weighed in the balance  in
                 the  proportionality  assessment  or   otherwise   in   the
                 decision;


             ii) The fact that the Respondent did not attend his hearing was
                 a relevant consideration. The Tribunal  had  before  it  no
                 evidence, oral or  otherwise,  capable  of  displacing  the
                 concerns raised by the Secretary of State. Without  hearing
                 from the Respondent himself  the  Tribunal  was  not  in  a
                 position to say whether he continued to pose a  threat,  or
                 whether his removal would be proportionate;

            iii) The Tribunal failed to give adequate  weight  to  the  fact
                 that the Respondent  continued  to  offend  in  the  United
                 Kingdom, albeit that  his  offending  was  of  a  different
                 nature to the robberies committed in Poland.



    The Hearing
 6. There was no appearance by the Respondent. A notice of hearing was sent
    to his last known address on the  30th  November  2016.  There  was  no
    communication at all from him on file.  Mr  McVeety  informed  me  that
    Home Office records show  that  the  Respondent  stopped  reporting  to
    Blackburn Police Station, as he had been required to  do,  sometime  in
    July 2016.  I was mindful that he had thus far played no  part  in  the
    proceedings before the Tribunal and had not had any  contact  with  the
    Secretary  of  State  since  December  2015.    Having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective I decided to hear the appeal in the absence of the
    Respondent.




    My Findings


 7. I am satisfied that the decision must be set  aside.  The  question  of
    whether the Respondent was, or had ever, exercised treaty rights in the
    United Kingdom  was plainly relevant to all of  the  matters  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had to consider. At the very least it went  to  the
    issue of proportionality; if he was not working, that was arguably also
    pertinent to the question of risk of reoffending.  Although the  First-
    tier Tribunal recognises the paucity of evidence  that  the  Respondent
    had in fact ever been a qualified person, it does not factor that  into
    its assessment.


 8. The  second  ground,  as  pleaded  in  writing,  was  not  particularly
    attractive.  It was at first blush surprising to see the  Secretary  of
    State argue that appeals could only rationally  be  allowed  where  the
    appellant  is  actually  present,  particularly  in  view   of   recent
    introduction of the 'deport first, appeal later' provision at 24AA.  Mr
    McVeety clarified that this was not in fact the point. The complaint is
    simply that there was a lack of evidence. The Secretary  of  State  had
    produced prima facie evidence of criminality, and  the  Respondent  had
    produced nothing to rebut that.  There was no evidence that he had  for
    instance undergone any rehabilitation or sought  to  integrate  himself
    into British society. These too were matters that went to the heart  of
    the issues raised in the deportation appeal.  Ground 3 is  related  but
    had this been the only ground I would not have found an  error  of  law
    for this reason. Weight is a matter for the Tribunal and it  cannot  be
    said that the description of these offences as 'minor' was irrational.


 9. I indicated that given my findings on grounds (1) & (2) the decision in
    the appeal would be remade.   Mr McVeety accepted that in fairness  the
    matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  full
    findings of fact can be made.  In the hiatus between this decision  and
    the matter being re-listed it is to be hoped that the  Respondent  will
    re-establish contact with the Tribunal and attend his appeal hearing so
    that his best case can be advanced and considered.



    Decision

10. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  in
    approach such that the decision should be set aside.


11. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           11th January 2017

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 23rd September 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Dineen

