
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00529 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 October 2013                            |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ILIR Halimi
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow an appeal by the Respondent,  who  I  will
    call the claimant, against a  decision  that  the  claimant  should  be
    deported pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 2. The grounds are of a kind which I have seen on many occasions recently,
    and refer to the approach of the Tribunal in the light of amendments to
    the Immigration Rules and  the  explanation  of  the  effect  of  those
    amendments given by the Tribunal in the case  of  MF  (Nigeria)  [2012]
    UKUT 00393.  The decision in MF (Nigeria) has been the  subject  of  an
    appeal to the Court of Appeal reported at MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192. It will on some occasion be necessary  for  me  to  look
    with great care at that decision.  However,  neither  party  before  me
    made any representations about it. It is quite clear to me from my  own
    reading of the case that although the Court, unlike the Tribunal, found
    the  Rules  to  be  an  all-embracing,  complete  codification  of  the
    necessary qualities  in  an  Article  8  decision,  the  assessment  of
    proportionality is a judicial decision  and  that  a  decision  allowed
    properly in accordance with jurisprudence based on  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights should be allowed under  the  Rules
    as an exception within the Rules.  I see no need to say more about that
    today given that neither party urged me to look at the case.

 3. The first substantial point taken against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that it did not express any  proper  regard  for  the
    public interest in deporting somebody who, like the claimant, has  been
    convicted of offences involving the supply of Class A drugs.  I do  not
    agree with that criticism.  It is justified in the sense that there  is
    not a particular paragraph of  the  determination  where  the  Tribunal
    reminds itself that there is  a  strong  public  interest  in  removing
    people who are convicted of such offences.  However, I find  it  wholly
    unfounded to suggest that the Tribunal was not aware of the seriousness
    of the offence of which the claimant was convicted.

 4. At paragraph 2 of the determination the Tribunal said, correctly,  that
    it was dealing with  an  appeal  against  a  deportation  order.   This
    clearly recognises that the Tribunal appreciated that the claimant  had
    done something sufficiently serious to make him be  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order.  It is trite and clear that the Tribunal  understood
    that the claimant had  done  something  that  was  seriously  wrong.  A
    relevant extract from the Crown Court judge's sentencing remarks is set
    out at paragraph 4  of  the  determination.  At  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination the Tribunal reminded itself that under Section 32(5)  of
    the United  Kingdom  Borders  Act  2007  the  respondent  must  make  a
    deportation order where a person is convicted in the  circumstances  in
    which this claimant has been convicted.

 5. Judges dealing with deportation appeals are not students writing essays
    where it is necessary to impress the examiner by  stating  things  that
    might be thought to be plain and obvious.  It is necessary to  write  a
    determination which shows that the relevant issues have  been  analysed
    and a rational decision reached.  I regard it as  self-evident  in  the
    absence of a contrary indication that  a  judge  would  appreciate  the
    strong social concern about the misuse of drugs and the  undesirability
    of people involved in drugs offences being established  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. Here the Tribunal, including an experienced non-legal  member,  clearly
    realised that this was a serious offence.  Indeed,  it  is  plain  from
    paragraph 39 of the determination  that  the  Tribunal  was  thoroughly
    unimpressed with the appellant's own conduct  and  indicated  that  the
    appeal  would  have  been  dismissed  if  his  rights  were  the   only
    consideration. Against this background it is wrong to suggest that  the
    Tribunal did not appreciate that there was a strong public interest  in
    removing the claimant.

 7. The Tribunal did not allow the appeal because it took a slight view  of
    the claimant's criminality but, as is so often the  case  when  appeals
    against deportation are allowed, because of the effect  of  deportation
    on the claimant's immediate family.

 8. It is particularly clear from paragraph 39 of  the  determination  that
    the Tribunal had regard to the interests of all the people affected  by
    deportation. This it was plainly required to do. It concluded that  the
    impact of removal on the claimant's daughters would be  just  too  much
    for them to have to bear.  I will set out paragraph 39 in its  entirety
    because I consider it a very important part of the determination.   The
    Tribunal said:

         "Were we considering the case of the claimant as a single  man,  or
         even in conjunction with his wife alone, it is clear that he  would
         not be able to benefit from the Immigration Rules  and  the  appeal
         would accordingly have to be dismissed.  However, Xhorxhina is only
         15 (later this month), whilst Xhesika is only just  13  years  old.
         Kevin will be 4 years  old  later  this  month.   All  are  British
         citizens, and entitled to the benefits that  ensue.   Their  mother
         has established a life for them in this country, having left Kosovo
         in terrible circumstances, and they  have  not  returned.  She,  of
         course, also has another child, the appellant's  step-son,  who  is
         aged 9.  All of them would face enormous disruption were they to go
         to Albania with the appellant.  Equally, in the case of the  girls,
         in  particular,  we  are  satisfied  that,  their   father   having
         'miraculously' come back into their lives, it  would  be  extremely
         damaging were the relationship to now be effectively  severed.   We
         appreciate that, with modern technological advances, there are many
         ways of keeping in contact, but  these  would  be  very  inadequate
         given the relationships which they have enjoyed with him."

 9. It is important to remember the savage nature of a  deportation  order.
    A person who has been deported from the United Kingdom  usually  cannot
    be readmitted for a period of ten years.  The  consequences  on  family
    life are usually far  greater  than,  for  example,  serving  a  prison
    sentence, where for all the necessary indignities and  difficulties  of
    prison life, positive steps are taken to preserve relationships between
    close relatives and provision made for children to see their parents.

10. Public policy  encourages  stable  family  life  and  recognises  that,
    generally, children benefit from a  close  relationship  with  both  of
    their parents. This is why considerable weight is given to family  life
    between parents and children in Article 8 balancing exercises. Here the
    First-tier Tribunal and made  a  decision  not  for  the  sake  of  the
    claimant but for the sake of his children.  It is not a decision that I
    can regard in any way as wrong in law.  I regard  it  as  reasoned  and
    humane, and whilst there may be technical criticisms to be made of  the
    way that the Tribunal expressed itself consequent on  the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MF, its reasons are clear and are sound in law.

11. Given the way that I was addressed about the effect  of  MF  I  do  not
    think it necessary or desirable for me to do any more than to say  that
    I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal, so the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2013                |


