

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00456/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Tyneside Magistrates Court     |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8th August 2013                            |on 9th August 2013           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              EDGARAS FIRSTOVAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Anderson of Immigration Legal Advice Centre.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination of a panel of the  First-
        tier Tribunal composed of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes  and  Mr
        BD Yates  (non-legal  member)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the
        Panel'), promulgated on 19th April 2013, in  which  they  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal against the decision to deport him from  the
        United Kingdom under the relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration
        (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred  to
        as 'the 2006 Regulations') and on human rights grounds.


     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by a Designated Judge of
        the First-tier Tribunal but granted on  a  renewed  application  by
        Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul who considered it  arguable  that  the
        Panel erred in their consideration of regulation 21 (5) of the 2006
        Regulations by  focusing  on  proportionality  and  in  failing  to
        address the other  relevant  factors.   Judge  Rintoul  thought  it
        appeared from the determination, at paragraph 60,  that  the  Panel
        erred in particular by taking into account the deterrence of  crime
        contrary to regulation 21 (5) (b)  and  that  the  Panel  erred  in
        drawing adverse inferences  in  paragraph  51  from  material  they
        considered had not been produced to them by the appellant.


     3. The  Panel  set  out  their  findings  from  paragraph  15  of  the
        determination, under headings dealing with the  various  issues  it
        was necessary for  them  to  consider.  It  is  accepted  that  the
        appellant has not acquired a right of permanent  residence  in  the
        United Kingdom.


     4. The Panel examined the extent of the  appellant's  integration  and
        his personal history but did not find that  he  had  been  truthful
        regarding family and friends still living in Lithuania [28] or that
        he had proved he had integrated himself to any  significant  extent
        into the community in the United Kingdom as his social life appears
        to have been limited to members  of  the  Lithuanian  community  in
        Leeds [29-37 and 58].


     5. The question of the appellants propensity to reoffending  and  risk
        to the community was considered at  paragraphs  49  to  51  of  the
        determination in the following terms:


     49.  On the basis of our findings the appellant has the protection from
              deportation of Regulation 19(3)(b).  Under Regulation 19(3)(b)
   a              decision to deport has to  satisfy  Regulation  21(5),  in
   particular the               proportionality test. Such  a  decision  may
   not be taken to serve                 economic ends (Reg. 21 (2)) but  it
   is not suggested on behalf of the             appellant that it has been.
    Instead it  is  argued  that  his  deportation  is                not  a
   proportionate  response  to  his  circumstances  and  to  the  risk  that
   he poses to the community.


     50.  It is not argued that the appellant's offence is not serious,  and
   it                  plainly was. This was a punishment beating of  a  man
   that the                appellant does not admit to knowing, or to having
   had any prior           dealings with. We have grave reservations  as  to
   whether  he  has  told               the  truth  about  this,  given  the
   necessarily small Lithuanian                   community  in  Leeds.  The
   appellant's theft  of  the  laptop  made  it  an              offence  of
   robbery, but the primary motivation of the group  appears              to
   have  been  violence,   with   the   theft   a   somewhat   opportunistic
   addition.


     51.  As set out above the appellant relies upon the assessment that  he
          poses a low risk of reoffending in the report of 14 June 2012, but
   we             are not satisfied that this is the whole picture.  We  are
   satisfied that               other  assessments  of  risk  posed  by  the
   appellant will have been                  made of him, and that they have
   not been disclosed by him.  We infer          that this is likely  to  be
   because they are less favourable to  him.  We             note  that  the
   author of this report does not comment upon the fact            that  the
   account  given  to  him  by  the  appellant  of  the  offence   and   his
   role in it, is not that which was relied upon by  the  sentencing  Judge.
      We  note  also  that  when  faced  with  deportation  the  appellant's
     response was in effect to threaten that he would be  forced  to  offend
     further in order to be able to support himself  in  Lithuania.  Looking
     at the evidence in the round we are not satisfied  that  the  appellant
     poses no risk, or a negligible risk of reoffending.  If  he  re-offends
   then           we are satisfied that there is at least a medium  risk  of
   serious harm            arising from that.


     6. It is clear that having analysed the evidence the Panel found  that
        the appellant  represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
        serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
        society.



Background


     7. The appellant was born on 11th March 1993  and  is  a  national  of
        Lithuania who is in the United Kingdom exercised treaty rights.  He
        has been made the subject of the decision to deport him as a result
        of his involvement in an offence for which he was convicted on 26th
        March 2012 at Leeds  Crown  Court.   On  16th  April  2012  he  was
        sentenced to three years in a Young Offenders Institute.  There was
        no appeal against conviction or sentence.  The  Panel  referred  to
        differences  between  the  facts  upon  which  the  appellant   was
        sentenced and his own account of his involvement in the  events  in
        question. The Panel chose to rely upon the sentencing remarks which
        noted that the offence had a number of aggravating  features  being
        (i) the offence occurred in the victim's own home, (ii) there  were
        three assailants including the appellant to one victim,  (iii)  the
        assailants were intoxicated, and (iv)  the  appellant's  co-accused
        was armed with a hockey stick. The sentencing Judge dealt with both
        the appellant and his co-accused on the basis of  their  pleas  and
        although they claimed to have taken the hockey stick in  case  they
        needed to defend themselves, the reality was that within moments of
        entering the victims property the man was attacked and beaten  with
        the hockey stick until it snapped.


     8. In relation to the appellant HHJ Marson QC stated:


              "You, Firstovas, by your basis of plea, admitted punching  him
   once in the face,            but you  continued  to  participate  in  the
   offence and it has to be in the  context  of              violence  being
   inflicted  by  others.  This  was  a  joint  offence   of   robbery   and
   although the violence  you  inflicted  yourself  is  relevant,  what  was
   happening to            this man at the time - being  attacked  by  three
   people - cannot be overlooked, and            you were the one  who  took
   the laptop at the suggestion of someone else.


              This was a sustained  attack  using  more  violence  than  was
   necessary and causing            him  a  fracture  to  the  left  orbital
   floor, a wound and other bruising. I bear in mind           he discharged
   himself  from  hospital  against  medical  advice,  but  it   must   have
   been a terrifying experience.




Discussion




     9. The deportation of EU nationals is covered by Directive  2004/38/EC
        which  is  incorporated  into  our  domestic  legislation  by   the
        Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).


    10. By virtue of Regulation 19(3) a person who has been admitted to, or
        acquired a right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
        Regulations may be removed from the United Kingdom if:


              (a)  he does not have or ceases to  have  a  right  to  reside
      under these               Regulations; or


              (b)      he would otherwise  be  entitled  to  reside  in  the
   United  Kingdom                    under  these   Regulations   but   the
   Secretary  of  State  has  decided  that                 his  removal  is
   justified    on    the    grounds    of     public     policy,     public
   security or public health in accordance with regulation 21.


    11. The respondent relies upon Regulation 19 (3)(b).


    12. Regulation 21(5) states that, where a relevant decision is taken on
        grounds of public policy or public security it shall,  in  addition
        to complying with the preceding paragraphs of this  regulation,  be
        taken in accordance with the following principles-


           (a)      the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
   proportionality;
          (b)     the decision must be based  exclusively  on  the  personal
   conduct of the               person concerned;
           (c)      the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
   represent a genuine,             present and sufficiently serious  threat
   affecting one of the fundamental              interests of society;
          (d)     matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
   relate to                considerations  of  general  prevention  do  not
   justify the decision;
          (e)      a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
   themselves justify the           decision.


    13. Regulation 21(6) states that before taking a relevant  decision  on
        the grounds of public policy or public security in  relation  to  a
        person who is resident in the United  Kingdom  the  decision  maker
        must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
        health, family and economic situation of the person,  the  person's
        length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social  and
        cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of  the
        person's links with his country of origin.


    14. It was accepted that the appellant could not prove he has acquired,
        or was entitled to, a permanent right of residence  in  the  United
        Kingdom and so it is the lower level of protection afforded to  EEA
        nationals that is applicable in this appeal; that  the  appellant's
        removal can be  justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
        security or public health.  In this appeal  we  are  not  concerned
        with public health.


    15. The Grounds raise a number of issues some of which are not relevant
        to the core question in dispute, whether the  appellant's  personal
        conduct represents a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
        threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.  The
        interest in issue is the protection  of  citizens  from  crimes  of
        violence.


    16. The Grounds challenge the weight given to the evidence by the Panel
        but weight is a matter for the Panel and, provided it is shown they
        considered the evidence with the degree  of  care  required  in  an
        appeal of this nature and gave adequate reasons for their findings,
        the Upper Tribunal should be slow to interfere with the decision  -
        SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155. Having read  the  determination
        it is clear this is precisely what  the  Panel  did.  No  error  is
        proved.


    17. The Grounds also allege the Panel stated in paragraph 49  that  the
        decision to deport  has  to  satisfy  regulation  21  (5)  and,  in
        particular, the proportionality test which is only one of the  five
        principles set out in the Regulations. The Grounds allege the Panel
        seem to have placed more emphasis on proportionality  than  any  of
        the other principles throughout the determination but, as is  noted
        in the determination, the proportionality of the decision  was  the
        main argument relied upon by Miss Anderson who claimed  deportation
        was not a proportionate response to the  appellant's  circumstances
        and to the risk that he poses to the community. In  any  event,  if
        one reads the determination it  is  clear  that  all  the  relevant
        elements the Panel  were  required  to  consider  were  taken  into
        account by them.  No error is proved on this ground.


    18. The Grounds allege the Panel had no evidence  before  them  showing
        that the appellant was a threat as the reports  from  the  National
        Probation Service state that he is has been assessed as a low  risk
        of re-offending. The Panel  is  criticised  for  finding  that  the
        failure of the appellant to produce other reports must mean he  had
        something to hide. The Panel were concerned about the lack of other
        reports and, as noted from the record of the case management review
        hearing,  the  question  of  which  reports  were   available   was
        considered by the First-tier Tribunal at the earliest  opportunity.
        No further reports were produced for  the  hearing  notwithstanding
        the record of proceeding showing that an enquiry was  made  at  the
        start of the substantive hearing by Judge Holmes regarding  whether
        the additional reports were now available. They were not. The Panel
        could only make its decision  based  upon  the  evidence  that  was
        available to it, although did speculate that the reason the reports
        had not been produced was likely  to  be  because  they  were  less
        favourable to the appellant. There are additional reports and these
        have now been produced in the bundle prepared for  the  proceedings
        before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Even  if  the  Panel's  speculation
        regarding the content of the reports that were not  been  disclosed
        amounts to an error of law it is not material.


    19. The information the Panel  had  available  to  them  describes  the
        commission of a serious violent  offence. Whilst it is  clear  from
        reading the Regulations  that  the  conviction  is  not  in  itself
        sufficient to constitute grounds for removing the appellant it  was
        accepted in Commission v The Netherlands  C50/06  that  convictions
        could be taken into account in so far as  the  circumstances  which
        have given rise to a conviction were evidence of  personal  conduct
        constituting a threat to the requirement  of  public  policy.   The
        Court of Appeal recognised in  Bulale  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  806  that
        although the Regulations made it difficult to expel  an  individual
        for dishonesty, offences of violence are a  different  matter.  The
        Regulations made no separate provision regarding  different  levels
        of violence and  Member  States  are  given  a  certain  amount  of
        judgment in deciding what their nationals could be expected to  put
        up with.


    20. This is a first offence and so there is no history of violence  but
        it is clear that the OASys report identified a  number  of  factors
        stated to  have  contributed  to  the  offence  including  (i)  the
        appellant mixing with the wrong people, (ii) alcohol, and (iii) the
        appellant's attitude.


    21.  The  Panel  analysed  the  evidence  regarding   the   appellant's
        associations with the named individuals and the evidence  given  by
        family members. They do not dispute that  the  appellant  may  have
        fallen in with the "wrong crowd". It is clear that those  he  chose
        to  associate  with  were  all  members  of  the  small  Lithuanian
        community in Leeds. Unless the appellant is somehow able  to  avoid
        associating with such individuals there is a real risk this element
        will remain of concern for the future. Alcohol was identified as  a
        factor and although it is stated the appellant  has  undertaken  an
        alcohol awareness course,  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been
        evidence before the Panel indicating there would be  any  reduction
        in his drinking when back into society.  Also of  concern  is  that
        alcohol is identified as having been a disinhibiter rather than the
        root cause of the assault. The fact alcohol was identified  as  the
        element which removed the personal constraints  the  appellant  may
        otherwise have had, indicates that the root cause of the problem is
        more likely to relate to the appellants own personality.


    22. The Panel note the difficulties the appellant  experienced  in  his
        younger  years  but  there  was  no   evidence   from   an   expert
        psychologist/psychiatrist or somebody dealing with adolescents  and
        young people from troubled backgrounds to explain why he behaved in
        the way he did  and  what  steps  have  been  taken  to  prevent  a
        recurrence in the  future.  In  section  12  of  the  OASys  report
        'attitudes' are said to be linked to a risk of serious harm,  risks
        to the individual and other risks, and to offending behaviour.  The
        reason the appellant engaged in  the  violent  assault  is  because
        there is an element of his personality that enabled him to do  that
        whereas others will not even contemplate getting involved  in  such
        an enterprise. There is also within the documents an example of the
        appellant resorting to violence when alcohol could not have been  a
        relevant factor. It is noted that when the  appellant  was  at  HMP
        Doncaster on 29th May 2012 he was found  guilty  of  fighting  with
        another prisoner for  which  he  received  14  days  forfeiture  of
        privileges, suspended for two months. Whilst he has remained out of
        trouble since, this is again illustrative of something  within  the
        appellant's personality and  profile  which  indicates  a  risk  of
        reoffending and violent nature.


    23. The Panel also noted the appellant's own evidence that if  returned
        he may be forced to re-offend showing he identified this as a means
        of being able to support himself rather than by  legitimate  means.
        This is suggestive of a propensity to resort to criminal conduct if
        he thinks it warranted.


    24. The Panel did not find the appellant to be anything  other  than  a
        low risk of re-offending as mentioned in  the  reports  now  relied
        upon. What they state in paragraph 51 is "looking at  the  evidence
        in the round we are not satisfied that the appellant poses no risk,
        or a negligible risk of reoffending. If he re-offends then  we  are
        satisfied that there is at least a  medium  risk  of  serious  harm
        arising from that."


    25. As the appellant does not have a permanent right of  residence  the
        level of protection is at the lower end of  the  scale.  The  Panel
        clearly took great care in assessing  the  competing  elements  and
        only came to the conclusion that the appellant did  pose  a  threat
        having considered all matters "in the round". The Grounds  alleging
        that  this  is  an  incorrect  decision  are  in  effect   a   mere
        disagreement.


    26. The Grounds also allege  that  if  it  was  necessary  for  further
        reports to be made available, the Secretary of  State  should  have
        obtained them but I find this ground has no merit.  The  burden  of
        proof is upon the appellant to prove  his  case  and  there  is  no
        obligation on the Secretary of State to do as suggested.  The  fact
        that at the case management review  hearing  the  question  of  the
        availability  of  additional  reports  was  discussed  should  have
        alerted the appellant to the fact that this was a  matter  of  some
        concern to the Tribunal. The Grounds seeking permission  to  appeal
        state that reports were not provided as they were deemed not to  be
        necessary. That is a decision taken by professional  representative
        but it cannot be an error for a judge  to  take  into  account  the
        evidence made available and use that as the basis for findings  the
        made.


    27. The Grounds also allege that  the  appellant  has  a  low  risk  of
        offending but this does not mean there  is  no  risk.  This  was  a
        factor that was considered by the  Panel  but  the  appellants  own
        conduct in relation to the offence  and  the  act  of  violence  in
        prison support the conclusions reached.


    28. The Upper Tribunal  grant  of  permission  refers  to  focusing  on
        proportionality which I have dealt with above and claims the  Panel
        may  have  erred  in  paragraph  60  by  taking  into  account  the
        deterrence of crime contrary to  regulation  21(5)(b)  but  if  the
        author of the grant had read the determination carefully  he  would
        have realised that this was not in the section in which  the  Panel
        set out their findings in relation  to  the  2006  Regulations  but
        rather their assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision
        under Article 8 ECHR, in which the case of Masih was relevant.


    29. As announced in court, having considered the matter very carefully,
        having read the determination thoroughly, and having  reviewed  all
        the evidence, I find that the Panel's conclusions  are  within  the
        range of those they were entitled  to  make  on  the  evidence  and
        accordingly no material error of law is proved.


Decision

    30. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Panel's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    31. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as none was requested and no basis  for  such
   an order has        been established.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th August 2013







