
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00950/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral determination given immediately |On 9 September 2015                  |
|following the hearing                |                                     |
|On 27 July 2015                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             mr abdul kadir said
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Gunamal (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr W Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Somalia who was born on 2 June 1989.  He
    entered this country on 4 April 1989 (when he was not yet 9 years  old)
    with his brother, using false identities and false passports.   He  was
    granted refugee status and indefinite leave to remain on 6 July 2001 as
    a dependant of his sister's husband.

 2. From a comparatively early age the appellant began offending such  that
    by the age of 21 he had some 29 convictions for 44  offences.   As  the
    judge who  sentenced  him  for  his  most  recent  offence  (a  robbery
    committed on 28 May  2010)  noted  in  his  sentencing  remarks,  these
    offences included three offences  against  the  person,  four  offences
    against property, one public order offence, nine offences  relating  to
    either the police, the courts or prisons, five drugs  offences  and  22
    offences of theft and  kindred  offences,  including  three  robberies.
    Having listed the categories of offences of  which  the  appellant  had
    been convicted, the judge, in his sentencing remarks went on  to  state
    as follows:

         "One in 2003 [at a time when this appellant would have been  either
         13 or 14 years old] involved  a  victim  who  was  threatened  with
         stabbing and a phone was stolen which  was  subsequently  found  in
         your possession; one, in 2004 when a victim was pushed  and  patted
         down and his mobile was taken and one,  in  2005,  when  money  was
         demanded from a victim who then, understandably, handed his  wallet
         over.  In addition, there are seven burglaries of dwellings and non-
         dwellings in 2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006."

 3. The most recent offence (for which the appellant  is  still  serving  a
    sentence of imprisonment of eight years, concerning which his  earliest
    date of release is  December  this  year)  was  for  robbery,  and  the
    appellant had pleaded not guilty, but when his dishonest alibi evidence
    was rejected by the jury, he then admitted the offence (no doubt in the
    hope of thereby reducing his sentence) but claimed that he was only the
    lookout.  However, the judge, having watched the CCTV of the  incident,
    and also having seen the appellant give evidence,  was  satisfied  that
    this also was untrue and that the appellant was not just a  lookout  as
    he then claimed which would  have  made  him  less  culpable  for  this
    offence.

 4. On  14  April  2014  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  cease  the
    appellant's refugee status, but before doing  so,  the  respondent  had
    written to the appellant on 28 January 2014 giving him  an  opportunity
    to make submissions in support of his continued entitlement to  refugee
    status.  The respondent  also  approached  the  UNHCR,  and  the  final
    decision was not made until both the appellant and the UNHCR had had an
    opportunity to make submissions if they so choose.  No submissions were
    received from either.  Subsequently, on 15 May 2014 a deportation order
    was made against the appellant under the provisions of  Sections  32(4)
    and 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, which require a deportation order
    to be made in respect of a person who has been sentenced to a period of
    imprisonment of at  least  twelve  months  unless  an  exception  under
    Section 33 of that Act applied.  In this case, as already noted  above,
    the appellant had been sentenced to eight years' imprisonment.

 5. The appellant appealed against this decision, notice of  appeal  having
    been given on 22 May 2014, and his appeal was heard before a  panel  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Halliwell and Ms V S
    Street JP (Non-Legal Member), sitting at Newport (Columbus House) on  3
    November 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 14 November 2014, the
    panel dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 6. Although in the grounds of  appeal,  it  had  been  asserted  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Somalia, it is clear  from  the
    determination that this argument was not advanced before the  panel  at
    the hearing, and nor was there evidence submitted in  support  of  this
    claim.  The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing, but at no stage
    was an application made for an adjournment on this or any other  basis.
    The hearing (at which the appellant and  members  of  his  family  gave
    evidence and were cross-examined)  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  his
    deportation would be in breach of his Article 8 rights.

 7. The appellant then appealed against the panel's decision, and  although
    permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal, that application was
    renewed before the Upper Tribunal.  The application  was  substantially
    out of time, and the Upper Tribunal Judge before whom  the  appeal  was
    placed considered that there was no satisfactory explanation  for  this
    delay.  Regarding the excuse tendered, she found as follows:

         "The application is out of time.  The application was lodged on  29
         January 2015, on the 25th working day after  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal refusing permission was sent.   The  delay  was
         therefore substantial.  I have considered the  explanation  offered
         at section F of the application form.  The  explanation  is  not  a
         satisfactory one, given that  the  appellant  would  have  had  the
         determination of the panel of the First-tier Tribunal.  It has  not
         been explained why the appellant's representatives considered  that
         they were unable  to  lodge  the  application  by  considering  the
         determination.  Furthermore, the appellant's  representatives  have
         not explained who they attempted to obtain  the  file  from,  given
         that the appellant was not represented at the hearing  or  when  he
         lodged his first application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
         Tribunal.  Finally, they  were  instructed  on  16  December  2014,
         before  the  decision  of  the   [First-tier   Tribunal]   refusing
         permission was sent on 17 December 2014."

 8. Nonetheless, and perhaps rather generously in the circumstances of this
    appeal, the Upper Tribunal Judge gave  permission  to  appeal,  stating
    that "notwithstanding the length  of  the  delay  and  the  lack  of  a
    satisfactory explanation, I have decided to exercise my discretion  and
    extend time".  However, it was made absolutely plain, in bold  writing,
    within the reasons for granting permission, that "permission is granted
    but limited to whether the appellant is at real risk of persecution  or
    serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3 in Mogadishu, applying
    the guidance in MOJ & Others".

 9. Regarding the other grounds, the judge granting  permission  considered
    there was no merit in them, and it was stated, again in bold,  that  "I
    therefore refuse permission on the remaining grounds".

10. The basis of the grant of permission was to  enable  the  appellant  to
    argue that the panel had failed to engage with the  guidance  given  in
    the country guidance case of MOJ & Others (return to Mogadishu) Somalia
    CG [2014] UKUT 00442.

11. Within her reasons for granting permission, the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    also gave very clear directions which  the  appellant  was  obliged  to
    follow, in the following terms:

         "As the appellant is in detention,  I  am  issuing  directions  for
         witness statements to be served explaining why the  appellant  will
         not be able to access funds from his family members in  the  United
         Kingdom.  Although the panel found that he  had  abandoned  contact
         with his family in the UK, as he pursued  his  criminal  activities
         (see para 25), members of his immediate family attended the hearing
         to support his appeal by giving  oral  evidence.   He  should  also
         explain why he will not be able to secure access to a livelihood in
         Mogadishu, given the panel's finding that he retains his  Bravanese
         identity and language and that he  would  have  social  support  in
         Mogadishu (see para 26 of the determination).

         The parties should prepare for the hearing on the  basis  that,  if
         the  decision  of  the  FtT  on  the  asylum  ground,  humanitarian
         protection ground and Articles 2 and 3  is  set  aside,  the  Upper
         Tribunal may proceed to re-make the decision on the appeal  without
         adjourning it.

         DIRECTIONS:

         On or before 2 May 2015, the appellant to file a skeleton  argument
         on the error of law issue and any evidence he seeks to rely upon to
         show that he is at real risk in Mogadishu, in  particular,  bearing
         in mind the guidance in MOJ & Others."

12. These directions, along with the reasons, were given on 13 April  2015,
    and were served shortly thereafter, that is a little over three  months
    ago.  However, the appellant, and more particularly those  representing
    him now, failed to comply with these directions.  Absolutely no further
    evidence has been filed in support of his claim, as  directed,  and  it
    was not until the morning of this hearing that a skeleton argument  was
    filed.

13. On behalf of the appellant, before me, Ms  Gunamal  accepted  that  the
    failure to comply with the directions which had been given could not be
    excused, but attempted nonetheless to explain why it had occurred.  She
    had only been instructed very recently, and  had  she  been  instructed
    herself earlier, she would have ensured that the documents  were  filed
    in time.  The person who was responsible for handling  the  appellant's
    case had also been looking after his terminally ill wife who  had  very
    tragically died about two weeks ago, and therefore he had not done what
    ought to have been done.

14. Given the history of this case, and notwithstanding  the  sympathy  one
    must have with the caseworker's personal circumstances, this  does  not
    excuse the failure of the firm to comply with the directions which  had
    been given over three months before, especially in circumstances  where
    there  had  already  been  inexcusable  delay  in  filing  the  renewed
    application for permission to appeal.

15. Notwithstanding this, Ms Gunamal asked the Tribunal to consider, if  an
    error of law was found, adjourning the hearing so that further evidence
    could be produced regarding  the  risk  the  appellant  would  face  if
    returned to Mogadishu now.  For example, she submitted, there had  been
    a bomb which had exploded yesterday there.

16. I should perhaps add that in her  skeleton  argument  (which  does  not
    contain paragraph numbers and which is not paginated) on the final page
    under "SUBMISSIONS" it is said that:

         "It  is  the  appellant's  submission  that  he  cannot  return  to
         Mogadishu after such a long period of absence,  he  has  no  family
         members  there  and  he  has  not  support   in   Mogadishu.    The
         representatives had been unable to  get  any  statements  from  the
         family members and the appellant as  it  was  Ramadan  and  it  was
         difficult to be ale to get the family to the office to be  able  to
         devise these statements."

17. Then, in the following paragraph, Ms Gunamal continues as follows:

         "It is submitted if an material error of  law  is  found  today  we
         request that the full  hearing  be  adjourned  for  the  appellants
         family members to be able  to  produce  these  statements  and  any
         evidence to back up these statements in relation to  the  financial
         capacity they have in supporting  the  appellant  and  any  reasons
         believed to why he cannot return to  Mogadishu  in  line  with  the
         guidance of MOJ also to be able to visit the appellant  and  to  be
         able to take full instructions from him in relation to his risk and
         why it is believed that" [the paragraph ends there].

18.  So  the  position  before  the  Tribunal  at  the  hearing  was  that,
    notwithstanding the directions  which  had  been  given,  even  if  the
    Tribunal was to find that there  had  been  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant would be unable
    to establish that he would be at  risk  on  return  without  a  further
    adjournment, notwithstanding that the judge who had granted  permission
    to appeal had stated in terms that the parties should prepare  for  the
    hearing on the basis that if the panel's decision was set  aside,  "the
    Upper Tribunal may proceed to remake the decision on the appeal without
    adjourning it".

Appellant's Submissions

19. Essentially the submissions advanced on the appellant's behalf  at  the
    hearing can be summarised as follows.  Although he may not himself have
    advanced his asylum claim with any force at the hearing, nonetheless he
    did wish to maintain this claim, and the panel  should  have  made  due
    allowance for the fact that he was unrepresented  and  considered  this
    itself, whether or not the appellant had advanced this  aspect  of  his
    claim with any force.  Secondly, given the nature  of  his  claim,  the
    panel should in any event have adjourned the hearing in order to  allow
    the appellant to seek representation.

20. In the course of advancing these submissions, Ms Gunamal made a  number
    of assertions which had not been set out in the grounds  and  were  not
    supported by evidence.  For example, she asserted that some ten minutes
    before the hearing, the appellant had been given a 150 page bundle from
    the respondent which he had had no opportunity  of  considering.   When
    asked how she could assert this, she informed  the  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant had told her this before the hearing.  She also asserted that
    the appellant had been unaware that he  could  have  representation  at
    this hearing.

21. Ms Gunamal also stated, apparently on very  recent  instructions,  that
    although the appellant had not produced any evidence, he had  tried  to
    pursue his asylum claim at the hearing.

Discussion

22. I deal first with the submission that the panel, of its  own  volition,
    should have adjourned  the  proceedings.   In  my  judgment,  there  is
    absolutely no reason why the panel should have done  so.   Regrettably,
    by the age of 21, this appellant has had more experience of courts than
    most people would acquire in several lifetimes, and had  he  considered
    that he needed an  adjournment,  either  for  the  purpose  of  seeking
    further evidence or because for reasons which he could  have  explained
    (if there were any) he had been unable to obtain  representation  which
    he now wished to have, he could have requested an adjournment.   It  is
    also the case as noted above, that the respondent had  written  to  the
    appellant on 28 January 2014  giving  him  an  opportunity  to  provide
    submissions in support of his continued entitlement to refugee  status,
    and the appellant had  failed  to  do  so.   The  respondent  had  also
    approached the UNHCR for its observations, and a final decision had not
    been made until three months after  these  approaches  had  been  made.
    Accordingly, even had  the  appellant  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing in order to make representations as to why he should  still  be
    entitled to asylum, he would have had to provide  not  only  very  good
    reasons as to why he had been unable to provide evidence in support  of
    his claim before the court but also why he had not done so  before  the
    decision was made (for which he had had three months).  In  the  event,
    he had produced no evidence and did not seek  an  adjournment,  and  in
    light of his very long history of dishonesty, there  is  absolutely  no
    reason why the Tribunal should now accept assertions made for the first
    time on his behalf that in  fact  at  the  hearing  he  had  sought  to
    maintain his asylum claim or that he had been handed documents  a  mere
    ten minutes before the commencement of the hearing.

23. This Tribunal is also entitled to have in mind  that  in  circumstances
    where the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  itself  filed
    considerably out of time the applicant had still provided absolutely no
    evidence in support of the assertion made on his behalf that  he  would
    be at risk on return, notwithstanding the very clear  directions  which
    had been made when he was somewhat  generously  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

24. Turning to the substantive argument, which is that the Tribunal  should
    have considered the asylum claim in any event, in my judgment there  is
    no merit in this submission either.  It is clear from paragraph  26  of
    the determination that  the  panel  did  indeed  consider  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk on return, even though this  aspect  of  his
    claim had not been specifically advanced at the hearing.  The panel, at
    paragraph 26, found as follows:

         "26. The appellant  has  flouted  the  laws  of  the  land  over  a
             prolonged period, committing offences of  increasing  gravity.
             In effect he rejected his schooling, being excluded at the age
             of 13, and ended up in the care of the  local  authority.   It
             cannot be said that he  is,  in  any  meaningful  or  positive
             sense, culturally or socially integrated  into  the  UK.   The
             recent Upper Tribunal case of MOJ &  Others  at  paragraph  44
             shows that conditions are now such in Mogadishu that there are
             no significant obstacles to the integration of  the  appellant
             back into Somali society.  He retains his Bravanese  identity,
             and the language, and would have social support there from his
             clan."

25. It is accordingly clear that the panel did have in  mind  the  guidance
    given in MOJ, and in the absence of evidence from the appellant  as  to
    why this guidance should not have been followed, or even submissions to
    the effect that he would be at risk on return,  the  Tribunal  was  not
    obliged to explore this aspect of the case any further.  The  appellant
    was supported by some  of  his  relatives  in  this  country  who  gave
    evidence at the hearing before the panel and it was  not  suggested  at
    that hearing that these family members could not or would not  continue
    to provide some assistance after his return.  When considering  whether
    there was an arguable error of law in the panel's failure  to  consider
    (of its own volition) whether  this  appellant  might  be  at  risk  on
    return, this Tribunal must also have in mind the guidance summarised at
    paragraph (x) of the head note in MOJ, that:

         "Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away."

26. Clearly, the return of this appellant, who poses a significant risk  to
    British society, is proportionate, and that aspect of this case is  not
    now before me.  The only basis upon which his return could be  said  to
    be unlawful is that he would be at such risk on return as to engage his
    Article 3 rights, but every opportunity to provide evidence in  support
    of such an argument has been neglected such that even now there  is  no
    evidence before the Tribunal in support of such  a  claim.   There  was
    certainly none before the First-tier Tribunal and there was accordingly
    no basis upon which it could have reached such a conclusion.  In  those
    circumstances, there was no error of law in the  panel's  determination
    and this appeal must accordingly be dismissed.

Decision

There being  no  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 3 September 2015
