
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00786/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2013                            |On 23 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                           rage mahmoud sharif ali

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Somalia born 1 January 1983  appeals
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Carey who for
    reasons given in his determination dated 23  September  2013  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the deportation  order  dated  11  April
    2013 made pursuant to section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007  as  the
    appellant being a foreign criminal is defined by section 32(1).

 2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal which  was  based  on  the
    sole remaining issue in dispute: whether the appellant was entitled  to
    humanitarian protection under 15(c) of the Qualification  directive  as
    transposed in paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules.   There  was  no
    reliance on the Human Rights Convention, in particular Article 8.

 3. The challenge in the grounds of application refers  to  the  tribunal's
    conclusion that the  appellant  originated  from  central  or  southern
    Somalia and that there was noting to  suggest  if  returned  there  via
    Mogadishu International Airport he would face a real risk of  suffering
    serious harm particularly in non-Al-Shabab controlled areas.

 4. Having directed itself  that  it  would  follow  the  country  guidance
    decision in AMM (Somalia) CG [2011] UKUT 445, despite new evidence, the
    tribunal had nevertheless reached a conclusion  that  was  inconsistent
    with that guidance  which  provided  that  the  majority  of  those  in
    Mogadishu faced a real risk of  serious  harm  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 15(c) and there was  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  came
    within any of the  exceptions  identified.   The  grounds  specifically
    state:

         "Mogadishu International Airport is in Mogadishu.  The start of any
         journey that the appellant might take to another part of Somalia is
         thus in Mogadishu".

 5. It is argued that the judge was therefore bound to find that removal of
    the appellant would expose him to a real risk of serious  harm  or  was
    bound to explain why this would not be the case.

 6. Permission to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  Macdonald
    was based on the judge's finding that the appellant "would be  returned
    to Mogadishu".  Although this suggests the judge may have misunderstood
    the findings by the  First-tier  Tribunal  nevertheless  permission  to
    appeal  has  been  granted   and   I   heard   submissions   from   the
    representatives on the relatively narrow basis  of  the  scope  of  the
    challenge.

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal indicates a  thorough  and
    carefully reasoned approach to  the  new  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellant as to its origins as well  as  the  evidence  that  had  gone
    before reflected in determinations promulgated in 2006 and  2010.   The
    appellant continued to maintain that he is from  Mogadishu  and  called
    witnesses who had not appeared before the earlier tribunals in  support
    of this claim including an expert,  Ms  Mary  Harper.   The  conclusion
    reached is set out in [77] of the determination as follows:

         "77. I therefore place little weight on Ms Harper's report  insofar
             as it purports to assist in a determination as to whether  the
             appellant originates from Mogadishu.  It is my view  that  the
             decision of IJ Corben on the appellant's origin  was  correct.
             Indeed I note that when the appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to
             the respondent on October 1 2007 to make a fresh claim on  his
             behalf they concentrated in their 6 page letter on the general
             position in Somalia making particular  reference  to  southern
             Somalia.  I conclude that it is  reasonably  likely  that  the
             appellant originates from central or southern Somalia.   There
             is nothing to  suggest  that  if  he  is  returned  there  via
             Mogadishu International Airport he would face a real  risk  of
             suffering  serious  harm  particularly  in  a  non   Al-Shabab
             controlled area.  There is nothing to suggest  that  he  falls
             within any of the risk categories identified  in  AMM  and  in
             particular would  face  any  travel  difficulties.   It  would
             appear from AMM and the Danish/Norwegian report that Al-Shabab
             are no longer the force they once were in central or  southern
             Somalia.

         78.  Mr Toal quite rightly conceded that whether the appellant  was
             a member of a minority clan was no longer of relevance in view
             of what was said in AMM.   He  sought  to  rely  on  no  other
             grounds  under  Section  33  of  the  2007  Act.    In   those
             circumstances in view of my finding on humanitarian protection
             it  is  inevitable  that  the  appellant's  appeal  should  be
             dismissed."

 8. There is no challenge to the finding as to the appellant's origins  and
    his prospect of safety once there.  Mr Toal  clarified  his  concession
    recorded at [78] above as that being a member (of a minority clan)  was
    not of itself a basis for entitlement to refugee protection and he  did
    not seek to argue that there was error of law on this basis.   Mr  Toal
    also acknowledged that there was no evidence before the tribunal of the
    distance of Mogadishu International Airport from Mogadishu  itself  but
    maintained his challenge that as  part  of  his  reasoning,  the  judge
    needed to turn his mind to how the appellant would be able to travel to
    central or southern  Somalia  without  passing  through  Mogadishu.   I
    reminded Mr Toal that the appellant was well aware of the challenge  to
    his place of origin and that it was for him to produce evidence that it
    was not open to him to return to southern or  central  Somalia  in  the
    event that it was found he was not from  Mogadishu  without  having  to
    pass through that city.  He had not done so but instead had  based  his
    case solely as someone from Mogadishu.

 9. Mr Toal and Miss Holmes  directed  me  to  various  passages  from  the
    tribunal's determination as well as the decision in AMM to throw  light
    on the core of Mr Toal's argument that it was not open to the appellant
    to make his way from MIA to  his  home  area  without  passing  through
    metropolitan Mogadishu.

10. Miss Holmes reminded me that at [10] of the determination Mr  Toal  was
    recorded as having accepted that the appellant would not be at risk  at
    Mogadishu International Airport or en route from the airport.   To  his
    credit Mr Toal did not seek to resile from that in his submissions.

11. At [350] of its determination in AMM the  tribunal  concluded  that  an
    Article 15(c) risk existed as  a  general  matter  in  respect  of  the
    majority of those in Mogadishu and as a  general  matter  as  to  those
    returning there from the United Kingdom.

12. At [87] and [88] the Tribunal in AMM noted the assessment by the  ECtHR
    in Sufi & Elmi v the UK [2011] ECHR 1045 under the heading "the risk in
    transit or upon settling elsewhere in southern  and  central  Somalia".
    The Tribunal observed at [87] in particular:

         "The court held that the situation in the airport was not  such  as
         to give rise to a real risk of ill-treatment to  somebody  arriving
         there.  They had also noted that  certain  journeys  to  places  in
         central and southern Somalia  from  the  airport  did  not  involve
         having to go to Mogadishu".

13. The tribunal in AMM further observed at [88]:

         "It was therefore possible for a returnee to travel from  Mogadishu
         International Airport to another place  of  'central  and  southern
         Somalia'  without  being  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
         prescribed by Article 8 solely  on  account  of  the  situation  of
         general violence"

14. Further at [520] the tribunal found:

         "The overwhelming message from the evidence before us is that it is
         sufficiently safe to travel from  Mogadishu  International  Airport
         into the city.  TFG/AMOSOM control the roads.  Although  there  was
         some  evidence  of  problems,  including  IEDs,  the  risk  run  in
         travelling along the road, in  any  form  of  transport,  does  not
         constitute a real risk of  serious  harm  including  Article  15(c)
         risk.  The letter risk arises by reason of being in the city."

15. After  observing  that  air  travel  within  Somalia  was  common  with
    reference to the UKBA's fact-finding  Mission  at  [524]  the  Tribunal
    observed:

         "If, in a hypothetical case, the respondent is  able  to  point  to
         evidence that the returnee can  fly  from  Mogadishu  International
         Airport to a town in central and southern Somalia, the focus of the
         appeal may well be upon the person's hypothetical situation in that
         town, rather than any problems accessing it by an  overland  route.
         This was not, however, the position in the present  appeals,  where
         there is no suggestion that the appellant AMM could fly  to  Jowhar
         or appellant MW  to  Merka  (both  of  which  are,  in  any  event,
         currently controlled by Al-Shabab).   Nor  was  it  suggested  that
         either they or appellants FM and AF (who come from Mogadishu) could
         fly to some other place in central or southern Somalia."

16. As I have observed above, the possibility of the appellant being  found
    to be from central or southern Somalia was not an issue that was sprung
    upon him in the light of the previous litigation and the question  mark
    over his claimed place of origin.  As observed by Sir John Dyson in  MA
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 49 with reference to the judgment of  Laws
    LJ in an earlier decision GM (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  833  at
    31:

17. "What Laws LJ was saying at para 54 was that, where  a  claimant  tells
    lies on a central issue, his or her case will not be  save  by  general
    evidence unless that evidence is extremely strong.  It is only evidence
    of that kind which will be sufficient to counteract the  negative  pull
    of the lie.  But much depends upon the bearing that the lie has on  the
    case...".

18. The lie told by the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that
    he was from Mogadishu.  Cogent and sustainable reasons were  given  for
    finding otherwise.  The  Strasbourg  Court  in  Sufi  &  Elmi  and  the
    tribunal in AMM found it was possible to travel safely  from  Mogadishu
    International Airport to elsewhere in Somalia other than Mogadishu  and
    accordingly there was no general evidence  which  the  appellant  could
    rely on to support his assertion on which he now seeks to challenge the
    tribunal's decision.  In particular there was no  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that apart from flying which in  any  event  was  a
    possibility open to the appellant (subject to  his  place  of  origin),
    there was no possibility of him being able to travel elsewhere  without
    passing through Mogadishu itself.

19. Accordingly I am not persuaded that the tribunal erred in  law  in  its
    determination.  This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 13 December 2013

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
