
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
DA/00622/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th March 2018                        |On 1st May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              LEONARDO BASILIO
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Portugal born on 20 July 1991. His appeal against the refusal of his
    protection claim was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge S L Farmer on
    30 January 2018 under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the  Appellant  was
    a repeat offender who had 24 convictions for 37 offences  between  2005
    and 2017 such that his conduct  demonstrated  a  genuine,  serious  and
    present threat to public policy. It was submitted that  the  judge  had
    applied  a  purely  binary  calculation  to  justify   the   heightened
    protection. A period of imprisonment in principle breaks the continuity
    when calculating the 10 year period which is to be  counted  back  from
    the date of the deportation decision. The judge misdirected herself  by
    failing to  assess  the  imperative  grounds  tests  adequately  or  in
    accordance  with  relevant  authorities.  There  was   no   qualitative
    assessment  accounting  for  the  Appellant's  behaviour,  conduct  and
    substance of residency.

3.   Further there  was  no  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence. The Supreme Court made a referral to  the
    ECJ on this point and the opinion of the advocate general was that  the
    acquisition of a permanent right of  residence  is  a  prerequisite  of
    qualification for enhanced protection (FV (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49).

4.   The Appellant's behaviour has shown a lack of  regard  for  UK  society
    and a lack of social and cultural integration, such  that  without  any
    heightened protection, his behaviour clearly warrants deportation as he
    remained a present and serious threat to society.  If  the  matter  was
    assessed under Regulation 27(1), with no added protection, it would  be
    proportionate  to  deport  the  Appellant  despite  his   long-standing
    connections with the UK

5.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Peart for the following reasons: "The judge's first task  was  to
    establish whether the appellant had been in the  UK  exercising  treaty
    rights such as to acquire a permanent right of residence. The next task
    was to assess the appellant's criminal offending against Regulation 27.
    The appellant might or might not have  been  entitled  to  an  enhanced
    level of protection. Regrettably there was no analysis or any  adequate
    analysis in that regard."

6.   In the Rule 24 response, the Appellant stated that  the  Appellant  had
    been in the UK since at least the age of five. The judge found that the
    Appellant's 17 years' residence prior to his  first  conviction  was  a
    factor which could be taken into account  when  assessing  whether  the
    integrating links forged by him could be broken. He did not  find  that
    the Appellant was entitled to the  highest  level  of  protection.  The
    judge did carry out a holistic  approach  and  considered  the  trigger
    offence, the judge's sentencing remarks, the assessment of reoffending,
    rehabilitation whilst in prison, the Appellant's  friends  and  family,
    his on going relationship with his son,  and  that  the  Appellant  was
    committed to addressing his offending behaviour.


Submissions

7.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had not dealt with  which  level  of
    protection applied and this must be inferred  from  paragraph  18.  The
    judge must accept that there was an on going risk and must  accept  the
    Appellant's conduct. However  the  judge  had  erroneously  taken  into
    account  the  Appellant's  10  years'  residence.  The  nature  of  the
    Appellant's residence was relevant in assessing whether  the  Appellant
    qualified for EU integration. Paragraph  18  of  the  decision  had  no
    relevance unless it is  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  level  of
    protection. There was no evidence and no finding that the Appellant had
    comprehensive  sickness  insurance  and,  therefore,  he  was  lawfully
    resident for the ten-year period as a student. There was no evidence or
    finding that the Appellant was a family member  of  someone  exercising
    Treaty rights. It was clear from the refusal of 10 October  2017  these
    matters were in issue.

8.   The judge's approach to integration was unlawful.  Although  the  judge
    mentioned schedule 1 at paragraph 19 she failed to properly  apply  it.
    Integrating links were weakened by offending behaviour. Integration was
    affected by conduct and  the  judge  was  required  by  schedule  1  to
    consider this. The judge  also  failed  to  consider  the  considerable
    history of offences and their nature, which  showed  an  escalation  in
    offending behaviour.  Paragraph  25  was  not  a  lawful  direction  in
    accordance with the schedule and was not sufficient to  show  that  the
    judge understood integration.

9.   In summary, Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had failed  to  indicate
    the level of protection applicable in the Appellant's  case.  Secondly,
    the Appellant was not entitled to enhanced protection  because  he  had
    not shown that he had acquired permanent  residence  or  that  he  held
    comprehensive sickness insurance or that he  was  a  family  member  of
    someone exercising Treaty rights. Thirdly, the approach to  integration
    was unlawful because the judge had failed to apply schedule 1.

10.  Mr Eaton submitted that when considering enhanced protection the  clock
    started from  the  decision  to  deport  counting  backwards  and  that
    imprisonment  would  break  the  continuity  of  that  residence.   The
    Appellant was not entitled to enhanced protection. However,  10  years'
    residence  could  be  taken  into  account   in   the   proportionality
    assessment. At paragraph 18 the judge in effect stated that  imperative
    grounds were not applicable, but she could still give the Appellant the
    benefit  of  his  length  of  residence  as  a  factor   in   assessing
    proportionality. The judge only applied the first level of  protection.
    There was no suggestion that the Appellant  had  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence because the evidence was insufficient to  show  that
    he was a student, due to the lack of sickness insurance, or that he was
    a family member of someone exercising Treaty rights.

11.   Mr  Eaton  submitted  that  10  years'  residence  was   relevant   to
    integrating links. The  Supreme  Court's  view  was  that  it  was  not
    necessary to  show  permanent  residence  and  the  Attorney  General's
    opinion was not before the Tribunal. It was an opinion not  a  judgment
    of the CJEU. In assessing 10 years' residence the judge was considering
    integration not whether the Appellant complied with the Regulations.

12.  Mr Eaton submitted that non-compliance with schedule 1 was not  pleaded
    in the grounds and schedule 1 was of dubious legality.  In  any  event,
    the judge referred to schedule 1 and carried out the task in substance.
    She considered the trigger offence, the OASYS report, the  future  risk
    and behaviour in prison. The judge considered the level  of  protection
    afforded to EU Nationals and the Appellant's contact  with  his  child.
    The judge complied with schedule 1 in substance.

13.  If the judge had erred in law in failing to  specifically  state  which
    level of  protection  was  applicable,  then  such  an  error  was  not
    material. The judge took into account all factors and her findings were
    open to her on the evidence.

14.  Mr Jarvis submitted that this case was  not  a  disagreement  with  the
    facts. It was concerned with a proper application of a legal scheme and
    the judge's approach was incorrect. The judge found that the  Appellant
    had established lawful residence. Lawful could only mean in respect  of
    EU law. Accordingly, the judge's findings at paragraphs 17 and 18, were
    that the Appellant had been residing in the UK in  accordance  with  EU
    law. It was accepted that he had not. The judge had  erred  in  finding
    that  the  Appellant's  residence  was  lawful  and,   therefore,   her
    proportionality assessment was flawed. Qualifying  residence  means  in
    accordance with the Regulations and any assessment must be made  within
    that  legal  context.  The  judge  did  not  make  reference   to   the
    requirements and therefore could not be sure  that  the  Appellant  was
    integrated when there was no evidence of sickness cover. The  Appellant
    was a career criminal and this affected the level  of  integration.  On
    the facts the Respondent had shown that the Appellant's deportation was
    justified, applying the lowest level of protection. The  Appellant  was
    not integrated and therefore his deportation was proportionate.

Discussion and Conclusion

15.  The Appellant is 26 years old and has lived in  the  UK  for  about  21
    years. He  has  committed  37  offences  resulting  in  24  convictions
    including assault occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  burglary,  theft,
    assaulting a police officer, possession of cannabis, battery, damage to
    property, shoplifting, possession of a  class  B  controlled  drug.  He
    received three warning letters from the Secretary of State. On 30  June
    2017, the Appellant was convicted of theft, assault occasioning  actual
    bodily harm and breach of a suspended sentence. He was sentenced to  12
    months imprisonment.

   16. The judge made the following findings:


         "17.     I am therefore satisfied and I find that the appellant has
             been resident in the UK since 1996 and has remained a resident
             here.  I  accept  his  evidence,  and  the  evidence  of   his
             witnesses, in particular Ms Barrow, who said she had seen  him
             frequently and regularly even after he left primary school.
         18.  Mr Eaton accepted on behalf of the appellant that  periods  of
             imprisonment do not count towards his continuous residence but
             his first custodial sentence was in 2013 and prior to this  he
             resided in the  UK  for  about  17  years.  He  has  therefore
             established lawful residence of [sic] in excess  of  10  years
             prior to any period of imprisonment and I find that I can take
             this into account as part  of  the  overall  consideration  in
             order to determine whether the integrating links  forged  with
             the host Member State have been broken (SSHD v MG [2014] EUECJ
             C-400/12).
         19.  I have given  consideration  to  the  principles  set  out  in
             Regulation 27(5), which state that the decision to deport must
             comply with  a  principle  of  proportionality  and  be  based
             exclusively on the  conduct  of  the  person  concerned.  That
             conduct must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
             serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
             society  taking  into  account  and  that  of  the  appellant.
             Schedule  1  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016  provides  a  non
             exhaustive list of the fundamental interests of society in UK.
             These include  maintaining  public  order,  preventing  social
             harm, maintaining the confidence of the public to take  action
             against EEA  nationals  with  convictions  and  combating  the
             effects of persistent offending and protecting the public."

17.  The judge went on to consider the sentencing remarks, the  most  recent
    trigger  offence,  when  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  months
    imprisonment, and the OASYS assessment, which found that the  Appellant
    posed a medium risk of reoffending. The judge accepted the  Appellant's
    oral evidence that he  had  engaged  with  rehabilitation  services  in
    prison and that he was committed to stopping drinking and would take up
    the support offered. The judge found that the Appellant had taken steps
    to improve his situation and was currently motivated to  avoid  further
    offending.

18.  At paragraph 25 the judge concluded: "I find that the Appellant's  most
    recent offence (March 2017) has met the respondent's minimum  threshold
    for considering deportation. Against this and I put  into  the  balance
    the fact that he has been in the UK since  he  was  4  years  old.  His
    family is in the UK and he has a young child (aged 6 years) who  is  in
    the UK and who I find he has an  on-going  and  committed  relationship
    with. I accept the evidence of  his  ex-partner  as  to  the  level  of
    contact and her on-going commitment to maintaining that relationship. I
    also find that the appellant has  committed  to  finding  work  on  his
    release, avoiding alcohol and his offending behaviour. When taking into
    account his length of residence in the UK and his ties to the UK  which
    I find are strong and the fact that whilst he has  a  long  history  of
    offences they are, in the main,  petty  offences  with  only  the  last
    reaching the minimum threshold I find that the appeal should be allowed
    and it would not be proportionate to return the appellant to Portugal."

19.  In MG the CJEU concluded that the fact that a person resided in a  host
    member state for 10 years prior  to  imprisonment  may  be  taken  into
    consideration as part of the overall assessment required  in  order  to
    determine whether the integrating links previously forged with the host
    Member State have been broken.

20.  I find that the judge did not find that the Appellant was  entitled  to
    enhanced protection. She applied the  lowest  level  of  protection,  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interest of society, which she set out at paragraph 19. Her
    findings at 18 show that  she  considered  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence  could  be  taken  into  account   in   determining   whether
    integrating links had been broken.  This  was  relevant  to  her  later
    assessment of proportionality.

21.  There is some merit in Mr Jarvis' point that  lawful  residence  should
    been residence in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations.  The  judge's
    reference to 'lawful' residence was unfortunate because it was accepted
    that the Appellant had not shown that  he  had  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance or that he was a family member of a person exercising  Treaty
    rights. However, I find  that  it  was  not  material  to  the  overall
    assessment of proportionality where the judge was entitled to take into
    account the Appellant's length of residence.

22.  On the facts, the Appellant did have  strong  integrating  links  given
    that he came to the UK when he was about four or  five  years  old  and
    there was credible evidence that he had attended school. There  was  no
    challenge to the judge's findings  at  paragraphs  16  and  17  of  her
    decision. The judge found that he had resided in the UK since 1996.

23.  I find that there was no error of law in the assessment  of  the  level
    of protection and the judge  specifically  stated  the  test  that  she
    applied. On that basis, the arguments made  in  relation  to  acquiring
    permanent residence were not relevant. I find that the  judge  properly
    considered  Regulation  27(5)  in  accordance  with  schedule  1.   She
    specifically referred to it and set out some of its provisions.  It  is
    clear from her findings at paragraphs 20 to 25 that she had  regard  to
    schedule 1.

24.  The judge took into account all relevant matters in her  assessment  of
    proportionality. The Appellant's family was in the UK and he had an on-
    going and committed  relationship  with  his  six  year  old  son.  She
    considered his length of residence and ties to the UK to be strong  and
    balanced this against his long history of offences. Her finding that it
    would not be proportionate to deport the Appellant and  return  him  to
    Portugal was open to her on the evidence before her.

25.  Accordingly, I find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of 30 January 2018 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Signed
              J Frances
                                    Date:  28 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
