
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00063/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        PETER OLUWADAMILOLA SHOWEMIMO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Whitwell, HOPO
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State appeals  with  leave  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Petherbridge  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  9
    August 2013 to make a  deportation  order  against  him  by  virtue  of
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The judge found the respondent, his mother and sister  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  He relied on the findings made by the judge in the sister's
    appeal against the deportation order made against her.

3.   I find however  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  particular
    circumstances of this respondent in respect of his appeal  against  the
    deportation order against him.

4.   The judge found that the respondent has lived in  the  UK  continuously
    since his birth and therefore it must follow that he has no  social  or
    cultural ties with Nigeria.

6.   The judge heard the appeal on  19  August  2015.  It  appears  that  he
    considered the  respondent's  appeal  under  the  old  paragraph  339A.
    Paragraph 399A was amended on 28 July 2014.  The  judge's  reliance  on
    the old paragraph 399A led to his failure to properly consider  whether
    the respondent met all of the requirements  of  the  current  paragraph
    399A.  The requirements are whether the respondent  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the UK for most of his life, whether  he  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in the  UK;  and  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into Nigerian society.

7.   The errors are material.  The judge's decision cannot stand.

8.   The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a  First-tier
    Judge other than FtTJ Petherbridge.


Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
