
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00006/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 22 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                mr Mustafa Er
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by Fortwell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  His date of birth is  5  January
    1972.  He was made subject to a deportation order on 20  December  2016
    under Regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    2006 Regulations ("the 2006 Regulations") following a conviction for  a
    sexual assault on a child on 20 October 2016.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against the deportation order.  His appeal was allowed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FTT").

2.   The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the FTT.  We found that the judge materially erred for  the
    reasons we set out in our decision of 21  August  2018.  They  read  as
    follows:-

         14.  The evidence before Judge Andrew was scant.  There was no  PSR
             or OASys report.  The OASys report before  us  post-dates  the
             hearing before Judge Andrew.  What reports were  in  existence
             and why they were not before the judge is not  entirely  clear
             to us.  In any event, there was evidence, albeit brief, in the
             letter of 21 March 2017 from Mr Joels that two  dimensions  of
             risk had been evaluated by the Probation Service.   The  judge
             recorded this and acknowledged that should the  Appellant  re-
             offend this would pose a medium risk of harm to  children  and
             members of the public.  However, the judge in  our  view,  did
             not grapple with this assessment of harm and how  it  affected
             the overall risk.  The decision was based on the evaluation of
             risk of re-offending which  was  low  without  regard  to  the
             assessment of harm (the risk of harm is to teenage  girls  and
             the nature of the harm is sexual  assault  including  touching
             and grooming as identified in the OASys report).


         15.  We acknowledge that the facts in Kamki [2017] EWCA Civ1715 are
             distinguishable.  The Appellant in that case was convicted  of
             rape and did not accept responsibility.   We  proceed  on  the
             basis that a judge should  look  at  both  likelihood  of  re-
             offending and the seriousness of consequences if it does.   We
             accept that this was a concession  made  by  both  parties  in
             Kamki and did not form part of the core decision of the  Court
             of Appeal.  However, it was not advanced by  Mr  Harding  that
             this was not the correct approach.


         16.  We do not accept that the only  available  challenge  to  this
             decision is on perversity grounds.  It is clear to us that the
             judge  failed  to  consider  a  material  matter;  namely  the
             assessment of serious harm when considering the  threat  posed
             by the Appellant.  It is our view that she failed  to  grapple
             with the evaluation by the probation service, the implications
             of it and the possible  risk  factors  which  impact  on  risk
             generally.  Whilst it is possible that having  considered  the
             combination of evaluative assessments, a judge may  reach  the
             overall conclusion that risk of re-offending was low, there is
             a need to  engage  with  the  whole  assessment  and  reach  a
             reasoned conclusion.  The judge did not adopt this approach.


         17.  The error is material.  We set aside the decision to allow the
             appeal under the EEA Regulations.  It was clear to us that  we
             needed up to date evidence to properly assess the threat posed
             by the Appellant.  We adjourned the hearing  with  a  view  to
             remaking the decision.


         18.   The  judge  accepted  that  the  marriage  was  not  one   of
             convenience.  There was no challenge to this by the  Secretary
             of State in the grounds.  At the hearing before us, Mr  Melvin
             did not seek  to  undermine  this  finding.   The  finding  is
             maintained.

3.   The matter came before us on 6 November 2018 for a substantive  hearing
    during which we heard evidence from the Appellant  and  his  wife,  Mrs
    Aija Berezanina, a citizen  of  Latvia.   Both  gave  evidence  through
    interpreters, Mr Er through a Turkish interpreter and his wife Russian.

4.    The  Appellant's  immigration  history  is  that  he  entered  the  UK
    unlawfully.  He was apprehended on 29  December  1999.   He  lodged  an
    application for asylum in 2000 which was refused in 2001.   His  appeal
    against this decision was dismissed.  He became appeal rights exhausted
    on 18 February 2003.  He did not leave the UK.  He was detained  as  an
    overstayer on 3 May 2010 and removed to Turkey on 18 May 2010.

5.   On 30 September 2010  he  married  Mrs  Berezanina  in  Turkey  and  he
    returned to the UK with her as her non-EEA national spouse.  It is  not
    clear the date he returned; however, he lodged  an  application  for  a
    residence card as a non-EEA national spouse on 26 April 2011.  This was
    granted on 12 July 2011, expiring on 12 July 2016.

6.   On 20 October 2016 the  Appellant  was  sentenced  for  an  offence  of
    sexually assaulting a 13- year old girl.  It was as a  result  of  this
    offence that the Respondent decided to make a deportation  order.   The
    offence was committed on  21  November  2013.   The  Appellant  pleaded
    guilty on 20 May 2014.  He was sentenced to three years imprisonment on
    20 October 2016.   The  judge  made  a  sexual  harm  prevention  order
    ("SHPO") prohibiting the Appellant from contacting either  directly  or
    indirectly the victim and ordering that he must not have any supervised
    contact with any young person under 16 except in the presence  of  that
    child's parent or guardian or other appropriate adult who has knowledge
    of his sexual offending.  The duration of the SHPO is five  years.   It
    expires on 20 October 2021.  The Appellant must register his name  and
    address on the Sex Offender  Register  as  required  under  the  Sexual
    Offences Act 2003 for an indefinite period.   The  Appellant's  licence
    expired on 19 April 2018.

7.   The judge's sentencing comments are as follows:-

         "It was a chance meeting in the park.   You  were  drinking  vodka.
         You gave vodka to the children and you then sexually assaulted [Y].
          The impact of that upon her I don't need to  elaborate  on.   It's
         obviously something that affects her significantly.


         I've read a presentence report  and  I  accept  that  this  was  an
         opportunistic offence.  You had [Y] telephone number on  you,  your
         mobile. You have been in contact with her because you worked in the
         area where she lived and there is an  element,  therefore,  of  you
         knowing her prior to this incident but I repeat that there  appears
         to be no planning involved.


         In those circumstances, it is agreed that this  is  a  category  3A
         offence on the guidelines.  That gives a  starting  point  of  four
         years  which  is  aggravated  by  your  use  of   drink   and   the
         vulnerability of that child to four and a half years.


         So far as credit is concerned, the forensic evidence was served  at
         a very late stage of the case and you immediately notified a guilty
         plea.  I'm therefore going to give you full credit, which means ...
         the sentence is three years' imprisonment)."

8.   We do not have a copy of the indictment or certificate  of  conviction.
    However, it is clear to us that the offence was one contrary to Section
    9 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003  which  is  sexual  activity  with  a
    child.  This offence was triable only on indictment as a result of  the
    circumstances of the allegation against the Appellant, namely, that  he
    penetrated the complainant's vagina with his fingers and as a result of
    the aggravating feature of penetration  the  maximum  sentence  was  14
    years'  imprisonment  on  indictment.   The  Appellant   was   released
    immediately on 20 October 2016 having served his sentence.  He remained
    in immigration custody until 18 January 2017.

9.       There was before the sentencing judge a presentence  report  (PSR).
    Regrettably it was  not  before  us.   We  had  an  OASys  Report  (the
    "report") which was prepared by a probation officer, Katie  Breeden  on
    19 July 2018.  The parties relied on the report in submissions. It  is
    necessary for us to go through it  in  some  detail.   Ms  Breeden  had
    before her the PSR and CPS  papers.   The  report  draws  a  comparison
    between the Appellant's attitude earlier in  the  criminal  proceedings
    with those on "termination," which we understand to mean when  she  met
    with him to prepare the report of 19 July 2018 after the expiry of  his
    licence.

10.  The details of the offence are set out at paragraph 2.1 of the  report.
     They are taken from CPS documents.  The Appellant with intent sexually
    penetrated the vagina of a girl aged 13 with his fingers.  He had  been
    drinking a bottle of vodka in the park alone to celebrate a job  offer.
    He was joined by the victim and her friend.  He knew the girls  due  to
    them being customers in the chip shop where he worked in  King's  Lynn.
    The girls drank vodka with him and the victim became inebriated and  it
    was at this time the offence occurred.

11.  At 2.4 of the report the  following  is  stated  when  considering  the
    victim perpetrator relationship:-

         "Grooming took place over a significant period of time,  which  led
         to the victim feeling that Mr Er was someone who  she  could  trust
         ... victim was under age and  may  have  been  intoxicated  through
         drinking from Mr Er's vodka bottle.  It could  also  be  said  that
         there was some degree of trust as the girl knew Mr Er as she was  a
         regular customer at the chip shop in the  borough  of  King's  Lynn
         where he worked on the counter."

12.  At 2.5 of the report the  impact  of  the  offence  on  the  victim  is
    described as follows:-

         "The  victim  was  taken  to   hospital   with   hyperthermia   and
         intoxication after the offence and she would have been  emotionally
         distressed.   It  must  be  noted  that  the   offence   may   have
         psychological impact on the victim which could  affect  her  future
         behaviour/ability to form relationships/attachments."

13.  At 2.6 in answer to the  question  "does  the  offender  recognise  the
    impact  and  consequences  of  offending  on  victim,   community/wider
    society?", the answer is in the negative.     At 2.8  the  question  is
    asked why did it happen - evidence of motivation and triggers and  the
    following is stated in response:-

         "There was grooming involved and Mr Er was  sexually  attracted  to
         the victim.  He used the alcohol as an disinhibitor  to  carry  out
         possible sexual fantasies.  In addition there may  have  been  some
         planning if he knew the victim frequented the park.  Mr  Er  abused
         his position of trust as an  adult  that  had  developed  a  social
         relationship with the victim."

14.   At  2.11  the  question  posed  is  whether   the   offender   accepts
    responsibility for the current offence and the answer given is  in  the
    positive.  The next question posed is how much responsibility  does  he
    acknowledge and does he blame others or  minimise  the  extent  of  his
    offending?  In answer to this the following is stated; "Mr  Er  accepts
    partial responsibility as  he  attempts  to  minimise  his  actions  by
    stating that the victim had stated she was older."  On termination  the
    position  is  recorded  as  follows:-   "Mr   Er   now   accepts   full
    responsibility for the offence.  He  does  not  seek  to  minimise  his
    behaviour and recognises that the impact for the victim would have been
    significant".

15.  At 2.14 of the assessment under the box which asks  for  identification
    of offence analysis issues contributing to risks of offending and  harm
    the following is stated:-

         "Although this Mr Er's first conviction, there is a serious offence
         committed  against  a  13  year  old  girl.   Mr  Er  was   heavily
         intoxicated at the time of the offence which may have  acted  as  a
         dishibiting factor.  However, the fact that  he  had  the  victim's
         telephone number and that he would call her suggests  he  had  some
         sort of interest in her and this may have been of a sexual  nature.
         Mr Er denies this and stated he  had  no  sexual  interest  in  his
         victim.   This  will  be  explored   further   during   supervision
         sessions."

16.  The report considered whether certain issues were linked  to  offending
    behaviour  and  concluded  that  accommodation,  education,   training,
    financial issues, lifestyle and association, emotional well-being  were
    not linked to offending behaviour.  However, within this  part  of  the
    report it is stated that, "When the Appellant was employed as  a  part-
    time chef in a fish and chips kebab shop this  is  where  the  grooming
    occurred.


17.  At section 6 of the report relationships are considered.  It is  stated
    that there are some problems with the Appellant's current  relationship
    and some problems with previous experience of close  relationships  and
    the following is stated at 6.9:-

         "The current offence did involve an association/friendship with the
         victim.  Whilst nothing specifically untoward happened during  that
         friendship, given their respective ages, the fact that  the  victim
         was under age, that Mr Er was a married man, in my assessment Mr Er
         did experience some  attraction  towards  the  victim;  Mr  Er  has
         accepted that it was wrong for him to keep her mobile phone number.
          In this respect it  could  be  said  he  formed  an  inappropriate
         association/friendship with a minor which contributed significantly
         to the offence.


         Mr Er was previously married but divorced; he has two children  (14
         and 17) from that marriage and they live with the mother in Turkey.
          He has been married to his current wife since 2010 and  they  have
         been together for nine years in total.   Mr  Er  has  denied  there
         being problems in his marriage, although he does admit he  has  not
         told his wife the  full  details  of  the  offence.   He  gave  his
         explanation for this as because he  was  ashamed  of  his  actions.
         This will be explored further during supervision."

18.  It is concluded that relationship issues are linked to the  Appellant's
    risk of  serious  harm,  risks  to  individuals  and  others  and  that
    relationship issues are linked to his offending behaviour.  However, it
    is noted on termination that he disclosed the offence in  full  to  his
    wife  and  she  remained  supportive  and  the   conclusion   is   that
    relationship issues are linked to the  risk  of  serious  harm  and  to
    offending behaviour.

19.  There was no drug misuse reported.  At section 9 of the report  alcohol
    misuse is considered and in respect of that the following is stated  at
    paragraph 9.3:-

         "Mr Er's intoxication was a significant factor in this offence.  It
         affected his judgment in allowing the under-age girls to drink  but
         also - in my view -  disinhibited  his  romantic/sexual  feelings
         towards [the victim].


         The writer of the PSR stated Mr Er had disclosed a drink dependency
         (vodka) from about six-seven years  ago  when  he  was  capable  of
         drinking a bottle of vodka in a day.  During supervision, Mr Er has
         denied  making  the  statement  and  he  is  insistent   that   the
         interpreter had translated incorrectly at that time.  He stated  he
         used to drank occasionally  and  had  stopped  drinking  since  the
         offence occurred.  It must be noted that the PSR writer is  a  very
         experienced member of staff  and  it  is  very  unlikely  that  the
         interpreter misheard.  Mr Er  was  challenged  at  length,  but  he
         continued to maintain his version of events.  This will be explored
         further during supervision sessions.


         It is my opinion, Mr  Er  did  have  a  ongoing  relationship  with
         alcohol which was a contributing factor  in  the  commissioning  of
         this offence.   He  clearly  does  not  think  he  has  a  problem,
         otherwise why would he be sitting in a park drinking  alcohol?   It
         may be that he is a binge drinker.


         Therefore, alcohol misuse issues are linked  to  Mr  Er's  risk  of
         serious harm, risks to the individual  and  other  risks.   Alcohol
         misuse issues are also linked to his offending behaviour."

20.  On termination it is recorded that  the  Appellant  now  abstains  from
    alcohol and that intervention has been  completed  to  address  it  and
    there is no evidence to suggest otherwise.  It is also stated that  the
    Appellant is aware that consuming alcohol  impacted  his  thinking  and
    behaviour  and  appears  motivated  to  avoid  drinking.   The  overall
    conclusion is therefore that alcohol misuse is not linked to  the  risk
    of serious harm or offending behaviour.

21.  In respect of thinking and behaviour this is considered at  section  11
    and it is recorded that the offence was  not  impulsive  and  that  the
    Appellant has "tentative romantic/sexual feelings towards [the  victim]
    which might explain why he had her mobile number".

22.   On  termination  it  was  stated  that  he  had  engaged   well   with
    intervention to address his offending and that he  could  now  identify
    why it had happened and did not seek to minimise his  behaviour.   When
    challenged about the offence he is  now  able  to  recognise  that  the
    impact of the victim would have been significant and that his behaviour
    was wrong.  It is stated that he shows motivation to avoid any  further
    antisocial behaviour.

23.  The risk of reoffending was  assessed  as  low  (see  page  27  of  the
    report) however the risk of serious harm was assessed as  medium.   The
    report identifies at R10.1 teenage girls being at  risk  and  that  the
    nature of the risk is sexual assault, touching  and  grooming.   It  is
    stated that risk is likely to be greatest "long-term and more  so  when
    Mr Er is under the influence of alcohol.  Also when unsupervised around
    children".  The  report  concludes  that  intoxication  and  developing
    friendships with girls under the age of 16 predominantly teenagers  are
    circumstances which are likely to increase the risk  and  factors  that
    are likely  to  reduce  the  risk  are  abstinence  from  alcohol,  not
    developing  friendships  with  girls,  awareness  of  the  dangers  and
    supervised contact with children.  The Appellant was assessed as posing
    a medium risk of serious harm to children and the public.

24.  A medium risk of serious harm is defined in the report at page 32 as :-



         "There are identifiable indicators of risk of  serious  harm.   The
         offender has the potential to cause serious harm but is unlikely to
         do so unless there is  a  change  in  circumstances,  for  example,
         failure to take medication,  loss  of  accommodation,  relationship
         breakdown, drug or alcohol misuse."

25.  We had before us the Appellant's bundle prepared for the hearing  which
    contained the original witness statements that  were  before  the  FTT.
    There was an e-mail from Katie Breeden  (page  79  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle).  She responded to an e-mail from  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    asking whether the position as outlined in the  OASys  Report  remained
    the same.  Her response was as  follows:-  "low  risk  of  reoffending.
    Medium risk of harm to public and that  won't  ever  change  unless  he
    reoffends".  The Appellant also relied on the letters from the National
    Probation Service which were before the FTT.

26.  The Appellant gave oral evidence.  He adopted  his  witness  statement.
    The Appellant's evidence is that he has complied with the  orders  made
    by the Crown Court Judge.

27.  In oral evidence the Appellant gave some  details  about  the  offence.
    He described drinking vodka in the park and he gave evidence  that  one
    of the girls started kissing him and that  he  kissed  her  back.   She
    received  a  call  on  her  mobile  phone  and  he  was  hit  and  lost
    consciousness.  When he came round he saw police officers  and  he  was
    taken to the  police  station.   He  expressed  his  embarrassment  and
    apologised for the incident.  He regretted what happened, stating  that
    it had ruined his family life and he would never do it again.

28.  In cross-examination he was asked more  questions  about  the  offence.
    He stated that he thought the girls were over 18 because that  is  what
    they told him.  Had he known that the girl was 13 he would not have got
    involved.  He confirmed that he knew the girl from his work in the fish
    and chip shop.  He stated that they would come  in  and  he  would  buy
    things and he also knew them from the park.

29.  In questions from the panel he stated that he had known the victim  for
    about a year or two years before the incident  and  that  he  knew  her
    brother and had known him for about three years.  He was not  sure  how
    old her brother was at the time but he thought  he  was  aged  21.   He
    confirmed that he had the victim's telephone number in  his  phone  but
    that he had deleted it.  He said he had it in his phone in order to see
    an older girl.  He had obtained it when he was sitting with the victim.
     She asked for his number and she gave him hers.   They  were  friends.
    He would not have been friends had he known her age.  He confirmed that
    he was 41 at the time.  He made a big mistake that day.  He regrets it.

30.  In cross-examination he stated that he wanted to explain something  and
    was given the opportunity to do so.  He then told us that  he  did  not
    really accept the accusation and  had  only  done  so  because  of  his
    lawyer.  His lawyer had advised him to plead guilty, telling  him  that
    he would only receive a minor punishment but if he did not plead guilty
    he could receive up to twelve years' imprisonment.  He was  then  asked
    whether he accepted that he committed a sexual offence  against  a  13-
    year old girl and in answer to that question he stated again  that  had
    he known the girls' age he would not have approached them and  that  he
    did not force anyone to do anything.  He pleaded guilty on  the  advice
    of his lawyer.  He confirmed that he told the probation officer that he
    had taken responsibility for his actions.  He stated  that  he  had  to
    plead guilty but if he had known the  girl's  age  he  would  not  have
    approached her.  She looked mature and did not tell him  her  age.   He
    said that he did not force her to do anything against her wishes.   Had
    he known she was 13 he would accept responsibility for the offence.

31.    The Appellant lives in a shared house with his wife.  They  occupy  a
    room.  The house belongs to a relative.

32.  The Appellant's wife Mrs Aija Berezanina gave  evidence.   She  adopted
    her witness statement of 4 April 2017 as  her  evidence-in-chief.   Her
    date of  birth  is  3  April  1969.   She  is  employed  and  currently
    exercising treaty rights.  In her witness  statement  her  evidence  is
    that her husband accepts that he made a mistake and he regrets what  he
    has done.  Their marriage has had ups and  downs  but  she  decided  to
    carry on with it and forgive him bearing in mind their marriage vows.

33.  In oral evidence she confirmed that her relationship with  her  husband
    is the same as it has always been.  She does not think he is  a  sexual
    predator.  The incident took place in a park and was more  to  do  with
    alcohol consumption than anything else.  She was asked whether she knew
    that her husband knew the victim and her brother prior to  the  offence
    and she stated that she had never seen these people and could not  even
    imagine what they looked like.  She would not go to Turkey should he be
    deported

34.  We heard submissions from both parties.  In oral submissions Mr  Melvin
    relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the  written  submissions.
    The Appellant was only released  from  prison  in  January  2017.   His
    licence expired as recently as 19 April 2018.  It  is  maintained  that
    the Appellant is a danger to the public, particularly young  girls  and
    given his previous behaviour there is a clear  future  medium  risk  of
    harm if his relationship is in  difficulties  or  he  reverts  back  to
    having alcohol problems to children and the public.   It  is  submitted
    that the Appellant represents a present and sufficiently serious threat
    that affects one of the fundamental interests of society.  It is  clear
    from the evidence that he groomed the child,  giving  her  alcohol  and
    then assaulted her, leaving her to need hospital treatment.
35.  Mr Melvin relied on the Home Office policy entitled  EEA  Decisions  on
    Grounds of Public Policy and Public Security Version 3.0 (published for
    Home Office staff on 14 December 2017).  The  SHPO  is  in  force  till
    October 2021.  These are imposed when the court concludes that there  a
    risk given the offence committed.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Appellant could believe that the victim was five years older  than  her
    age.   It  is  difficult  to  see  how  he  could  have  accepted   his
    responsibility when his evidence is  that  he  pleaded  guilty  on  the
    advice of his lawyer.  The  Respondent  takes  the  view  that  serious
    sexual offences against children are serious  and  warrant  deportation
    proceedings in this instance.  There is little evidence of  integration
    aside from his marriage and his employment in a fish and chip shop.  He
    spent 26 years of his life in Turkey.  He has  cultural  links  to  the
    country and family members there, including an ex-wife and  sons.   The
    Appellant entered the UK illegally.  He  has  not  shown  a  degree  of
    social or cultural integration and has little regard for the  law.There
    is no evidence of health problems, either physical or mental.

36.  Mr Harding made oral submissions.  He referred to  a  website  relating
    to the assessment of risk of harm with reference to medium.  After  the
    hearing he provided the printout.  It  contains  information  which  is
    within the OASys Report and which we have taken note of in terms of the
    definition of medium risk of  harm.   It  is  guidance  from  the  NOMS
    website and indicates that an assessor seeking  evidence  on  which  to
    make judgments about the level of risk posed by an individual  offender
    drawing on an accurate appraisal of all the relevant risk  factors  and
    analysis of how likely something is to occur and in what circumstances,
    the potential impact and how that impact will be affected by particular
    circumstances and how imminently  the  act  is  likely  to  occur.   It
    defines medium risk of harm and repeats what is in the OASys Report and
    what we have set out above.

37.   The  applicable  legal  framework  is  Regulation  21  of   the   2006
    Regulations

    Decisions taken on public policy, public  security  and  public  health
    grounds


    21.- (1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
                taken on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or
                public health.


           (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                ends.


           (3)    A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                person with a permanent right of residence under  regulation
                15 except on serious grounds  of  public  policy  or  public
                security.


           (4)    A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-




                (a)    has resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant
                    decision; or


                (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision
                    is necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in
                    the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
                    General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th  November
                    1989 F1 .


           (5)    Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                policy or public security it shall, in addition to complying
                with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken
                in accordance with the following principles-


                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                    proportionality;


                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                    personal conduct of the person concerned;


                (c)    the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                    represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
                    threat affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                    society;


                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                    which relate to considerations of general prevention  do
                    not justify the decision;


                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                    themselves justify the decision.


           (6)    Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                public policy or public security in relation to a person who
                is resident in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must
                take account of considerations such as  the  age,  state  of
                health, family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the
                person's length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                person's social and cultural  integration  into  the  United
                Kingdom and the  extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
                country of origin.


           (7)    In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
                public health-


                (a)    a disease that does not have  epidemic  potential  as
                    defined by the relevant instruments of the World  Health
                    Organisation F2 or  is  not  a  disease  [F3  listed  in
                    Schedule  1  to  the  Health  Protection  (Notification)
                    Regulations 2010 ] shall not constitute grounds for  the
                    decision; and


                (b)    if the person concerned is  in  the  United  Kingdom,
                    diseases  occurring  after  the   three   month   period
                    beginning on the date on which he arrived in the  United
                    Kingdom shall not constitute grounds for the decision.


38.  Mr Melvin relied on the guidance and that he  relied  on  the  guidance
    with specific reference to page 15 of 43 which  is  entitled,  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society and reads as follows:-

         "The threat they pose must be a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious one affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.
         These factors are considered in turn in this section.


         Genuine: the threat must be a realistic one.


         Present: the threat must exist but it does not need to be imminent.
          An indication of a present threat may include intelligence or  any
         precautionary measures which have been imposed  on  the  individual
         for example a licence condition imposed because there is a  genuine
         and present risk.  Even a low risk can constitute a present threat,
         especially where the consequences of any offence could be  serious.
         An argument by  the  individual  that  they  pose  a  low  risk  of
         offending should not be determined automatically  in  their  favour
         when making a public policy decision for the purpose of determining
         whether a person is a present threat while they are  detained,  the
         fact that they are detained should not be taken into account.   The
         threat does not need to be imminent at the point of release.


         Sufficiently serious: the threat must be serious enough  to  affect
         one of the fundamental interests of society but does not need to be
         a serious threat.


         It is also not necessary  to  demonstrate  that  an  individual  is
         likely to commit a specific type of offence.


         When considering whether an individual poses a threat, you may also
         consider the following factors.


         Nature of the offence: in deportation cases the  Government's  view
         is that certain types of offences weigh in favour  of  deportation.
         Those offences typically  result  in  a  custodial  sentence  or  a
         requirement to sign the Violent and Sex Offenders Register (ViSOR).
          This includes, violence, sexual  harm,  a  gun  and  drug  related
         offences.


         Length of sentence: in most cases,  the  length  of  sentence  will
         provide a  strong  indication  of  the  severity  of  the  offence,
         although each case must be considered on its individual merits.   A
         period  of  imprisonment,  especially  a  life  sentence   with   a
         particularly long tariff is confirmation from the sentencing  court
         as to the danger posed by the individual.  Where the individual  is
         held as the highest category  of  prisoner  (a  position  which  is
         reviewed annually) and assessments of their risk are such that  the
         person requires the  most  secure  accommodation  on  the  prisoner
         state, this is on the basis of the risk posed to  society  if  they
         escaped.


         Rehabilitation: the duration of any rehabilitative efforts will  be
         relevant to the public policy decision.  Where such efforts are  in
         their infancy (for example a few weeks in the community, or  a  few
         weeks  undertaken)  these  should   not   be   considered   to   be
         determinative of the question of a risk of  recidivism.   Where  an
         individual relies on rehabilitative prospects in their  country  of
         origin compared  to  the  UK,  any  differences  in  rehabilitative
         provisions will be minor, unless there is strong  evidence  to  the
         contrary."

39.  Mr Harding submitted that in the absence of any legal analysis or  case
    law relating to the standard of proof required to establish  Regulation
    21(5), the burden of proof in his view, should be  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The issue is whether on the balance  of  probabilities,
    there will be a change in circumstances which would cause the Appellant
    to reoffend.  He also submitted that an SHPO can be  imposed  for  less
    serious offences such as voyeurism and exposure and does  not  indicate
    that there is a risk of reoffending.  The point of them is  to  prevent
    risk and the imposition of the order limits risk factors.

40.  Mr Harding referred to the judge's sentencing remarks and the terms  of
    the SHPO with which the Appellant has complied.  Whilst it was  a  very
    serious offence the Appellant as recorded in the OASys Report  at  2.11
    accepted full responsibility.  The Secretary of  State  cannot  on  the
    facts of this case establish that the Appellant's conduct represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  Mr Harding accepted that should  the
    appeal fail on that basis and the Tribunal has  to  proportionality  he
    would not be able to persuade us that the Appellant could  come  within
    S.117C of the 2002 Act. We understood from this that he  conceded  that
    the Appellant could not come within exceptions 1 or 2 or s.117 C (6) of
    the 2002 Act.

Conclusions

41.  The Appellant in this case committed a very serious offence  aggravated
    by the use of alcohol and further aggravated by the  fact  he  supplied
    alcohol to the victim.  It appears that the assault took place  in  the
    presence of the child victim's friend in a public park.  She  was  aged
    13 and he was aged 41.  His own evidence is that he knew the victim for
    a year or two.  It is very difficult to accept that  he  believed  that
    she was 18 bearing in mind his own evidence that he was acquainted with
    the family for some time and hence must have known the victim from  the
    age of 11/12.

42.  The independent evidence before  us  relied  on  by  the  Appellant  to
    support his case that he presents a low risk of re-offending was wholly
    undermined by the Appellant's evidence at  the  hearing.   We  conclude
    that the Appellant was not truthful to Ms Breeden.   Had  he  told  her
    what he told us, it is in our view very unlikely that  she  would  have
    reached the conclusions she arrived at  in  respect  of  risk.   It  is
    likely she would have concluded that there had been very little  change
    on expiry of the Appellant's licence.  For  this  reason,  we  attached
    limited weight to the conclusions in the OASys report.

43.  We were not impressed by the Appellant's evidence.  We  found  him  not
    credible.  We accepted his wife's evidence, but she, like the probation
    officer, has taken at face value, what the Appellant has told her.   We
    accept that the Appellant is sorry for his conduct.  Having  considered
    his oral evidence, it is clear to us that he  is  sorry  to  have  been
    arrested for the offence and to have served a custodial  sentence.   He
    is sorry for the disruption  to  his  life  and  for  the  considerable
    embarrassment the incident has caused him.  We are not  satisfied  that
    he feels remorse for the impact on the victim in this case.  It  simply
    was not apparent from his oral evidence.  His oral evidence  before  us
    was not consistent with what was recorded by the probation  officer  in
    the OASys assessment.  The Appellant did  not  in  evidence  before  us
    accept responsibility for the offence.  His account was that he thought
    that the victim was an adult and that she told him that  she  was  aged
    18.

44.  The Appellant's oral evidence significantly undermined the  conclusions
    in  the  OASys   report   specifically   those   about   remorse,   and
    responsibility.  Whilst we accept that whatever the Appellant genuinely
    thought about the victim's age could never provide him with  a  defence
    and a child could never consent to sex, there is no suggestion that  he
    pleaded to the offence on the basis that had any  reasonable  cause  to
    believe the victim was aged 18.  There is no evidence before us that he
    was sentenced on this basis or that he entered a guilty  plea  on  this
    basis.  His own evidence before us does not support  that  he  did  not
    know the child's age.  We do not accept that  the  Appellant  was  even
    reckless as to her age.  Based on what he told us, we conclude that  he
    was wholly aware that the victim was a child.  His evidence  before  us
    discloses a denial of essential elements of  the  offence,  a  lack  of
    honesty and an ability to effectively hoodwink the probation officer.

45.  The probation officer had a copy of the evidence from the CPS  and  the
    PSR  from  which  conclusions  were  reached   about   grooming.    The
    Appellant's evidence before  us  also  conveniently  ignored  that  the
    offence was aggravated by an  element  of  grooming  and  that  he  was
    sexually interested in a 13-year  old  child.   Whilst  we  accept  and
    assess risk on the basis of the sentencing comments of the judge  which
    make it clear that there was no planning involved  in  so  far  as  the
    meeting in the park is concerned and the commission  of  this  offence,
    the evidence was that there was an element of grooming in so far as the
    Appellant had struck up a friendship with a 13 year old  girl  and  had
    her number in his mobile phone.  The  Appellant's  evidence  before  us
    failed to engage with this and again is at odds with his oral  evidence
    that he thought he victim was an adult.

46.  Whilst it is  true  that  the  Appellant  since  his  release  has  not
    committed any further offences it must also be borne in  mind  that  he
    was not released until 18 January 2017 and  since  then  a  deportation
    order has been hanging over him.  Equally, we take  into  account  that
    this is the first offence committed by the Appellant.

47.  The probation officer was satisfied that the Appellant  was  no  longer
    drinking and that was his evidence before us.  His offending  behaviour
    is  linked  to  alcohol.   The  probation  officer  accepted  what  the
    Appellant told her.  We approach  this  evidence  with  caution  having
    already concluded that the Appellant has been less than candid with the
    probation officer and this reduces the weight  we  can  attach  to  the
    conclusions in the report and his  evidence.   There  was  no  reliable
    evidence supporting the Appellant having given  up  alcohol.   In  this
    respect we note the what was stated in the  PSR  and  recorded  in  the
    report by Ms Breeden regarding  the  Appellant's  denial  that  he  had
    disclosed drink dependency to the author of the PSR.

48.  We were not satisfied that the Appellant fully  disclosed  the  details
    of the offence to his wife, contrary to  what  he  told  the  probation
    officer because of her response to the question from Mr Melvin  whether
    she was aware that the Appellant had known  the  victim.   This  is  an
    aggravating factor of the offence  which  the  Appellant  in  our  view
    failed to disclose to his wife.  Whilst the Appellant has  the  support
    of his wife and it was clear from her evidence that the relationship is
    still ongoing we are not satisfied that the relationship is  sufficient
    to have a meaningful impact on risk of reoffending. It did not  prevent
    the offence in 2013.  There is nothing that has arguably changed  since
    then other than the Appellant's evidence that  he  no  longer  consumes
    alcohol.  The risk of offending and risk of serious harm is affected by
    alcohol misuse.  There is no independent reliable evidence  to  support
    that the Appellant has given up alcohol and is unlikely to relapse.  In
    respect of the Appellant's wife's evidence, we do not believe that  she
    has intended to mislead us in any way, but it is clear  from  what  she
    said that she is motivated by a desire not to be left alone.

49.  We know from Arranz (EEA Regulations Deportation test [2017]  UKUT  294
    that the Respondent carries the burden and  has  to  establish  on  the
    balance of probabilities  that  the  Appellant  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

50.  The ancillary orders made by the judge establish in our view  that  the
    sentencing judge was of the view that he posed a risk  to  young  girls
    and equally we accept that the imposition  of  the  orders  potentially
    reduces risk.   However, the only independent evidence before us  about
    risk is the report which we believe for the  reasons  given  should  be
    given limited weight.  We do not feel able to adopt the  assessment  of
    risk of re-offending or harm identified in  the  report.   We  conclude
    that the risk  is  far  greater  than  that  assessed  by  Ms  Breeden,
    worryingly so, having considered what the Appellant  told  us  in  oral
    evidence.  The Appellant's evidence establishes that he  is  in  denial
    about key aspects of the offence.   He  blames  the  child  victim  for
    having told him she was an adult, which is not credible in  any  event.
    He has not accepted the element of grooming which took  place  and  his
    sexual attraction to a 13 year  old  child.   He  has  a  problem  with
    alcohol.  It is our view that a relapse would lead to a high risk of re-
    offending.  We are  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  establishes  a
    commitment to abstinence.  We  are  not  satisfied  that  a  change  in
    circumstances is anywhere near as remote or unlikely as  the  Appellant
    was able to persuade the probation officer to be the case.

51.  If there is an additional burden on the Respondent  at  this  stage  as
    posited by Mr Harding, which we very much doubt, to  establish  on  the
    balance of probabilities that there will be a change in  circumstances,
    it  has  been  discharged.   We  find  that  the  evidence  before  us,
    especially the Appellant's own oral evidence is such that he represents
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  to  the  safety  of
    children and the rights of children to be safe from sexual  attack  and
    grooming.  The Respondent has discharged the burden of proof.

52.  Mr Harding conceded that he could not persuade us that  if  the  appeal
    turned on proportionality, the Appellant could succeed under s.117C  of
    the 2002 Act.  We agree with him.  It would not be unduly harsh for the
    Appellant and  his  wife  to  be  separated.   There  are  no  properly
    identifiable circumstances that would be capable of amounting  to  very
    compelling circumstances with reference to  s.117C  (6).   However,  we
    assess proportionality on basis that this is a  deportation  under  the
    EEA Regulations.  Taking into account all factors mentioned at  Reg  21
    (6), there is no factor  properly  identified  either  on  its  own  or
    cumulatively capable of establishing  that  deportation  would  not  be
    proportionate in the context of an appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006.  The evidence establishes that the Appellant is integrated  to  a
    limited extent is so far as he has worked here in a fish and chip  shop
    prior to his arrest.   There  is  no  further  evidence  before  us  of
    integration.  He has family in Turkey.  He was there until 2011 and  it
    can be reasonably inferred that he has connections there.  It  will  be
    difficult for the Appellant's wife to cope  with  separation  from  her
    husband, but it is open to her to join him  in  Turkey  if  she  wants.
    However, in the light of the risk he poses to young girls,  deportation
    is proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                    Date 15 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
