
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00537/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 23 July 2013                               |On 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               ALI MIRZA NAVEED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Vaughan, Counsel, instructed by Rodman
Pearce, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  on  20  July  1971.   He
   appeals against a determination by a panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   comprising Judge Conrath and Dr Okitikpi, promulgated on 25  March  2013,
   dismissing his appeal against deportation.

2) The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  on  4
   grounds.  Permission was granted on grounds 2 and 3 but not on grounds  1
   and 4.  Mr Vaughan did not seek to argue the grounds  excluded  from  the
   grant of permission.

3) Ground 2 is that the panel failed to consider or apply the criterion  set
   out at paragraph 75 of Maslov v Austria, European Court of Human  Rights,
   Grand Chamber, application no 1638/03, judgment dated 23 June 2008:

    For a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major  part  of
    his or her childhood and youth in the host country very serious reasons
    are required to justify expulsion ...


4) Ground 3 alleges failure to take into account and  to  make  findings  on
   evidence relevant to the appellant's Article 8 private life interests, in
   particular:

    ... the report from the country  expert  and  anthropologist  Dr  Roger
    Ballard ... which argued inter alia that the absence of attempt by  the
    appellant to nurture familial  links  in  Pakistan  now  makes  it  ...
    extremely difficult for the appellant to rely on  such  familial  links
    ... The report also analyses the extent  to  which  the  appellant  has
    culturally assimilated into UK culture as opposed to the Pakistan  side
    of his identity ... all of this is ignored by the panel.


5) We indicated at the outset that we  had  significant  reservations  about
   absence from the determination of  reference  to  (a)  the  principle  in
   Maslov and (b) Dr Ballard's report.  In view of the conclusions  we  have
   reached and the nature of the case, we can summarise the  submissions  on
   error in law briefly.

6) Mr Wilding argued as follows.  In light of SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
   EWCA Civ 550 the "Maslov  test"  although  not  irrelevant  has  been  so
   watered down that absence of reference to it did not constitute an  error
   of any significance.  The Tribunal was clearly aware of the report by  Dr
   Ballard, which is mentioned at paragraph 15.  The thrust of the  findings
   at paragraphs 27-28 is such that the report must  have  been  taken  into
   account.  In any event Dr Ballard's report so far crossed the  line  from
   objective expert reporting into advocacy for the appellant as to lose all
   objectivity, and dealt with so many matters which were not in the  proper
   province of the expert that it could not have  advanced  the  appellant's
   case.

7) Mr Vaughan submitted that nothing in SS watered down  the  principles  of
   Maslov; that the lack of reference to Maslov, which had been cited to the
   First-tier Tribunal, could not  be  immaterial;  and  that  although  the
   report by Dr Ballard went outside its proper field of expertise, that did
   not excuse failure to consider those  parts  of  the  report  which  were
   relevant.

8) Parties agreed that if we were to find  error,  the  decision  should  be
   remade on the basis of further submissions,  which  they  were  ready  to
   present.  Mr Vaughan did, without conviction, advance the possibility  of
   adjourning to obtain an updated psychiatric report on the appellant.   He
   acknowledged  that  there  were  directions  reminding  parties  of   the
   requirement to give notice of any proposed further evidence, and that  no
   such notice had been given.  He also advised us that no report  has  been
   instructed.  In those circumstances, we were not willing to adjourn.

9) As to remaking the decision, Mr  Wilding  relied  upon  the  respondent's
   refusal letter and, to  the  extent  that  they  were  relevant,  to  the
   submissions made under the heading of legal error.  He pointed  out  that
   the appellant has been convicted  on  21  occasions  of  a  total  of  41
   offences.  He received a sentence of 4� years imprisonment in  1997.   He
   was warned then by the Secretary of State that any future  offending  was
   likely to lead to deportation.  The appellant ignored  the  warning,  and
   was convicted of various offences which led to service  of  notice  of  a
   decision to make a deportation order on 20 October 2006.  He attempted to
   lodge a late appeal on 5 January 2007 but had exhausted his appeal rights
   by 31 January 2007.  He was convicted of further offences on 17  December
   2007 and sentenced to 4 months and 28 days imprisonment.   A  deportation
   order was made on 2  July  2008.   After  sundry  procedure  he  appealed
   successfully against refusal to revoke that order in case  IA/14080/2008.
   The determination by Judge  Lucas  of  that  appeal,  promulgated  on  30
   December 2008, showed that the appellant's case was clearly  then  "touch
   and go".  The determination warned:

    Clearly ... if this  appellant  were  to  reoffend  he  would  have  no
    realistic or further objection to his immediate deportation.


10) Our attention was next drawn to passages in the  sentencing  remarks  of
   Judge Beech on 12 April 2010:

    On 17 March of this year you were convicted of an  offence  of  assault
    with intent to rob ... you approached your victim ... in the street and
    asked him for money.  When he declined to give you any  you  threatened
    him with the fact that you were a boxer and you would go  crazy  if  he
    did not give you any money.  You then punched him twice and grabbed his
    clothing in the vicinity of his neck.  He agreed to give you money, but
    when you released him he ran off with you chasing.  When he got  to  an
    off licence you stopped in your pursuit and got into a car  of  someone
    you know, in all likelihood a drug dealer.  The effect upon your victim
    ... has been profound ... he has been significantly traumatised ...


      You are 38 years of age with 20 convictions for 40 offences ...


    You  have  rejected  assistance  for  your  drug  dependency  from  the
    Probation Service ... I reject your assertion that you have been  in  a
    drug rehabilitation programme on a voluntary basis in 2006 ... you have
    rejected intervention from the Community Mental Health  Team,  although
    whether such intervention is needed is open to doubt.


    I sentence you to a determinate sentence of imprisonment.  You  have  a
    dreadful record and you show absolutely no remorse ... You first of all
    required [your victim] to give evidence because you denied that it  was
    you that had attacked him ... Now  you  assert  that  it  was  he  that
    attacked you ... Your account of what happened ... is,  quite  frankly,
    laughable, bearing in mind the build of your victim  when  compared  to
    you.  He was a slight man whereas you have the  physique  of  a  boxer.
    This was a serious attack  at  night  with  violence.   Both  of  those
    features are aggravating features.


    ... I now sentence you to a term of  imprisonment  of  5  years  and  6
    months.  That sentence should also result in automatic  deportation  to
    Pakistan.


11) Mr Wilding submitted that  the  significant  criminal  history  and  the
   public interest in deportation  of  serious  criminals  constituted  very
   serious reasons to justify deportation, and that no more was required.

12) He next argued that the appellant's position  became  even  weaker  upon
   reference to the OASYS Report instructed by his own solicitors, Part A of
   his bundle in the First-tier Tribunal.  This is a report by Ms  Marshall,
   independent risk assessor, dated 19 February 2013, with an appendix dated
   19 February 2013.  Mr Wilding said that that this was a  reliable  report
   save for speculation on the likely effects of removal  to  Pakistan  upon
   the appellant and for the author's beliefs about  whether  the  appellant
   should be deported, matters not  within  her  remit  or  expertise.   The
   report concludes that the appellant poses a high risk in the community.

13) As to factors upon which the appellant appeared to rely on  his  favour,
   Mr Wilding pointed out that although  he  has  a  relationship  with  his
   mother, that was previously found not to constitute family life.  It  was
   relevant to private life, but it was a stronger factor that  the  further
   extended family members in the UK have  completely  distanced  themselves
   from the appellant.  There was very little difference in the  quality  of
   family links which he would enjoy either in the UK or in Pakistan.

14) Mr Wilding turned finally to the report by  Dr  Ballard.   He  submitted
   that pages 1-10 are only repetition of material  made  available  to  the
   author.  Dr Ballard conducted no interview with the appellant,  and  only
   extrapolated from materials given  to  him.   He  speculated  on  medical
   issues, not within his province.  The psychiatric report was obtained  at
   a later date.  Dr Ballard made conjectures  about  the  appellant's  life
   history and criminal behaviour, matters which did not seem to  be  within
   the province of his "anthropologically based assessment."  The nature  of
   such an assessment was not explained.  The author said that he was "by no
   means certain" as to how far the respondent's decision maker's conclusion
   that the appellant had a criminal  history  could  stand  up  to  serious
   scrutiny, and offered the alternative explanation that the appellant  had
   extreme difficulties in adjusting to his new environment in the  UK  when
   he arrived at age 7.  The report amounted  to  spin  on  the  appellant's
   behalf.  At 3.7 the author went so far as to  say  that  if  returned  to
   Pakistan  the  appellant's  "life  expectancy  in  such  a  position   of
   kinlessness would in my opinion be extremely short", for which there  was
   no adequate basis.  Section 4 of the report, dealing with family life and
   legal issues, was pure advocacy and should not have appeared in an expert
   report.  There was nothing in the report which told significantly against
   the force of the public interest in deportation.

15) In short, Mr Wilding argued that the appellant's position had been on  a
   knife edge in 2008, and having re-offended significantly since  then,  he
   has reached the end of the road.

16)  Mr  Vaughan  submitted  that  the  factors  to  be  considered  on  the
   appellant's side are as follows.  He has resided in the UK for 37  years,
   from the age of 7.  At least 34 of these years have been with  indefinite
   leave to remain.  He is heavily  integrated  into  UK  society.   He  had
   supportive statements from his mother and from  his  boxing  coach,  with
   whom he has worked to benefit the community.  The positive aspects of the
   mother and son relationship had to be given weight from both  sides.   Mr
   Vaughan accepted that relationships with siblings  and  further  extended
   family in the UK were very limited, but such relationships did exist.  By
   contrast, there was no family in Pakistan prepared to offer any  support.
   Mr Vaughan sought to rely on section 3.7 of Dr Ballard's report  (and  on
   no other sections).  This  section  describes  the  absence  of  familial
   resources in Pakistan and ends with the passage which was  criticised  by
   the Presenting Officer.  Mr Vaughan submitted  that  the  fact  that  the
   appellant had no relatives either on the paternal  or  maternal  side  to
   help him in Pakistan was substantiated by the evidence and was within  Dr
   Ballard's expertise and country knowledge.  This showed  that  on  return
   the appellant would be alone and would  have  to  fend  for  himself.   A
   relapse in his mental health would be  likely.   In  this  connection  Mr
   Vaughan referred to the psychiatric report by Dr A Kharbteng, Part  C  of
   the appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle dated 14 February  2013.   The
   diagnosis at section 6 is as follows:

    At the time of the assessment Mr Mirza was in good mental  health  with
    no symptoms of a psychotic disorder or of a mood disorder.


    Based  on  a  long  history  of  psychosis,  there  is  a  very  strong
    possibility that Mr Mirza suffers from paranoid schizophrenia ...


    Schizophrenia is a relapsing and remitting condition that can be caused
    to flare up in periods of stress or the use of psychoactive  substances
    such as illicit drugs.  People with schizophrenia  have  their  illness
    for life ...


    The appellant's poor memory  warrants  further  investigation  as  this
    could be due to low IQ, brain damage due to schizophrenia, brain damage
    due to drugs, brain damage due to boxing ...




17) At section 8 the report states that the appellant is currently well  and
   not in need of specific interventions apart from preventive measures such
   as reduction of stress and not using illicit substances.  It is said that
   destitution could have a significant impact, as he would be at high  risk
   of relapsing into schizophrenic psychosis.  The report continues:

    Removal to Pakistan would have  a  devastating  effect  on  his  mental
    health.  Although he has  familial  and  historical  links  ...  it  is
    largely an alien environment ... the  stress  ...  would  have  a  high
    likelihood of precipitating a major relapse ...


    Access to mental health  care  in  Pakistan  is  very  limited.   State
    provision is almost non  existent  and  reserved  for  those  that  are
    severely ill.  Private provision is available but it is  expensive  ...
    community mental health care is non-existent.

18) Mr Vaughan referred to the respondent's Country  of  Origin  Information
   Report (COIR) at 27.31-39 on mental health  provision  and  at  13.01  on
   prison conditions.  This information showed that the appellant would have
   no access to treatment on his probable relapse.  It was  likely  that  he
   would re-offend and thereby end up in prison, where conditions are  known
   to be very poor and where there is an absence of mental health provision.
    There would thus be a significantly adverse impact on his  physical  and
   moral integrity, weighing on his side in the Article 8 scales.  There has
   also been filed background information on the backward attitudes held  in
   many parts of Pakistan towards the mentally ill.

19)  Mr  Vaughan  said  that  while  the  appellant  could  not   meet   the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules to remain in the UK, his  inability
   to meet them was of no significance, because the Rules  ignore  residence
   for a period of less than 20  years,  ignore  the  degree  of  a  party's
   integration into UK society, and ignore a  childhood  spent  in  the  UK.
   These factors also  fed  into  the  Maslov  related  assessment  and  the
   justification for the high test of  very  serious  reasons.   Mr  Vaughan
   accepted that on the other side of the scales there  is  the  persistence
   and seriousness of the appellant's  offending,  which  had  to  be  given
   significant weight.  He did  not  accept  that  higher  legal  tests  are
   established by SS.  He pointed out that the appellant  appeared  to  have
   stayed clear of trouble for some time prior to the index offence,  having
   previously last offended in 2007.  That fitted with the suggestion in the
   medical evidence that he was not using drugs  during  that  period.   The
   statement from his boxing coach showed that he had been in the process of
   establishing a regular and useful routine and of contributing to  society
   by helping  at  the  boxing  club  and  with  younger  members.   It  was
   unfortunate that he relapsed again into offending.  It was relevant  that
   his mental health history showed that he had an inability to  learn  from
   his mistakes.  That  placed  him  in  a  different  category  from  other
   offenders who simply refuse to learn from their  mistakes  or  to  desist
   from their behaviour.  There were  some  cases  such  that  even  serious
   offending ought not to lead to deportation.   The  appellant's  35  years
   residence compensated for the length of the period of  imprisonment,  and
   this was an appeal which should be allowed.  It would be disproportionate
   to deport an individual who to all intents and purposes is British  to  a
   situation of destitution and other dire consequences in Pakistan.

20) We reserved our determination.

21) Under the heading of general considerations, Laws LJ said in SS:
   THE DEPORTATION OF FOREIGN CRIMINALS
      (1) THE SOURCE OF THE POLICY: PRIMARY LEGISLATION
   1. With these considerations in mind I may turn to the particular case of
      the deportation of foreign criminals under the 2007  Act.  Where  such
      potential deportees have raised claims under  Article  8,  seeking  to
      resist deportation by relying on the interests of a child or  children
      having British citizenship, I think  with  respect  that  insufficient
      attention has been paid to the weight to be attached, in virtue of its
      origin in primary legislation, to  the  policy  of  deporting  foreign
      criminals.  In  Sanade  the  UT  observed  "[t]he  more  serious   the
      offending, the stronger is the case for deportation"  (paragraph  48).
      With respect that is no doubt right; but it applies as  readily  to  a
      case where the offender is not subject to automatic deportation  under
      s.32 of the 2007 Act and his removal is at the  Secretary  of  State's
      discretion. In Strasbourg, within the Uner/Maslov criteria we  find  a
      comparable reference to "the nature and  seriousness  of  the  offence
      committed by the applicant".
   1. These references say nothing about  the  policy's  origin  in  primary
      legislation. The policy's source, however, is as we have seen  one  of
      the  drivers  of  the  breadth  of  the  decision-maker's  margin   of
      discretion  when  the  proportionality  of  its  application  in   the
      particular case is being considered. In relation to foreign  criminals
      the point was almost alive in AP (Trinidad & Tobago) [2011]  EWCA  Civ
      551, referred to in Sanade at paragraph 41, in which Carnwath  LJ,  as
      he then was, observed at paragraph 44:
      "Indeed, as I have  said,  Parliamentary  endorsement  is  arguably  a
      matter which should be taken into account in giving greater weight  to
      such factors when drawing the balance of proportionality under article
      8. Although Ms Patry Hoskins [for the Secretary of State] did  not  so
      argue, it seems a little  surprising  (if  she  is  right)  that  this
      apparently definitive statement by Parliament has made  no  difference
      in practice, at least where any form of  private  or  family  life  is
      involved." (original emphasis)
      Carnwath LJ had stated at paragraph 36 that he preferred to leave  for
      another occasion the question whether counsel had been  right  not  to
      contend that the policy's legislative source made a difference.
   1. In AP Carnwath LJ also cited the remarks of Sedley LJ at paragraph  24
      of BK, cited in Sanade, which I have already set out. Though  somewhat
      laconic, this passage is one of the few references to the significance
      of the policy's source being an Act of Parliament. I will  repeat  the
      material part:
      "[I]n the  case  of  a  'foreign  criminal'  the  Act  places  in  the
      proportionality  scales  a  markedly  greater  weight  than  in  other
      cases... Arguably the executive's view of  policy  and  its  immediate
      requirements has been superseded by the legislature's."
      Since AP there has been MF [2012] UKUT 393 in the UT, in which however
      the reference to s.32 of the 2007  Act  misses  its  significance:  at
      paragraph 42 the UT, citing AP among other cases,  states  that  "[i]n
      deportation cases involving foreign criminals s.32  of  the  2007  Act
      gave clear parliamentary expression to the particular  importance  the
      Secretary of State attached to  their  deportation".  But  it  is  the
      importance attached by Parliament itself that matters.
   1. Amongst other recent cases is  AM  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1634,  in  which
      Pitchford LJ cited N (Kenya) and OH (Serbia). But  their  emphasis  on
      the public interest in deporting alien criminals arose in the pre-2007
      Act legal environment, when the  decision  was  at  the  Secretary  of
      State's discretion. Then at paragraph 31 Pitchford LJ said this:
      "While the landscape for qualification for deportation has changed  in
      consequence of the 2007 Act by the creation of 'automatic deportation'
      of 'foreign criminals', it seems to me, in agreement with Aikens LJ in
      RU (Bangladesh) and Sir Stephen Sedley in Gurung, inevitable  that  in
      measuring proportionality the  public  interest  in  deterrence  is  a
      material and  necessary  consideration.  The  public  interest  is  an
      important  component  of  the  balancing  exercise  required  to  test
      proportionality (for the purpose of section 33(2)(a))..."
      With great respect there is  here  no  acknowledgement  of  the  free-
      standing importance of the legislative  source  of  the  policy  as  a
      driver  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of  discretion   when   the
      proportionality of its application in the  particular  case  is  being
      considered.
   1. In my opinion, however, this is a central element in the  adjudication
      of Article 8 cases where it is proposed to deport a  foreign  criminal
      pursuant  to  s.32  of  the  2007  Act.  The  width  of  the   primary
      legislator's discretionary area of judgment is in  general  vouchsafed
      by high  authority:  Brown,  Lambert,  Poplar,  Marcic,  Lichniak  and
      Eastside Cheese, cited above. But it is lent  added  force  where,  as
      here, the subject-matter of the legislature's policy lies in the field
      of moral and political judgment, as to which  the  first  and  natural
      arbiter of the extent to which it represents a "pressing social  need"
      is what I have called the elected arm of  government:  and  especially
      the primary legislature, whose Acts are the primary democratic  voice.
      What, then, should we make of the weight which  the  democratic  voice
      has accorded to the policy of deporting foreign criminals?
      (2) THE NATURE OF THE POLICY: MORAL AND POLITICAL
   1. The importance of the moral and  political  character  of  the  policy
      shows  that  the  two  drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin   of
      discretion - the policy's nature and its source - operate  in  tandem.
      An Act of Parliament is anyway to be specially respected; but all  the
      more so when it declares policy of this kind. In this case, the policy
      is general and overarching. It is circumscribed only by five carefully
      drawn exceptions, of which  the  first  is  violation  of  a  person's
      Convention/Refugee Convention rights. (The others concern  minors,  EU
      cases, extradition cases and cases involving persons subject to orders
      under mental health legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007  Act
      has attached very great weight to  the  policy  as  a  well  justified
      imperative for the  protection  of  the  public  and  to  reflect  the
      public's proper condemnation of serious wrongdoers. Sedley LJ was with
      respect right to state that "in the case of a 'foreign  criminal'  the
      Act places in the proportionality scales  a  markedly  greater  weight
      than in other cases".
   1. I would draw  particular  attention  to  the  provision  contained  in
      s.33(7): "section 32(4) applies despite the application  of  Exception
      1...", that is  to  say,  a  foreign  criminal's  deportation  remains
      conducive to the public good notwithstanding his  successful  reliance
      on Article 8. I said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the  authorities
      demonstrate that there is no rule of  exceptionality  for  Article  8,
      they also clearly show that the more pressing the public  interest  in
      removal or deportation, the stronger must be the claim under Article 8
      if it is to prevail. The pressing nature of the public  interest  here
      is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by  Parliament's   express
      declaration  the  public  interest  is  injured  if   the   criminal's
      deportation is not effected. Such a result could in my  judgment  only
      be justified by a very strong claim indeed.
      (3) SUMMARY
   2. None of this, I apprehend, is inconsistent with established principle,
      and the approach I have outlined is well supported by the  authorities
      concerning the decision-maker's  margin  of  discretion.  The  leading
      Supreme Court cases, ZH and H(H), demonstrate that the interests of  a
      child affected by a removal  decision  are  a  matter  of  substantial
      importance, and that the court must proceed on a proper  understanding
      of the facts which illuminate those interests (though upon the  latter
      point I would not with respect accept that the decision  in  Tinizaray
      should be regarded as establishing anything in the nature  of  general
      principle). At the same time H(H)  shows  the  impact  of  a  powerful
      public interest (in  that  case  extradition)  on  what  needs  to  be
      demonstrated  for  an  Article   8   claim   to   prevail   over   it.
      Proportionality, the absence of  an  "exceptionality"  rule,  and  the
      meaning  of  "a  primary  consideration"  are   all,   when   properly
      understood, consonant with the force to be attached in  cases  of  the
      present kind to the two drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
      discretion: the policy's  source  and  the  policy's  nature,  and  in
      particular to the great weight which the 2007 Act  attributes  to  the
      deportation of foreign criminals.

22) Lady Justice Black and Mr Justice Mann both agreed with the judgment  of
   Lord Justice Laws, which  Mr  Justice  Mann  described  as  a  "masterful
   analysis".

23) This is not a case involving  a  child.   Other  than  that,  the  above
   passage all applies.  The facts in this case for and against  deportation
   have all been set out for us, as narrated above.

24)  Mr Wilding asked us to find that SS diluted Maslov to vanishing  point,
   and that the force of statute as now interpreted was such that  reference
   to Maslov would now be otiose.  Mr Vaughan sought to persuade us that  SS
   makes no difference for our purposes, and in particular  that  what  Lord
   Justice Laws said at paragraph 54 about  justification  only  by  a  very
   strong claim indeed did not detract from earlier  jurisprudence  and  did
   not lay down any legal rule.  For our part we think the  judgment  speaks
   for itself and requires no gloss or interpretation  from  us.   We  would
   only say, firstly, that we do not think that SS intends to take  anything
   away from the principle in Maslov in the  case  of  a  criminal  who  has
   resided in the UK from childhood and well into adulthood, and,  secondly,
   that our weighing of the proportionate outcome in this case results in  a
   clear striking of the balance against the appellant, and does not turn on
   any fine shading of legal approach advanced before us.

25) The appellant is likely to find life difficult in Pakistan, although  we
   would not go to the extremes portrayed by Dr Ballard.   His  approach  in
   this case is highly coloured, and his conclusion goes too far.

26) Resources which might help to rehabilitate the appellant  are  available
   in the UK, but the appellant has consistently declined to take  advantage
   of  them,  as  his  history  and  the  sentencing  remarks  make   clear.
   Rehabilitation cannot be forced.  That takes a good deal  away  from  the
   significance of the absence of similar facilities for  the  appellant  in
   Pakistan.  It reinforces the high risk of reoffending which emerges  from
   his own report.  His counsel forecasts from the evidence that in Pakistan
   the appellant is likely to fall into illegal drug taking, criminality and
   mental relapse.  We think that sadly likely, but such  possibilities  are
   not significantly less in the UK.

27) The appellant's long residence from childhood in the UK has counted  for
   much in the past, but he poses a high risk of serious offending,  he  has
   shown no interest in taking advantage of opportunities to escape from the
   pattern in which he finds himself, and he  has  exhausted  several  clear
   warnings over a period of many years.  The point in his  criminal  career
   at which long residence outweighs the public interest in  deportation  is
   well behind him.  We find that there are  very  serious  reasons  why  he
   should be deported.

28) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   However,
   the decision which we  substitute  is  that  the  appeal,  as  originally
   brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is again dismissed.

29)  No anonymity order has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                31 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
