
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00630/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2016                               |On 12th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      M
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  panel  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  "the
    panel") promulgated on 17th July 2014 in which the Tribunal allowed the
    appeal of M against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to
    revoke a deportation order against him.

 2. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.   Similarly I will refer  to
    M as the Appellant as  he  was  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. There is  no  dispute  that  the  Tribunal  should  make  an  anonymity
    direction  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) as the case involves the interests of
    children.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court  orders  otherwise,  no
    report or any proceedings or any form of  publication  therefore  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the Appellant or  the  minor  children.
    This prohibition applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties  and  their
    representatives.

Background:

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of the DRC.  The Appellant's history is  not
    in any dispute.  The Appellant initially arrived  in  the  UK  on  28th
    October 1991 with his ex-spouse and son using a false Belgium  passport
    and claimed asylum on arrival.  In 1996 a further child was born to his
    present partner.  His asylum application was  refused  on  30th  August
    1996 and he later made a further claim which was again refused on  26th
    November 1997.  There were fresh representations  made  on  his  behalf
    which led to a grant of exceptional leave to remain (ELR) on 27th  July
    1998 which was valid until 27th July 2003.  Another daughter  was  born
    in February 2003.  On 27th July 2003 he was granted indefinite leave to
    remain.  However, his application for naturalisation was refused in  or
    about November 2006 for reason of his failure  to  respond  to  further
    enquiries.

 5. On 22nd August 2008 a deportation order was made against the  Appellant
    under Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 following his conviction
    for conspiracy to defraud for which  he  was  on  8th  September  2006,
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of three years  and  six  months.
    His appeal against the notice of intention to deport was  dismissed  on
    19th June 2008 and he became appeals  rights  exhausted  on  27th  June
    2008.

 6. The papers refer to attempts  to  remove  the  Appellant  which  proved
    unsuccessful  and  further  representations  against  removal   raising
    Article 3 issues were made on  his  behalf.   His  appeal  against  the
    decision of 21st May 2009 was dismissed in a determination  promulgated
    on 17th December 2009.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal panel  on  17th  December  2009
    related to a decision to refuse to revoke  a  deportation  order  dated
    23rd August 2008.  The basis of his appeal was on the ground  that  his
    removal to the DRC would be a breach of the UK's obligations under  the
    Refugee Convention.  He also appealed on Article 8 grounds.  The  panel
    reached the conclusion that he  was  not  part  of  a  political  party
    [paragraph 27] and that even if he had attended meetings whilst in  the
    United Kingdom, the panel did not find that those activities would lead
    to his persecution or ill-treatment in his country of nationality.   As
    to the appeal on Article 8 grounds, the panel set out brief findings at
    paragraphs [33]-[40]  and  made  reference  to  the  previous  Tribunal
    decision but found there was no "obstacle" to the  Appellant's  partner
    and children returning to the DRC, as they were  not  British  citizens
    and that it would be reasonable for his  spouse  and  the  children  to
    return to live in the DRC with the Appellant.

 8. There was a further unsuccessful application for  review  to  the  High
    Court and the Appellant became appeals rights exhausted  on  13th  July
    2010.

 9.  In  September  2012  his  youngest  child   was   born   and   further
    representations  were  made  in  support  of  the  revocation  of   the
    deportation order made on 5th November 2012 and on 19th December  2013.
    In the later representations, reliance was placed  on  the  High  Court
    decision of P (DRC) R (On the application of) v SSHD [2013]  EWCH  3879
    (Admin) in  relation  to  the  risk  on  return  relating  to  criminal
    deportees.

10. The reasons given for that decision are set out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent dated 26th March 2014  and are summarised in the decision of
    the panel at paragraphs [2]-[10].

11.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

12. The first appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal panel on 26th June
    2014.  In a decision promulgated on 17th July 2014  the  panel  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 and Article 8).

13. In reaching their decision the panel had regard to a  large  amount  of
    material having made reference to the bundle filed  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State at paragraph [12] and at [13] by  reference  to  the
    Appellant's bundle comprising of some 483 pages which included a number
    of expert reports  from  the  Probation  Trust,  the  Foreign  National
    Support Team, a Psychiatric Report and also  a  report  of  independent
    social worker.  The  panel  also  had  the  advantage  of  hearing  the
    Appellant give evidence along with his partner and two of his  children
    (both under 18 years).

14. The  panel's  findings  were  set  out  at  paragraphs  [17]-[62].   At
    paragraph [18] the panel set out the basis of the Appellant's claim  by
    reference to his lengthy residence in the United  Kingdom  since  1991,
    the circumstances in which he had built up  a  substantial  family  and
    private life with his partner and  his  three  British  children.   The
    Appellant's reliance on probation reports which disclosed that  he  was
    at a low risk of re-offending or of serious harm to others and that  he
    had led a law-abiding life  for  the  previous  eight  years,  enjoying
    family life with his partner and children.  The Appellant  relied  upon
    his relationship with his partner and his children and that removal  to
    the DRC would not only separate the family but  would  have  a  serious
    detrimental effect upon the children (relying on the Independent Social
    Worker  Report)  and  also  by  relying  on  his  psychiatric  evidence
    regarding his own mental  health  which  would  deteriorate  if  family
    support was  removed  from  him.   He  relied  on  his  remorse  whilst
    accepting that he had committed what was a serious criminal offence.

15. The panel began their assessment by considering the appeal by reference
    to Article 3 and in particular the judgment of Phillips J  in  P  (DRC)
    (as cited earlier).  The panel  considered  the  evidence  provided  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State in rebuttal of that decision [28]  but
    reached the conclusion  at  [29]  that  information  had  already  been
    considered by the High Court in reaching its conclusions and that  they
    found there was "no good reason"  to  take  a  different  view  of  the
    reports already considered by Mr Justice Phillips.  As to the  evidence
    that was not considered by the court in P (DRC) the panel found at [30]
    that the evidence came from a  senior  member  of  the  state  security
    forces  who  acted  with  impunity  (by  reference  to  the  background
    material) and thus they found that that  report  could  not  be  relied
    upon.  They also reached the conclusion that the evidence  of  the  DGM
    was not impartial.  They further found that the  assertion  that  there
    were no detention facilities at the  airport  was  supported  by  other
    background evidence and that the DGM  evidence  was  inconsistent  with
    that considered by the High Court in  P  (DRC).   They  contrasted  the
    material before the High Court in P (DRC) which they noted came from "a
    far  wider  range  of  sources"  thus  they  concluded  that  in   such
    circumstances "little  weight"  could  be  attached  to  the  purported
    assurances provided by the DGM in  relation  to  the  circumstances  of
    foreign national offenders who were to be deported.

16. At paragraph [31]  they  considered  the  IGC  Report  found  that  the
    information within that document did not take matters any further  than
    that information considered by the High Court.  Thus at [32]-[36]  they
    reached the  conclusion  that  a  record  of  his  offending  would  be
    available to the DRC via a simple internet search and at [33] and  that
    as his criminal history may be ascertained  with  relative  ease,  that
    there was a "real likelihood" that if  questioned  by  the  immigration
    security officials on his  return,  in  the  absence  of  any  reliable
    rebuttal evidence following the decision of the High Court,  the  panel
    found that there was a real risk that he would be detained and  thus  a
    breach of his Article 3 rights.

17. The panel went on to consider Article 8 and set out  its  findings  and
    conclusions at paragraphs [37]-[62].  The panel set out the sole  issue
    between the parties under the Immigration Rules in respect of paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b).  Furthermore,  the  panel  had  regard  to  Chapter  13:
    Criminality Guidance  in  Article  8  ECHR  cases,  which  provided  an
    internal guidance as to the assessment of the criteria laid down  under
    the applicable Rule.  The panel set out the relevant  extract  of  that
    guidance at paragraph [38].  The panel at [39] reached  the  conclusion
    that the refusal letter did not explicitly address the factors set  out
    in the guidance  when  reaching  a  decision  but  that  the  Appellant
    nonetheless was unable to demonstrate that "there is  no  other  family
    member who is able to care for the child in the UK".  This was based on
    the fact that the children's mother, who was settled  in  the  UK,  had
    remained a constant figure in their lives since their  births  and  was
    able and willing to continue with that.   That  whilst  his  case  fell
    within paragraph 398(b) he could not satisfy either  paragraph  399  or
    paragraph 399A.  The panel however noted the following:-

         "We will return to a consideration of the factors identified in the
         guidance later in this determination."

    That is, because, the panel took  into  account  the  reasons  why  the
    Appellant could not  meet  paragraphs  399  or  399A  when  reaching  a
    decision as to whether or not there  should  be  a  revocation  of  the
    deportation order.

18. At paragraph [40], the panel reminded themselves that where  paragraphs
    399 and 399A do not apply,  that  it  would  "only  be  in  exceptional
    circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation   will   be
    outweighed by other factors."  They made a reference to the decision of
    the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  at  [43]  that  "exceptional
    circumstances" means that in order for an argument under Article  8  to
    succeed there will need to be  "very  compelling"  reasons  beyond  the
    broad range of circumstances contemplated by the Rules.  The panel then
    went on to consider whether there were "exceptional circumstances" that
    demonstrated  that  the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation  was
    outweighed.

19. Their findings can be summarised as follows:-

      i) The Respondent did not dispute the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his  partner  and  his  three  British
         children each one being under the age of  18.   The  children  were
         born in the  UK  and  have  lived  here  for  their  entire  lives.
         Applying the principles of  Devaseelan,  in  June  2008  the  panel
         reached their findings  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's  two
         children were not British citizens.  Furthermore, his  partner  was
         not considered a settled person [see paragraphs 20 and 22]  of  the
         decision in June  2008.   They  were  significant  matters  in  the
         panel's conclusion that there were no obstacles to the continuation
         of family life in the DRC and upon the family choosing to relocate.
          The panel in 2009, also assessed matters from the standpoint  that
         all the individuals who constitute family life were citizens of the
         DRC.  It is accepted by the Respondent that  at  the  date  of  the
         hearing all three children  were  British  citizens  and  that  the
         Appellant's partner was a settled person with indefinite  leave  to
         remain and that it was unreasonable to expect the Appellant and the
         three children to relocate to the DRC (albeit it would be  open  to
         them to elect to do so).

     ii) When considering the best interests of the children, the panel gave
         careful consideration to the report of the ISW who also appeared as
         a witness and whose evidence was unchallenged by the  Secretary  of
         State.

    iii) Looking at the children's best interests, the  panel  heard  direct
         evidence from two of the three children who the panel found  to  be
         credible witnesses [see paragraph 50].

     iv) The panel found that the Appellant  and  his  longstanding  partner
         with  their  three  children  enjoyed  a  strong   and   subsisting
         relationship and that their relationship had been -

             "substantially  tested  not  only  on  account   of   enforced
             separation  through  the  Appellant's  22  month   period   of
             imprisonment  but  also  through  his   various   periods   of
             immigration detention."

         The panel accepted the Appellant's partner's evidence that despite
         challenges faced by her and bringing  up  her  two  children  as  a
         single parent she was intent on keeping  the  family  intact.   The
         panel found that his partner  and  two  daughters  visited  him  in
         prison every week and also  maintained  contact  by  telephone  and
         letters.   The  visits  continued  throughout  various  periods  of
         immigration detention, even  when  the  Appellant  was  transferred
         despite severe financial difficulties and put practical limitations
         on the family.

      v) The panel found that the Appellant's family members  have  sort  of
         "preserved family life with the Appellant so as to ensure  that  he
         remained an integral part of their family unit."

     vi) In  relation  to  the  eldest  child,  the  panel  found  that  the
         Appellant's imprisonment had a "particularly detrimental impact  on
         her".   The  panel  accepted  her  evidence  that  she  found   the
         consequences of her father's imprisonment particularly  challenging
         and that prior to imprisonment they had enjoyed an especially close
         relationship [see 51].  The panel took into account the ISW  report
         and its contents reacting to the effect on the children.

    vii) In relation to the second youngest child, the panel found that  she
         encountered the same sense of separation  and  isolation  and  that
         this had had a real impact on the children's personal and emotional
         development.

   viii) The Appellant was released on licence for a period of three  months
         before being re-detained in 2009 until 2010 and was  then  detained
         again from October 2010 until May 2011.   The  panel  accepted  the
         children's evidence that having their father taken  into  detention
         was distressing and difficult to comprehend.  The panel found  that
         for the past three years having been reunited with their father had
         been "especially significant" for them.  The panel  made  reference
         to this period of stability at [52].  They were satisfied  that  he
         had resumed the role of being a joint primary carer  including  for
         the youngest child [52].

     ix) The panel took into  account  the  stages  in  which  each  of  the
         children were in terms of their social and educational  development
         and attached weight to the ISW report for the reasons  set  out  at
         paragraph [53].

      x) The panel found that it was  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         children  to  be  solely  cared  for  by  their   mother   in   the
         circumstances where they had now readjusted  to  living  with  both
         parents.   They  found  the  decision  would  have  the  effect  of
         separating them from the Appellant for a substantial period of time
         except the  visits  which  they  found  would  be  "infrequent  and
         impractical and long distance forms of communication."   The  panel
         went on to find that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  them  to
         continue family life with him  in  the  DRC  and  that  there  were
         insurmountable obstacles to that continuing [see 54].

     xi) The panel also took into account the psychiatric evidence at [55].

    xii) Thus the panel found that this was a "tight knit family  unit"  and
         that the support derived from being in  a  functioning  and  caring
         family unit is distinct to the issue of whether he would be able to
         access treatment and medication to manage a condition in the DRC.

   xiii)  The  panel  considered  that  the  nature   of   the   Appellant's
         relationship with his three children, and that of his  partner  and
         the specific practical  emotional  dependency  upon  them  for  the
         stability of  his  mental  health  and  the  circumstances  of  the
         children were matters that constituted "exceptional circumstances".

    xiv) They took into account the relevant factor  that  he  had  not  re-
         offended for nearly eight years taking into account  the  Probation
         Officers' reports which found him to be at low risk of re-offending
         or of serious harm to the public [2009].  They  made  reference  to
         the absence of any further offences in that period of  eight  years
         but  attached  considerable  weight  to  the  wider  objective   of
         deportation as a deterrent [see 60].

     xv) The panel took into account the delay at [61].

    xvi) The panel found that the adverse impact on  the  Appellant's  three
         minor children was a "weighty consideration  against  deportation".
         At paragraph [62] for the reasons that they gave  they  found  that
         the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  that  there  were   "exceptional
         circumstances" albeit the decision was one that they  found  to  be
         "finally balanced."

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

20. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Deans (sitting as  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal) but permission  was  granted  on  the  12th
    February 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.  Her reasons for  granting
    permission were as follows:

         "The application is  made  out  of  time  but  I  consider  that  a
         satisfactory  explanation  has  been  offered  and  then  time   is
         therefore extended.

         Three grounds have been put forward.  The first  takes  issue  with
         the consideration of the letter of 23rd January 2014 relied  on  by
         the Respondent which provides information from  a  meeting  between
         officials from the British High Commission and a senior official in
         the DRC Migration Service.  It is arguable that the panel  did  not
         give due weight to that  evidence  and  did  not  provide  adequate
         reasoning for that approach.

         The second ground criticises the  panel's  assessment  of  the  IGC
         report.  It is arguable that the panel disregarded the evidence  of
         removals to the DRC by other European countries.

         The third and final ground takes  issue  with  the  proportionality
         assessment carried out by  the  panel.   It  is  arguable,  as  the
         grounds maintain, that the majority of the  assessment  focuses  on
         the Appellant's circumstances  with  very  little  attention  being
         given to the public interest in his deportation.  For these reasons
         the grounds are arguable and permission is granted."

21. Thereafter the appellant's solicitors began judicial review proceedings
    to challenge the decision of the Upper Tribunal to extend time  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  and  to  grant  permission  and   therefore   the
    proceedings were adjourned to await the outcome of  those  proceedings.
    There are no papers in the bundles relating to those JR proceedings but
    the court record accessed by the Tribunal demonstrate  that  permission
    was refused on the papers in April 2015 and  on  oral  application  was
    refused on the 15th October 2015 by Mr Justice Edis.

22. Thus the application was listed before the Upper Tribunal.

23. At the hearing there was no appearance nor representation on behalf  of
    the Appellant.  There had been an application  for  an  adjournment  on
    28th April 2016 which had been refused by an Upper Tribunal Judge.  The
    basis of the application related to the inability of the solicitors  to
    contact the  Appellant.   The  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  considering  the
    application set out that -

         "The Appellant has been served with the notice of the  hearing  and
         it is incumbent on him to attend the hearing in person, even if  he
         is not legally represented."

     That refusal was sent to the Appellant's solicitors.  A further  letter
    was later received stating that they  were  no  longer  acting  on  his
    behalf and would not be attending.

24. On checking the file, the Appellant was served at his home  address  on
    14th April 2016 with the notice of hearing.  Nothing further  has  been
    heard from the Appellant and he did not appear before the Tribunal.  As
    set out in the notice, if a party or his representative does not attend
    the hearing, the Tribunal may determine the appeal in  the  absence  of
    that party.  Therefore having considered the file  in  accordance  with
    the Procedure Rules, I considered that I should determine the appeal in
    his absence.

25. Miss Johnstone for the Secretary  of  State  relied  upon  the  written
    grounds.

26. In her oral submissions, in relation to Ground 1,  she  submitted  that
    the panel erred in law in finding that the Appellant was at risk  of  a
    breach of his Article  3  rights  on  return  to  the  DRC.   She  made
    reference to the evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    including the letter dated 23rd January 2014 which provided information
    from a meeting between officials from the British High Commission and a
    specific, senior official in the  DRC  Migration  Service  (DGM).   She
    submitted that the officials asked about detention on return and stated
    that the enquiries in respect of criminality preceded  re-documentation
    and was limited to  identifying  those  DRC  nationals  who  have  been
    documented and also appear on a list of persons  with  outstanding  DRC
    arrest warrants.  That evidence, she submits was highly relevant to the
    assessment of the Appellant's risk on return.   She  further  submitted
    that the reasons given by the panel for placing little  weight  on  the
    evidence were inadequate, and that it was  illogical  to  suggest  that
    evidence of the type criticised by the panel was unreliable without the
    name of its source.  She  submitted  the  panel  had  not  called  into
    question the genuineness of his official position or that  the  British
    High Commission official had not recorded his answers accurately.  Thus
    she submitted, that evidence superseded the evidence in the decision of
    the High Court in P (DRC) and  that  the  panel's  statement  that  the
    officials'  answers  were  inconsistent  with  the   FFM   Report   was
    inadequately reasoned.

27. She made reference also to the decision of Lokombe which considered the
    question of the bulletin.

28. In respect of Article 8, she submitted that the challenge was that  the
    panel had given inadequate reasoning to support their  conclusion  that
    the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.  In  particular  she
    submitted that the panel had failed to  consider  the  public  interest
    (see BL (Jamaica) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  357)  at  [49]-[52].   She
    further submitted that the panel's determination at paragraph [54]  had
    not adequately considered the  public  interest  when  considering  the
    proportionality assessment in relation to the children.  She  submitted
    that "the exceptional circumstances" that the panel purported  to  rely
    upon did not constitute "exceptional circumstances" and that there  was
    nothing exceptional about their situation.  She submitted on the  facts
    of the appeal, the Appellant's partner could continue  to  provide  for
    them and that there was no detrimental effect on them.   She  submitted
    that where the Appellant is a foreign offender, separation from  family
    is not an exceptional circumstance.  In this case the chronology showed
    that he had been detained  following  his  imprisonment  and  that  the
    children had continued to live with their mother during  those  periods
    of time.

29. She further submitted, as the written grounds set out, that  the  panel
    failed to consider the  issue  of  deterrence  and  whilst  the  public
    interest was set out at paragraphs [43] and [44] no  consideration  was
    given to the difficulties that would be encountered by the  Appellant's
    family relating to deportation.  She further submitted that  the  panel
    did  not  give  sufficient  reasons  as   to   why   there   would   be
    "insurmountable obstacles" for family life taking place outside of  the
    UK and furthermore, the fact that there  would  be  infrequent  contact
    would not make it unjustifiably harsh.  She submitted  that  the  panel
    had not given reasons as to why, in the event of his deportation, there
    would be infrequent contact or that such contact in the  DRC  would  be
    impractical.  It was up to the family, she submitted  as  to  how  they
    would communicate if the Appellant was deported and  it  could  not  be
    said to be unjustifiably harsh on the circumstances of this  particular
    case.  She submitted the panel had erred in law.

30. There had been no submissions made on behalf of the  Appellant,  either
    in writing or by way of a Rule 24 response.

31. I reserved my decision.

Discussion:

Article 3:

32. Dealing with  the  first  ground,  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
    challenge the findings made by the panel relating to Article 3.  As set
    out in their determination, the panel allowed the appeal on  Article  3
    grounds on the basis of R (On the application of P) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC
    3879 (Admin).  In that decision Phillips J had concluded that  criminal
    deportees would be at risk on return  to  the  DRC  as  they  would  be
    investigated on arrival and it would come to light that such  a  person
    would have criminal  convictions  which  would  lead  to  ill-treatment
    contrary to Article 3 (see paragraphs [44] and [--] of the decision  of
    P (DRC)).

33. The judge's assessment of those issues are set out at paragraphs  [24]-
    [36] of the  determination.   The  panel  observed  at  [37]  that  the
    Secretary of State had withdrawn an  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    against that decision and further  observed  that  there  had  been  no
    further country guidance that had been issued.

34. Since the decision in P (DRC) the Secretary  of  State  has  relied  on
    further evidence set out  in  a  DRC  Policy  Bulletin  dated  1st/2014
    (intended to postdate the decision  in  P  (DRC)  and  update  the  DRC
    Country Policy Bulletin of 1/2012).  The Secretary of State relied upon
    a letter from the British High Commission dated 23rd January 2014  from
    the Directore G�n�rale de Migration (DGM) that the authorities  in  the
    DRC had no interest in Foreign National  Offenders  (FNO's)  or  failed
    asylum seekers, unless they had criminal  matters  outstanding  in  the
    DRC.

35. The panel at [30] stated that they had placed little or  no  weight  on
    this letter because its author remained anonymous and it had come  from
    a senior member of the state security forces relating to border control
    and was therefore not considered to be impartial.

36. The letter  made  it  clear  that  detention  on  return  preceded  re-
    documentation and thus was limited to those persons who had outstanding
    DRC arrest warrants, a category that  this  Appellant  would  not  have
    fallen into.

37. The question before the Tribunal is whether the panel were entitled  to
    attach limited weight to this evidence.  The fact that the  author  was
    anonymous does not seem to me to necessarily lessen the weight attached
    to the report in circumstances where the panel did  not  consider  that
    its contents were inaccurately recorded or that there was any challenge
    to its genuineness.  Furthermore, the fact that he had not  been  named
    was of little relevance bearing in  mind  that  the  conversation  took
    place at the Home Office between an official of the  FCO  and  a  high-
    ranking official of the DRC.  However, it was open  for  the  panel  to
    consider that the author of the  report  was  someone  whose  role  was
    involved in the security services and therefore may not  be  impartial,
    which is what the panel had stated at [31].

38. Dealing with the IGC report of December 2013, the panel considered that
    this did not provide further information that  was  different  to  that
    before the  High  Court  in  P  (DRC)  (see  paragraph  [31]  of  their
    determination).  This was a document which provided replies from  eight
    countries to a number of questions posed to them.   Questions  1  to  3
    related to the issue of return and whether the  countries  in  question
    returned (either voluntarily or by force) rejected  asylum  seekers  to
    the DRC and if not, why not.  Question  3  related  to  the  number  of
    returnees since March 2012 by force or on a voluntary basis.  Questions
    4 to 6 related to allegations of returnees being subjected to  problems
    on return and if so what problems and whether any  of  the  allegations
    had then  been  substantiated.   Questions  7  to  8  referred  to  the
    overseeing of returnees.

39.  Having  considered  the  grounds  in  the   light   of   the   panel's
    determination, I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has made  out
    her grounds in this respect.  At paragraph [31]  of  the  determination
    only seeks to consider the replies to the questions posed at  questions
    1 to 3 and places emphasis on the answers relating  to  the  number  of
    returnees.  However, the replies to  questions  4  to  6  was  material
    evidence  to  be  considered  by  the  panel  but  as   that   material
    demonstrated eight of the responding states had referred to allegations
    made about returns (except for Belgium) and that after  they  had  been
    investigated,  none  of  them  were  found  to  be  either  upheld   or
    substantiated.  Whilst the panel dismissed the bulletin's  contents  as
    the same as the evidence that had before the High  Court  in  P  (DRC),
    that is not  borne  out  by  the  contents  of  the  replies  to  those
    particular questions.  Furthermore, there was material evidence in  the
    Fact-Finding Mission  of  November  2012  which  supported  that  later
    evidence,  namely  that  there  was  no   evidence   of   substantiated
    allegations of ill-treatment on return.  The point relied upon by  Miss
    Johnstone, is that those who  were  returned  to  the  DRC  as  foreign
    national offenders would have been likely to notify  sources  in  their
    home country, including  family  members  as  to  when  they  would  be
    arriving and that it is reasonable to assume if  there  were  problems,
    that there would have been reference  to  those  difficulties  to  that
    person's representatives or to any NGOs operating in the country.

40. In the circumstances, I find that  the  panel's  consideration  of  the
    evidence in this respect was flawed.  In particular, their reliance  on
    the lack of monitoring at the point of return, failed  to  engage  with
    the evidence that had been provided by the responding states  and  that
    there were no allegations of mistreatment at the airport.

41. I am therefore satisfied that the Secretary of State has made out their
    grounds and thus their assessment of the evidence relating to  risk  on
    return contrary to Article 3 was flawed and cannot stand.

42. The Appellant has not complied with the directions and has not provided
    any further evidence or any Rule 24 response.  Since the  determination
    of the panel, the Tribunal has considered further  evidence  which  has
    resulted in the promulgation of a country guidance determination of  BM
    and Others (Returnees - criminal and noncriminal) DRC  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00293.  The decision reached the conclusion after considering  all  the
    evidence relating to FNOs that a national of the DRC who  has  acquired
    the status of an FNO in the United Kingdom is not, simply by virtue  of
    such status, exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious  harm  or
    treatment proscribed by Article 3 of  the  ECHR  in  the  event  of  an
    enforced return to the DRC.  It further found that such a national  who
    attempted to acquire refugee status  but  was  unsuccessful  would  not
    without more, be exposed to a real risk of persecution or serious  harm
    or proscribed treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR in the  event
    of an enforced return to the DRC.

43. At  paragraphs  [80]-[81]  the  Upper  Tribunal  analysed  the  country
    materials.  The Appellant has provided no  evidence  to  challenge  the
    decision of BM or seek to  distinguish  the  decision  relying  on  any
    further evidence or by reference to the facts of the appeal.  The  case
    before the panel was advanced solely on the basis of him as an FNO thus
    based on the decision of BM and the country material set  out  in  that
    decision, it cannot be said that the Appellant has demonstrated that he
    would be at risk of Article 3  mistreatment  on  return  as  a  Foreign
    National Offender or as a failed asylum seeker.

44. However, the panel did not only allow the appeal on Article  3  grounds
    but also allowed the appeal on Article 8.  Therefore, any error of  law
    in relation to Article 3 would not be material if the panel's  decision
    relating to Article 8 does not disclose  any  error  of  law.   I  have
    therefore considered the grounds advanced by the Secretary of State  to
    challenge the Article 8 assessment of the panel.

Article 8:

45. The relevant legislative background  at  the  time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal is set out below.

46. The Appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of  State  of  the
    26th March 2014 to refuse to revoke the deportation order made  on  the
    23rd August 2008. The First-tier Tribunal set out the applicable  legal
    framework at paragraphs [14] and [37] of its determination.

47. Rule 390 of the Immigration Rules  provides  that  an  application  for
    revocation of a deportation order will be considered in  the  light  of
    all the circumstances including (i) the grounds on which the order  was
    made; (ii) any representations made in support of the revocation; (iii)
    the interests  of  the  community,  including  the  maintenance  of  an
    effective immigration control; and (iv) the interests of the applicant,
    including any compassionate circumstances.

48. Rule 390A sets out that, where rule 398 applies, the Secretary of State
    will consider whether 399 or 399A applies and that,  if  not,  it  will
    only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by other  factors.



49. From the  9 July 2012 until the  27 July 2014 the relevant  Immigration
    Rules provided as follows:
         "Deportation and Article 8
         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and
             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of at least 4 years;
             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  months;
                  or
             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because, in the view of the  Secretary  of
                  State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are
                  a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                  the law,
         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.
         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and
                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or
                  (ii)     the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case
                      (a)      it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
                           child to leave the UK; and
                      (b)  there is no other family member who is  able  to
                           care for the child in the UK; or
                      (b)   the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
                           relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and
                           is a British Citizen, settled in the  UK,  or  in
                           the  UK  with  refugee  leave   or   humanitarian
                           protection, and
                           (i)  the person has lived in the  UK  with  valid
                               leave continuously for at least the 15 years
                               immediately  preceding  the  date   of   the
                               immigration decision (discounting any period
                               of imprisonment); and
                           (ii)     there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
                               family life  with  that  partner  continuing
                               outside the UK.
         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
             if -
             (a)  the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                  20 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
                  decision (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he
                  has no ties (including social, cultural  or  family)  with
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK; or
             (b)  the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                  half of his life living continuously in the UK immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment)  and  he  has  no
                  ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
                  the UK.
         399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  limited  leave  may  be
             granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave  shall
             be given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of  State
             deems appropriate. Where a  person  who  has  previously  been
             granted a period of leave under paragraph 399B would not  fall
             for refusal  under  paragraph  322(1C),  indefinite  leave  to
             remain may be granted."
50. This appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal panel on the 26th  June
    2014 and their decision was promulgated  on  the  17th  July  2014  and
    therefore the new provisions under the Immigration Act 2014 which  came
    into force on the 28th July 2014, did  not  apply  to  this  particular
    appeal (see YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State [2014] EWVA Civ 1292).

51. By reason of the Appellant's conviction and sentence of imprisonment of
    three and a half years he fell within paragraph  398(b)  and  thus  the
    panel were required to consider whether he satisfied the conditions set
    out in paragraphs 399 or 399A.

52. The Rules therefore reflect the statutory obligation to deport  foreign
    criminals whilst recognising that there may be cases where  the  making
    of a deportation order (or as in this case,  the  continuation  of  the
    deportation order) would be incompatible with Article 8 (as set out  in
    the provisions of Rules 398, 399 and 399A).

53. As set out in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at [36]:-

         "What is the position where paragraph 399  or  399A  do  not  apply
         either because the case falls within paragraph 398(c)  or  because,
         although it fell  within  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)  none  of  the
         conclusions set out in paragraph 399(a) or (b) or  399A(a)  or  (b)
         applies?  The new Rules provide that in any event it will  only  be
         in  exceptional  circumstances  that   the   public   interest   in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors."

54. The court observed at [38] that paragraph 398 expressly contemplated  a
    weighing  of  "other  factors"  against  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.  The central question was whether the
    use of the phrase "exceptional circumstances" meant that  the  weighing
    exercise contemplated by the new Rules was to  be  carried  out  ......
    compatibility with the ECHR.

55. The court continued at [40]-[41] as follows:-

         "40. ... Miss Giovannetti submits that the reference to exceptional
             circumstances serve the purpose of emphasising  that,  in  the
             balancing exercise, great weight should be given to the public
             interest in deporting foreign criminals  who  do  not  satisfy
             paragraphs 398 and 399 or 399A.  It is only exceptionally that
             such foreign criminals will  succeed  in  showing  that  their
             rights under Article 8.1 trump  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation.


         41.  We accept this submission ...".

56. Lord Dyson MR, delivering the judgment of the  court  stated  at  [42]-
    [46]:
         "42.     ...  In our view, that is  not  to  say  that  a  test  of
             exceptionality  is  being  applied.  Rather  it  is  that,  in
             approaching the question of whether removal is a proportionate
             interference with an individual's Article 8 rights, the scales
             are heavily weighted in favour of  deportation  and  something
             very compelling (which will be "exceptional") is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal. In our view, it is no
             coincidence that the  phrase  "exceptional  circumstances"  is
             used in the new rules in the context of weighing the competing
             factors for and against deportation of foreign criminals.
         43.  The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a  departure
             from a general rule. The general rule in the  present  context
             is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom  paras  399
             and 399A  do  not  apply,  very  compelling  reasons  will  be
             required to outweigh the public interest in deportation. These
             compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".
         44.  We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
             code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
             in  the  balancing  exercise  involve  the  application  of  a
             proportionality   test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. We accordingly respectfully do not  agree  with
             the UT that the decision-maker is not "mandated  or  directed"
             to take all the relevant Article 8 criteria into account (para
             38).
         45.  Even if we were wrong about that, it  would  be  necessary  to
             apply a proportionality test outside the new rules as was done
             by the UT. Either way, the result should be the same. In these
             circumstances, it  is  a  sterile  question  whether  this  is
             required by the new rules  or  it  is  a  requirement  of  the
             general law. What matters is that it is required to be carried
             out if paras 399 or 399A do not apply.
         46.  There has been debate as to whether there is a  one  stage  or
             two stage test. If the claimant succeeds on an application  of
             the new rules at the first hurdle ie he shows that para 399 or
             399A applies, then it can be said that he has succeeded  on  a
             one stage test. But  if  he  does  not,  it  is  necessary  to
             consider   whether   there   are   circumstances   which   are
             sufficiently  compelling  (and   therefore   exceptional)   to
             outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation.  That  is  an
             exercise which is separate from  a  consideration  of  whether
             para 399 or 399A applies. It is the second part of a two stage
             approach which, for the reasons we have given, is required  by
             the new rules. The UT concluded (para 41) that it is  required
             because  the  new  rules  do  not  fully  reflect   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. But either way, it is necessary to carry out  a
             two stage process."
57. There can be no dispute that the effect of the  2007  Act  and  Section
    32(4) makes plain  that  the  deportation  of  a  foreign  national  is
    conducive to the public good.  This is  described  as  a  statement  of
    public policy and enacted by Parliament (see SS (Nigeria) at  paragraph
    [53] and LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 at [17].

58. In SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550; [2014] 1 WLR 998, Laws LJ neatly distilled this principle
    at [53]:-

         "The importance of the moral and political character of the  policy
         shows that the  two  drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
         discretion - the policy's  nature  and  its  source  -  operate  in
         tandem. An Act of Parliament is anyway to be  specially  respected;
         but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind.  In  this
         case, the policy is general and overarching.  It  is  circumscribed
         only by five carefully drawn exceptions,  of  which  the  first  is
         violation of a person's Convention/Refugee Convention rights.  (The
         others concern  minors,  EU  cases,  extradition  cases  and  cases
         involving  persons  subject   to   orders   under   mental   health
         legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007 Act has attached very
         great weight to the policy as a well justified imperative  for  the
         protection of  the  public  and  to  reflect  the  public's  proper
         condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with  respect
         right to state that "in the case of a 'foreign  criminal'  the  Act
         places in the proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than
         in other cases ...".
59. Both of the decisions set out  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds
    emphasise the great weight to be attached to the public interest in the
    deportation of foreign criminals (or in this case  the  maintaining  of
    the deportation order) and the importance of the policy in this  regard
    which effect has been given by Parliament to the UK Borders  Act  2007.
    In the decision of LC (China) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1301 Moore-Bick LJ
    said this (at [17]):
         "Two points of importance emerge from the decisions in SS (Nigeria)
         and MF (Nigeria).  First both emphasise  the  great  weight  to  be
         attached to the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals and the importance of the policy in that regard to  which
         effect has been given by Parliament in the UK Borders Act 2007  ...
         The second is  that  it  is  wrong  to  consider  the  question  of
         infringement  of  Article  8  rights  outside  the  terms  of   the
         Immigration Rules ...".
60. This approach was further considered by Sales  LJ  in  the  SSHD  v  AJ
    (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636, at [39]-[40]:
         "39. The fact that the new Rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
             comprehensive code is significant, but if  it  means  that  an
             official or a Tribunal should seek  to  take  account  of  any
             Convention rights of an Appellant through the lens of the  new
             Rules themselves, rather  than  looking  to  apply  Convention
             rights for themselves in a freestanding way  outside  the  new
             Rules.  This speech for the  new  Rules  makes  the  decision-
             making framework in relation to  foreign  criminals  different
             from that in relation to other parts of the Immigration Rules,
             where the Secretary of  State  retains  a  general  discretion
             outside the Rules in exercise of which, in some circumstances,
             decisions may need to be made in order to  accommodate  claims
             for leave to remain on the basis of Convention rights ...
         40.  The requirement of assessment through the lens  of  the  Rules
             also seeks to ensure that decisions are made in a way that  is
             properly informed by the considerable weight to  be  given  to
             the public interest in deportation of  foreign  criminals,  as
             declared by Parliament in the 2007 Act and reinforced  by  the
             Secretary of State ... so as to promote public  confidence  in
             that system in this sensitive area."
61. The Court of Appeal in the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department v LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369 at  [14]  summarised
    succinctly the law as follows:-
    (i)  the new Rules provide a comprehensive code:
    (ii) the context is the great weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals:
    iii) that public interest and related  questions  of  public  confidence
         reflect  (1)  protection  of  the  public  from  re-offending;  (2)
         deterrence; (3) public revulsion:
    (iv) the considerations in a deportation case are thus  very  different
         from those applicable to the cases of immigration control:
    (v)  a proportionality test, taking all the relevant Article 8 criteria
         into account and weighed in the scales against the public  interest
         in deportation, is to be conducted - but through the  lens  of  the
         new Rules, rather than as a freestanding exercise:
     vi) and the case for a  person  sentenced  for  at  least  four  years'
         imprisonment, paragraph 398(a) applies and  neither  paragraph  399
         nor  399A  is  applicable;  accordingly,  it  will   only   be   in
         'exceptional circumstances' that the public interest in deportation
         will be outweighed by other factors:
    vii) 'exceptional' here means something 'very  compelling'  rather  than
         something 'unusual'; hat something is 'unusual'  is,  no  doubt,  a
         necessary but not sufficient condition for the  determination  that
         'exceptional circumstances' apply.
   viii) 'the application  of  the  new  Rules  in  an  individual  case  is
         necessarily fact specific."

62. The Secretary of State's written grounds and adopted by Miss  Johnstone
    in her oral submissions, as set  out  at  paragraphs  20  to  27,  make
    reference to the above Court of Appeal decisions and in particular that
    of MM and MF (Nigeria) quoting  paragraphs  [14]-[16],  and  paragraphs
    [42]-[44].  It further makes reference to SS (Nigeria).  The thrust  of
    the written grounds and the oral submissions were to  the  effect  that
    the panel misdirected themselves in law  by  failing  to  consider  the
    public   interest   in   deporting   the   Appellant   when   assessing
    proportionality outside the Immigration Rules and paragraphs  [43]-[44]
    of the determination were insufficient as  the  vast  majority  of  the
    determination comprised of an exhaustive assessment of the  Appellant's
    circumstances and the effects of deportation on  his  family  and  that
    there was no consideration of deterrence.

63. A careful consideration of  the  determination  demonstrates  that  the
    criticisms made by the Secretary of State are not made out.  The  panel
    had proper regard to the conviction upon which the original deportation
    proceedings  were  based  and  which  had  resulted  in  the  term   of
    imprisonment of three and a half years.  As the panel set out  at  [42]
    there was no doubt that this was a serious offence and one in which his
    deportation was necessary to safeguard  one  of  society's  fundamental
    interests, namely the prevention of crime and disorder.   At  [43]  the
    panel went on to state:-
         "43. Notwithstanding that the offence was committed in 2006 we take
             into account the strength of the Respondent's  view  that  the
             public interest lies in the deportation  of  foreign  national
             criminals.  We find that heavy weight must be attached to  the
             public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not
             satisfy the circumstances laid down in paragraph 399 or  399A.
             In this case albeit that the offence was non-violent in nature
             the public interest in deporting a foreign  national  who  has
             been convicted of conspiracy to defraud is considerable ...".
     The panel then went on to set out and take into account the  particular
    circumstances of this offence and went on to state:-
         "... there is no doubt that the offence was one which also had real
         consequences on the economic wellbeing of the country."
         44.  We find that the fact that the Appellant has  failed  to  meet
             the requirements of  the  new  Rules  is  of  significance  to
             consideration in the overall  assessment  of  proportionality.
             It is well established through Strasbourg  jurisprudence  that
             states are entitled  to  decide  that  there  is  generally  a
             compelling public interest in  deporting  foreign  criminals."


64. The panel at [45] then identified a number of factors which they  found
    "weighed heavily"  in  favour  of  his  deportation  including  that  a
    significant proportion of his family and private life was formed in the
    knowledge that his immigration status was precarious, that he had lived
    in the UK with valid leave for a period of approximately nine years out
    of his 23 years and that the youngest child was born during the  period
    in which the Appellant and his partner were well aware that enforcement
    action would be taken.  Thus the panel concluded that:-
         "The combination  of  the  Appellant's  conviction  for  a  serious
         criminal offence, the duration of  the  sentence  imposed  and  his
         lengthy irregular immigration status contributed to the strength of
         his private and family life in the UK are  each  individually,  and
         cumulatively matters which we find weigh heavily in favour  of  his
         deportation."
65. Furthermore, contrary to the grounds at [29] the panel when considering
    the issue of the public interest plainly  did  consider  the  issue  of
    deterrence as set out at paragraph [60] of the determination where  the
    panel, whilst finding that the Appellant had not re-offended for nearly
    eight years and had been  assessed  as  a  low  risk  of  re-offending,
    observed:-
         "However we are also  mindful  that  in  considering  his  lack  of
         propensity to re-offend we  are  required  to  attach  considerable
         weight, which we do, to the wider objective  of  deportation  as  a
         deterrent, its expression of societal abhorrence in the criminality
         in question and as  a  system  of  control  that  maintains  public
         confidence.  We have taken these considerations into the balance in
         reaching our overall assessment."
66. Thus the panel clearly expressed that they had  taken  account  of  the
    essential elements of the public interest of deterrence and  revulsion.
    Therefore, contrary to the  grounds  I  am  satisfied  that  the  panel
    properly identified and took into account the  strong  public  interest
    and approached their  decision  on  the  basis  that  the  scales  were
    weighted in favour of deportation unless there were circumstances which
    were sufficiently compelling (and therefore  exceptional)  to  outweigh
    that public interest in deportation (see MF (Nigeria) at [46]) and that
    there must be  "something  very  compelling"  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest (see Richards LJ in MA (Somalia) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 48  at
    [17]).

67. Furthermore the panel did properly direct themselves in accordance with
    the correct legal framework.  Having found at [39] that  the  Appellant
    could not meet paragraph 339 or 399A,  they  applied  MF  (Nigeria)  at
    paragraphs [39] and [40] of the panel's determination.

68. Whilst  the  grounds  at  paragraph  [29]  assert  that  there  was  no
    consideration of the mitigation of  the  difficulties  which  would  be
    encountered by the  Appellant's  family  on  his  deportation  such  as
    arranging visits by the family to his country of nationality, the panel
    expressly dealt with this at paragraph [54].  The panel made  reference
    to the acceptance on behalf of the Respondent that all  three  children
    were British citizens and that their mother (the  Appellant's  partner)
    was settled and that it would be unreasonable for them to relocate (see
    [48]).  At [54] the panel considered the effects  of  separation.   The
    panel, having already found on the evidence that it was not in the best
    interests of the children to revert to being solely cared for by  their
    mother in circumstances where they  had  readjusted  after  periods  of
    separation.  This was based on the unchallenged evidence of the ISW and
    the direct evidence of the children concerned (see  [49],  [50],  [51]-
    [53] of the determination).  Thus the panel did consider the issue  and
    were entitled to reach the conclusion on the evidence before them  that
    such  contact  would  be   infrequent   and   impractical   given   the
    circumstances of the country in  question   and  the  prohibitive  cost
    involved.  I find no merit in that ground either.

69. It is further submitted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the
    panel found that the Appellant's relationship with his family  and  the
    support that they gave him amounted to an  "exceptional  circumstance".
    Miss Johnstone submits that there was nothing exceptional in his mental
    health difficulties and that whilst they might be unusual they were not
    exceptional and thus the panel wrongly placed weight and reliance  upon
    this as an "exceptional circumstance".

70. However, the panel's findings need to be read in their  entirety.   The
    panel were not solely relying on the Appellant's mental health and  the
    support the family provided to him.  It is  true  that  the  panel  did
    consider at [55] the psychiatric evidence and the reference to that set
    out in the  ISW  report.   However,  whilst  they  found  that  he  had
    encountered serious difficulties during periods of detention, the panel
    properly found that that did not reach the threshold  to  constitute  a
    breach of Article 3 and  whilst  they  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
    effects of deportation on the Appellant at [56] at  [57]  onwards,  the
    panel made it plain that this  was  not  the  only  factor  which  they
    considered to be exceptional or compelling which  they  had  identified
    during the course of their consideration of the  issues.   Therefore  I
    find no merit in the ground submitted by Miss Johnstone.

71. The written grounds  did  not  seek  to  raise  any  other  grounds  of
    challenge.  However Miss Johnstone sought to extend the above ground by
    submitting  that  the  panel  had   not   identified   any   compelling
    circumstances capable of outweighing the strong public interest in  the
    maintenance of the deportation order.  She submitted that the fact that
    the deportation of the Appellant would separate him from  his  children
    was insufficient to constitute a "compelling circumstance"  and  relied
    on the  decision  of  AD  (Lee)  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  348.   However  the
    circumstances of that particular case are wholly different  from  those
    facts of the present appeal.  In that case, the Appellant's immigration
    history included the Appellant having overstayed, left the country  and
    then returned unlawfully, absconded and was removed and re-entered.  He
    was sentenced  to  a  term  of  seven  years'  imprisonment  for  drugs
    offences.  Thus the circumstances of the public interest were different
    to that of this particular Appellant.  It seems to me that the question
    that the panel had to ask itself was whether there were very compelling
    circumstances such  as  to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
    deportation.  Having approached this question through the lens  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  ensuring  that  full  weight  was  given   to   the
    deportation of foreign criminals.

72. On the facts of this case, the panel, whilst finding that  he  did  not
    meet paragraph 399 or 399A, sought to  consider  and  rely  on  matters
    relevant to those paragraphs, including the length  of  residence,  his
    family ties in the UK, his  relationship  with  the  children  and  the
    effect upon the children of the deportation order being maintained  and
    the children being  solely  cared  for  by  their  mother.   The  panel
    identified at [39] that whilst paragraph 399 or  399A  did  not  apply,
    that they "will return to a consideration of the fact identified in the
    guidance later in this determination".  The panel were referring to the
    guidance set out at [38] which had set out internal guidance as to  the
    assessment of the criteria laid down under the applicable  Rules.   The
    panel had set out the relevant factors under the guidance at  paragraph
    [38].

73. The panel did not have the advantage of the case law where it has  been
    subsequently decided that it  is  permissible  to  rely  upon   matters
    relevant to  Paragraphs  399  or  399A  when  considering  whether  the
    Appellant  had  demonstrated   "exceptional   circumstances   or   very
    compelling circumstances" (see SSHD v JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116).

74. In reaching their decision I am satisfied that the panel did  not  seek
    to elevate the best interests of the children and  properly  took  into
    account that they were a primary consideration and could be outweighed.
     As set out in SS (Nigeria) the interests of children are a substantive
    consideration but will have to be stronger the more pressing the nature
    of the public interest in the parents' removal (or in  this  case,  the
    maintaining of the decision for removal via  deportation).   The  panel
    clearly set out what they had considered to be the  best  interests  of
    the children and were entitled to  place  weight  on  the  unchallenged
    evidence of the ISW and the direct evidence of the children  themselves
    and gave sustainable  reasons  for  reaching  the  decision  why  their
    interests were strong enough to displace the  public  interest  in  his
    deportation being maintained.

75. The grounds refer to the decision made as "irrational".  However  I  am
    satisfied, having read the determination as a whole and in the  context
    of the particular facts and evidence that was before the panel, that it
    was open to them to reach the conclusion that they did, that  they  had
    adequately reasoned their decision and it is a sustainable decision.

76. The panel were entitled to place weight on the Appellant's relationship
    with his partner and his children, that the children were  all  British
    citizens.  As I have set out earlier, there was a substantial  body  of
    evidence before the panel, including direct evidence from the  children
    and the ISW  Report  both  of  which  was  unchallenged.   This  was  a
    relationship that the panel found to have been  "substantially  tested"
    not only by the enforced separation as a result of his imprisonment but
    also through periods of immigration detention (see paragraph [51]).  It
    was therefore open to the panel to find that whilst there  was  someone
    to look after the children in the Appellant's absence (and  thus  could
    not meet paragraph 399(a)) there was evidence  before  the  panel  that
    demonstrates that the separation that  had  occurred  had  a  real  and
    tangible impact on  each  of  the  children's  personal  and  emotional
    development (see paragraph [51] and [52]) and that  the  needs  of  the
    children were such that their emotional and practical security  was  of
    great  importance  [53].   The  panel  took  into  account   also   the
    Appellant's length of residence since 1991, that he  last  offended  in
    2006, was at a low risk of reoffending and had in  essence  turned  his
    life around.

77. Consequently I have reached the conclusion that  the  decision  of  the
    panel was one that was open to them.  As set out in MA (Somalia) v SSHD
    [2010] UKSC 49, Sir John Dyson SCJ (as he then was) stated at [45]:-

         "... the court should not be astute to characterise as an error  of
         law what, in truth, is no more than a  disagreement  with  the  ...
         (Tribunal's)  ...  assessment  of  the  facts.   Moreover  where  a
         relevant point is not expressly  mentioned  by  the  Tribunal,  the
         court should be slow to infer that  it  has  not  been  taken  into
         account".

78. The panel found this  to  be  a  "finely  balanced"  case  and  on  the
    particular facts of this  case  it  was  open  to  them  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the  maintenance  of  the  deportation  order  was  not
    proportionate.

79. I therefore reach the conclusion that it  was  open  to  the  panel  to
    conclude that exceptional circumstances existed  which  outweighed  the
    public interest in maintaining the deportation order.
Notice of Decision:
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the decision relating to Article 8 stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings






Signed                              Date:12th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
