
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00264/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2016                           |On 01 November 2016           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 S G AGEROAE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate, instructed by LKW,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lea, promulgated on 22 August 2016, dismissing his appeal against
    deportation under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. The grounds assert that the judge gave manifestly excessive  weight  to
    the appellant's most recent conviction, which she had described as  not
    particularly serious; erred in relation to the burden of  proof,  which
    was on the respondent not the appellant; and as the  recent  conviction
    was not serious and previous convictions were almost 10 years ago,  the
    conclusion of a propensity to reoffend was irrational.

 3. Mr Forrest submitted as follows.  He did not wish to add to the grounds
    going to the weight given to the most recent  conviction.  The  grounds
    going to the burden of  proof,  and  to  rationality,  together  showed
    material error. The judge said at paragraph 9 "the burden of  proof  is
    on the appellant", which is plainly wrong:  SSHD v Straswzewski  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1245, paragraph 12. There were before the judge  2  categories
    of conviction, the earlier ones in Romania  and  recently  in  the  UK.
    Separately,  neither  category  could  justify  the  conclusion  of   a
    propensity to offend.  Considered correctly  and  in  the  round,  they
    could not rationally do so even in combination. The evidence was simply
    not there to show that the appellant presented any genuine, present  or
    sufficiently serious threat. The  two  categories  of  conviction  were
    entirely different in time, place,  and  circumstances.  There  was  no
    conjunction between them. That showed the decision  to  be  irrational,
    and it should be reversed.

 4. In a rule 24 response the  respondent  runs  as  follows.  The  grounds
    amount to no more than disagreement with the findings. The weight to be
    attached to the convictions was a matter for the  judge.  She  properly
    directed  herself  in  law  regarding  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    represented a present, genuine and  sufficiently  serious  threat.  She
    recognised that the previous convictions in Romania were some time  ago
    but the recent offence, although minor, was an offence  against  person
    and property and involved violence. The judge was entitled to  conclude
    that the appellant  still  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend.  She  also
    properly directed herself that previous offences cannot solely  justify
    deportation. She engaged with the appellant's circumstances in the  UK:
    he was not living with his partner; his partner put  his  name  on  her
    child's birth certificate, despite his not being the father, after  the
    threat of deportation; the partner's family had various  problems,  not
    indicative of helping the appellant's rehabilitation. Taking all  these
    factors  into  account,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude   that
    deportation was proportionate under the regulations.

 5. Mr Matthews accepted for purposes of this case that the  judge  did  go
    wrong on the burden of proof (although  he  said  the  matter  was  not
    entirely free from doubt, there being an earlier decision  to  contrary
    effect, to which the Court in SSHD v Straswzewski was not referred.) He
    submitted thus.  Paragraph 9 was no more than the  use  of  a  standard
    paragraph, a "cut-and-paste" type of error, and did  not  reflect  what
    the judge actually applied in her decision. She  said  at  paragraph  6
    that what she had to decide was whether or  not  the  decision  of  the
    respondent complied with the principle of  proportionality,  which  set
    the bar the other way, and set it too high. Her discussion of the facts
    did not suggest  that  she  was  deciding  whether  the  appellant  had
    discharged the burden, rather she was assessing whether serious grounds
    existed. There might have been a  slip,  but  no  overall  error.   The
    remaining  grounds  did  not  reach  the   high   target   of   showing
    irrationality. The decision was well within the  scope  of  the  judge.
    Another judge might have decided differently, but that was  immaterial.
    This was not a case with only one possible outcome. The judge  accepted
    that it was 10 years since the  offending  in  Romania,  and  that  the
    appellant has been at liberty and remained free of convictions for some
    7 years. However, his offences in Romania had a serious and  a  violent
    character. The judge  was  entitled  to  look  at  the  nature  of  the
    offending in both categories, including the circumstances  giving  rise
    to the offending in the UK.  Although of a more minor  character,  that
    did involve kind of violence, although directed against property rather
    than directly against the person, and it arose in a  domestic  context.
    The information the judge  had  about  the  appellant's  circumstances,
    which came from evidence led on his behalf, was all relevant. There was
    no quarrel with the finding  that  he  was  living  within  a  volatile
    domestic context.  The judge reached a finding well  within  her  scope
    and gave specific and legally adequate reasons. The  outcome  might  be
    unwelcome to the appellant, but it was not shown to be legally flawed.

 6. Mr  Forrest  in  response  renewed  his  submission  that  the  judge's
    conclusion was irrational, on the evidence before her.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. The judge did not treat this as a  case  so  finely  balanced  that  it
    eventually turned on where the onus lay.  She decided  it  on  all  the
    evidence which had emerged and according to the criteria  in  terms  of
    the regulations.

 9. Reading the decision fairly and as a whole, the reference at  paragraph
    9 to a burden of proof on the appellant  is  only  a  standard  recital
    which has been left unrevised, and not part of the  decisive  passages.
    It is an immaterial slip.

10. The weight to be given to various aspects of the evidence was  for  the
    judge, within the bounds of rationality.  Her reasons are stated.  None
    is shown to be incorrect.

11. Broadly, I prefer the submissions for the respondent, for  the  reasons
    given.  The case for the appellant in substance is only renewal of  the
    case he put to the FtT, and disagreement with its  overall  conclusion.
    However, that conclusion was open to the FtT, and its  decision  is  an
    adequate explanation to the appellant of why it was reached.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            31 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




