
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00477/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via MS     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Teams)                           |                                 |
|On 5 July 2021                   |On 3 August 2021                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FM (PORTUGAL)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Walsh, instructed by Turpin Miller LLP (Oxford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,  against   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carolyn Scott's decision to allow  FM's  appeal  against
    the decision to deport him from the United Kingdom.

 2. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"): FM as the appellant and the  Secretary
    of State as the respondent.



Background

 3. The appellant is a Portuguese national who was born on 4 December 1985.
     He arrived in the UK with his mother and sister in  2001.   He  has  a
    long history of psychiatric difficulties and a confirmed  diagnosis  of
    Paranoid Schizophrenia.

 4. The appellant has been convicted of criminal  offences  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He received a caution for actual bodily  harm  in  2015.   In
    September  2017,  he  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of  racially  or
    religiously  aggravated  disorderly  behaviour  with  intent  to  cause
    harassment, alarm  or  distress.   He  was  sentenced  by  West  London
    Magistrates' Court to a 12-month conditional discharge.  The respondent
    did not take any deportation action in response to that conviction.

 5. On 20 May 2019, however, the appellant was convicted at Isleworth Crown
    Court of two offences, which were  committed  in  the  same  course  of
    events.  The first was possession of  a  bladed  article  in  a  public
    place, for which he received a 4 month custodial sentence.  The  second
    was wounding with intent, contrary to s20 of the Offences  Against  the
    Person Act 1861, for which the appellant  received  a  sentence  of  27
    months' imprisonment.  The two sentences were to run concurrently.

 6. Those offences arose out of a confrontation with the appellant and  his
    neighbour.  There is said to have been a history of bad  blood  between
    the two men.  On 19 October  2018,  things  came  to  a  head  and  the
    appellant attacked the neighbour with a knife, causing two wounds,  one
    to the bicep and one to the back, both of which are  described  in  the
    papers as superficial.  The appellant subsequently brandished  a  metal
    pole at the victim and said to  the  arresting  officers  that  he  had
    intended to teach the victim a lesson 'so he won't fuck with me again'.



 7. Sentencing the appellant to the terms of imprisonment I have  described
    above, HHJ Edmunds QC took into account the aggravating and  mitigating
    features in  the  offence,  including  the  appellant's  mental  health
    diagnosis, which was set out in a detailed  report  from  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist, Dr Agarwal.

 8. These offences did cause the respondent  to  take  deportation  action.
    She wrote to him in June 2019 to state that  she  was  considering  his
    deportation.  Later that month, the appellant's sister and  the  Mental
    Health In-Reach Team at HMP Wormwood Scrubs replied on the  appellant's
    behalf.  They stated, in summary, that the  appellant's  mental  health
    condition was managed in the UK and he was concerned that it would  not
    be in Portugal; that he  had  all  of  his  close  family  in  the  UK,
    including two children by an ex-partner; and that he had lived  in  the
    UK for many years.

 9. The respondent notified the appellant on 9 September 2019 that she  had
    decided to make a deportation order against him.  The  letter  is  very
    long - running to 112 paragraphs in total - and it suffices  to  record
    the bones of the reasoning.  The respondent did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had acquired permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom  or
    that she was required to justify his deportation on anything more  than
    ordinary grounds of public policy or public security: [12]-16].  Having
    considered the available evidence including the sentencing  remarks  of
    HHJ Edmunds QC and the OASys report, the respondent concluded that  the
    appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat  to  the  fundamental  interests  of  the  UK:  [17]-[39].   The
    respondent concluded that it was proportionate to deport the appellant;
    treatment for schizophrenia was available in Portugal and  neither  his
    level of integration to the UK nor his family ties rendered that course
    disproportionate: [42]-[49].  The respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant's rehabilitation would be prejudiced by  his  deportation  to
    Portugal: [50]-[55].  In the circumstances,  the  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant should be deported from the UK under the Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016: [56].  The remainder of  the  letter  concerned
    Article 8 ECHR, on which basis the appeal was not allowed  by  the  FtT
    and need not be considered herein.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant appealed to the FtT.   His  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge
    Carolyn Scott ("the judge"), sitting remotely on 24 February 2021.  The
    appellant was represented  by  Mr  Walsh,  as  he  is  before  me,  the
    respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer (not Mr Bates).  The
    judge heard evidence from the appellant, his  mother  and  his  sister.
    She heard submissions from the advocates before reserving her decision.

11. The judge's reserved decision  is  carefully  structured  and  cogently
    reasoned.  She set out the background and the evidence  before  her  at
    [1]-[9] and the legal framework, including relevant authority, at [10]-
    [18].   She  gave  a  self  direction  regarding  the   assessment   of
    credibility at [19].  At [20],  she  stated  that  she  had  found  the
    appellant, his mother and his sister to  be  credible  witnesses.   She
    went on to find, for reasons that she gave at [21], that the  appellant
    had not acquired a right to reside permanently in the UK.  There is  no
    cross appeal or respondent's notice in respect of that finding.

12. At [22]-[28], the judge found that the appellant represented a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
    the UK.  She reached that conclusion after consideration  of  disparate
    pieces of evidence and evaluation of Mr Walsh's submissions, with which
    she disagreed at [26].  The judge found there to be  a  risk  that  the
    appellant could stop taking his mental health medication,  which  would
    be likely to lead to a relapse of  his  paranoid  schizophrenia,  which
    'could result in serious harm to others': [27].  Again,  there  is  not
    said by the appellant that there is anything wrong in  law  with  these
    findings.

13. At [29]-[46], the judge considered whether the appellant's  deportation
    would comply with the principle of proportionality.  In doing  so,  she
    balanced what she described as the  'strong  public  interest'  in  the
    appellant's deportation against the  remaining  factors  in  regulation
    27(6) of the EEA Regulations.  She therefore had  regard  to  his  age,
    state of health, family and economic situation, length of residence  in
    the  UK,  social  and  cultural  integration  and  the  impact  on  his
    rehabilitation were he to be deported to Portugal.   In  each  respect,
    she made detailed findings, most of which (with the exception of social
    and   cultural   integration)   militated   against   the   appellants'
    deportation.  At [47], the judge  drew  the  threads  of  her  decision
    together in the following paragraph:

         "I have weighed all of the evidence in the round.  I find  that  in
         the  circumstances  of  this  appellant,  notwithstanding  that  he
         represents a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to
         the public to justify his deportation  on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy, it would not be proportionate to deport him.  I  make  this
         finding for the following reasons:

          a) The appellant's criminal conduct is largely as a result of his
             Paranoid Schizophrenia;

          b) The appellant has  taken  significant  steps  to  control  his
             Paranoid Schizophrenia so as to best avoid a relapse;

          c) The appellant has a significant support network, both  from  a
             medical perspective and familial  perspective.   I  find  that
             deporting the appellant would fracture this  support  network,
             and  is  likely  to  result  in  a  relapse  of  his  Paranoid
             Schizophrenia;

          d) Whilst the appellant's father lives in Portugal, I  find  that
             he would not be able to assist the appellant on his return  to
             Portugal, for the reasons previously identified.  There is  no
             other real family support  the  appellant  could  call  on  in
             Portugal;

          e) The appellant has spent the majority of his life  in  the  UK,
             and all of his adulthood.  He has not been in education  since
             the age of 15, and very limited work experience.   I  find  it
             likely that if returned to Portugal he would not  be  able  to
             gain meaningful employment such as to support himself."



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

14. The single ground of appeal advanced by the respondent is  said  to  be
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for findings on material
    matters.  The particulars of the ground are as follows:

      i) the judge's exploration  of  the  appellant's  ability  to  receive
         support from his family in Portugal was inadequate.  The respondent
         notes in that connection that the appellant  has  been  in  contact
         with his extended family via Facebook  and  that  he  has  received
         financial support from his grandmother.

     ii) the judge failed to give adequate reasons for concluding  that  the
         appellant would be unable to secure employment, given that  he  has
         enjoyed some  work  in  the  UK.   The  respondent  notes  in  this
         connection that the appellant spent  his  formative  years  in  the
         country and that he continued to speak the language.

    iii) the judge failed to consider whether the appellant's  mother  might
         relocate to Portugal with him so as to assist with his  integration
         and access to mental health services,  if  necessary  for  a  short
         period.

     iv) the judge failed to acknowledge 'that the public interest outweighs
         appellant's rights under EEA law in view of his offending'

15. Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,  who
    considered  it  arguable  that  the   proportionality   findings   were
    materially flawed for the reasons given in the grounds.

16. A concise response to the grounds of appeal  was  duly  settled  by  Mr
    Walsh,  who  contended  in  summary  that  the   respondent's   grounds
    represented nothing more than an attempt to challenge findings of  fact
    legitimately reached by the judge.



Submissions

17. Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  was  insufficiently
    reasoned.  She had clearly accepted that the appellant did not  have  a
    right to reside permanently in the UK and that he was not socially  and
    culturally integrated in the UK.  She had found that  the  offence  was
    very serious and that there was a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the fundamental interests of the UK if the  appellant
    remained.  The judge had erred in her consideration of whether  or  not
    treatment  would  be  available  for  the  appellant's  mental   health
    problems; if the  appellant  was  asserting  that  treatment  would  be
    insufficient, the burden was  on  him  to  establish  that.   Mr  Bates
    submitted that the judge had failed to  consider  MC  (Essa  principles
    recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC); [2016] Imm AR 114 and had failed,  as  a
    result, to note that the facilities in a state which was  a  member  of
    the EU were unlikely to be  lacking.   The  judge's  conclusions  about
    treatment were wholly lacking.

18. Mr Bates noted that the  appellant  was  in  contact  with  his  family
    members in Portugal via Facebook, including his father and grandmother.
     Where, Mr Bates asked rhetorically, was the judge's attempt to  engage
    with that evidence and to make findings about the support  which  might
    be available to the appellant as a result of it?   Mr  Bates  submitted
    that the appellant would probably be 'better placed' in  Portugal.   He
    had some education in that country and there was  no  reason  to  think
    that he would not be able to find  employment  there.   The  judge  had
    found that the appellant was not integrated into the  UK  so  she  must
    have concluded that he was integrated into Portugal.

19. Mr Walsh made two points at the outset.  He noted that  the  respondent
    set some store in the possibility of  the  appellant  securing  support
    from his father.  This overlooked what had been said  at  the  hearing,
    which was that the appellant's  father  had  placed  him  in  a  mental
    hospital following a disagreement in 2002, when the appellant  remained
    a  minor.   Secondly,  the  respondent  also  overlooked  the  evidence
    regarding the appellant's education.  The report of Dr Agarwal recorded
    that the appellant's education in Portugal had petered out when he  was
    fifteen, after spells of truanting and other poor  behaviour.   He  had
    received no qualifications and had pursued no further education.

20. Mr Walsh submitted that the decision was an impressive  and  carefully-
    structured one.  It was for the respondent to make out her  grounds  of
    appeal and she was in difficulty in that regard.  It was to be recalled
    that proceedings before the FtT are adversarial.   The  respondent  was
    represented and the evidential points in the grounds of appeal had  not
    been taken by the respondent at the hearing.  It was not for the  judge
    to ascertain which avenues the respondent might pursue;  that  was  the
    role of her advocate, and it was the judge's role to evaluate the cases
    presented to her.

21. Mr Walsh submitted that the findings adequately explained the  ultimate
    outcome in the case.  What the judge was particularly concerned about -
    and what was found to render the decision disproportionate  -  was  the
    rupture which would be caused to the appellant's support network if  he
    was deported.  MC (Portugal) was not cited to the  judge  but  she  did
    not, in any event, adopt an approach which was at odds  with  that  (or
    any)  authority.   She  considered  the  appellant's  circumstances  at
    present and she  found  that  his  deportation  would  impinge  on  his
    rehabilitation.   There  was  obviously  some  treatment  available  in
    Portugal but the  case  was  not  about  that  -  as  the  judge  fully
    understood.

22. Mr Walsh noted that the judge was clearly aware  of  the  great  public
    interest which attached to the appellant's deportation.  She  had  made
    that plain at [30] of her decision.

23. Mr Bates responded by noting that the judge had found the appellant  to
    be a risk in the UK.  He submitted there was a wholesale failure on the
    part of the judge to consider what was likely to happen in the future.



Analysis

24. I agree with the submissions made orally and in writing by Mr Walsh and
    I find it to be quite clear that the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    determining this appeal as she did.  I  accept  Mr  Walsh's  submission
    that the judge's decision is a  cogently-reasoned  and  well-structured
    one.

25. This is precisely the type of case in which an appellate  court  should
    have firmly in mind the words of caution from cases  such  as  UT  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095, in  which  Coulson  LJ  (with  whom
    Floyd LJ agreed) criticised the  Upper  Tribunal  for  interfering  too
    readily with a decision at first instance.  In doing so, he drew on the
    following dicta from SSHD v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49; [2008] 1 AC  678
    and  R (Jones) v FtT and CICA [2013] UKSC 19; [2013] 2 AC 48:

         "Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirections simply
         because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts
         or expressed themselves differently."

         (per Baroness Hale at [30] of AH (Sudan))

         "It is well established, as an aspect of tribunal law and practice,
         that judicial restraint should be exercised when the reasons that a
         tribunal gives for its decision are being examined.  The  appellate
         court should not assume too readily that the  tribunal  misdirected
         itself just because not every step in its reasoning  is  fully  set
         out in it."

         (per Lord Hope, at [25] of Jones).

26. The crux of the judge's reasoning in this case could  not  be  clearer.
    She reached a carefully reasoned finding that the appellant represented
    a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  the  fundamental
    interests of the UK, thereby rejecting the submission made by Mr Walsh.
     The judge was clearly aware of the significance of that finding, which
    she underlined more  than  once  in  her  decision.   She  was  however
    concerned about the effect of deportation on the appellant, who suffers
    from very serious mental health problems  and  has  a  support  network
    comprising family members and medical professionals  in  this  country.
    She found that there would be an interruption in that package  of  care
    and that this would have a detrimental effect on the appellant and  his
    prospects of rehabilitation.  Considering  the  appellant's  length  of
    residence and other relevant matters,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    consequences of deportation were disproportionate to the legitimate aim
    which the respondent sought to pursue.  The respondent can be under  no
    illusions about the basis upon which she was  unsuccessful  before  the
    FtT and the decision cannot properly be criticised for failing to  give
    adequate reasons.

27. I agree with Mr Walsh's submission that  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal actually amount to an attempt to re-argue the case on its merits
    and to argue points which were not even taken before the  FtT.   It  is
    clearly  established  that  proceedings   before   the   FtT(IAC)   are
    adversarial: JK (DRC) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 831; [2008]  Imm  AR  114.
    The respondent was, as I have said, represented by a Presenting Officer
    before the FtT.  The respondent  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to
    'explore' in her decision the  possibility  that  the  appellant  would
    receive meaningful assistance from his family members in Portugal.  The
    judge is also criticised for supposedly failing to consider whether the
    appellant's  mother  could  relocate  to  Portugal   with   him,   even
    temporarily, so as to ameliorate the effect on his mental health.

28. Mr Walsh was counsel before the FtT and was  able  to  state  that  the
    latter point was simply not pursued by the respondent at  the  hearing.
    I have considered the clear and detailed Record of Proceedings from the
    hearing before the FtT and there is indeed no record of any  submission
    by the Presenting Officer that the appellant's mother (herself  an  EEA
    national) could leave the UK with the appellant, even temporarily.   It
    was not for the judge to 'explore' that possibility for  herself.   She
    was instead required (or, at the very least, entitled) to focus on  the
    cases advanced by the parties.

29. The respondent's complaint about the extent of the reasons given by the
    judge for finding that  the  appellant  would  have  inadequate  family
    support must be considered in  its  proper  context.   The  appellant's
    father has consistently been said to have mental health problems  which
    are at least as acute as the appellant's.  The appellant and his mother
    have referred to there having been physical abuse in the household.  Mr
    Walsh took me to the evidence before the FtT, in  which  the  appellant
    had stated that his father had made the appellant homeless in 2002  and
    2016, apparently as a result of arguments over 5  euros  and  an  apple
    respectively.  As the judge found, the appellant's  father  is  plainly
    unsuited to providing him with the support he would require in order to
    adapt to life in Portugal.

30. The Record of Proceedings also details the appellant's  evidence  about
    the other family he has in Portugal.  An aunt and uncle have  not  been
    in contact since 2016, although  they  wished  the  appellant  a  Happy
    Birthday  on  Facebook.   Everyone  else  had   left   Portugal.    One
    grandmother had passed away, the other one (who has sent money  to  the
    appellant in the past) now lives in Africa.

31.  The  judge  considered  the  possibility  of  the  appellant's  father
    assisting him on  return  and  found  that  he  would  provide  neither
    emotional nor financial support.  On the basis of the  evidence  before
    her (which she expressly accepted to be  credible),  that  finding  was
    unsurprising.  Her consideration of the  position  of  the  appellant's
    aunts and uncles was brief and unsurprisingly so.  The judge noted that
    the appellant's mother  does  not  maintain  a  relationship  with  her
    siblings.  She was aware that the appellant received a birthday message
    from them.  There was nothing more to 'explore' on these facts, and the
    judge was not required as a matter of law to do anything more  than  to
    accept this evidence as being truthful testimony.

32. As for the appellant's grandmother, it is unsurprising that  the  judge
    did not consider whether she would be able to assist the  appellant  on
    return to Portugal, given that the accepted evidence was that  she  had
    relocated to Africa. Unlike  the  author  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    therefore, the judge was clearly aware of the evidence which was  given
    before the FtT and clearly explored the evidence to the extent that was
    required of her.

33. Some submissions were made by Mr Bates before me about the  ability  of
    the appellant to receive mental health treatment  in  Portugal.   There
    was a suggestion that the judge might have reversed the burden of proof
    in this regard, or that she had overlooked the fact that Portugal is an
    EU Member State in which suitable treatment is likely to be  available.
    There is absolutely no merit in this  submission.   Mr  Walsh  did  not
    argue that treatment would be unavailable.  That was noted by the judge
    at [46] of her  decision.   Her  concern,  however,  which  echoed  the
    submission made to her, was that removal to Portugal  would  'interrupt
    and destabilise the treatment he has already received in the UK for his
    problems'.

34. There is a tendency in the respondent's written and oral submissions to
    minimise the appellant's condition and his need for medical supervision
    and other support.  His mother gave evidence before the judge,  all  of
    which was accepted as true, that the appellant behaves  as  though  the
    umbilical  cord  is  still  attached.   She  said  that  he   sometimes
    telephones her ten times a day and that  he  panics  if  she  does  not
    answer.  She has moved in with him on occasions when his mental  health
    takes a turn for the worse.  The evidence in respect of the appellant's
    treatment was that he is required to take oral medication and a regular
    depot injection of anti-psychotic medication and that any  interruption
    to that regime brings about very disturbing paranoia.  All of this  was
    known to, and appreciated by, the judge and it does no justice  to  her
    careful decision to suggest that she reversed the burden  or  that  she
    failed to consider whether treatment was available in Portugal.  As  Mr
    Walsh submitted, her decision was evidently rather more nuanced.

35. I am similarly unimpressed by  the  respondent's  submission  that  the
    judge erred in her consideration of whether the appellant would be able
    to find work.  She was evidently aware of the very limited education he
    had received, as detailed in the report of Dr Agarwal, and the  equally
    limited work  experience  he  has  had  in  the  UK.   Given  his  lack
    familiarity with the labour market in either  country  and  his  rather
    precarious mental health,  it  was  certainly  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that he would not be able to find employment so as to  support
    himself.  No further reasons were required; it is abundantly clear  why
    the judge found as she did on the evidence before her.

36. Mr Bates focussed some  criticism  on  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant's rehabilitation would be  compromised  by  his  deportation.
    The point he took in his oral submissions went far beyond that  pleaded
    at [8] of the grounds, which is a simple complaint that the appellant's
    mother could help him  to  adjust  to  life  in  Portugal.   Mr  Bates'
    submission was that the judge had failed to follow the approach  in  MC
    (Portugal).  That authority was not cited to the judge or mentioned  in
    the grounds but Mr Walsh was content to meet the point head on,  rather
    than objecting on procedural grounds to it being raised.

37. The judicial headnote to MC (Portugal) runs to ten separate  paragraphs
    and I need not set it out in full.  Mr Bates' submissions  focussed  on
    the  principles  summarised  in  the  final  three  paragraphs  of  the
    headnote:

         "(8)  Gauging  such  prospects  requires  assessing  the   relative
         prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State  as  compared
         with those in the Member State of origin, but, in  the  absence  of
         evidence, it is not to be assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in that other Member State (Dumliauskas  [46],  [52]-[53]
         and [59]).

         (9) Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects  of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community  and  the  like  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [34]). However, lack of access to a Probation Officer or equivalent
         in  the  other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,  preclude
         deportation (Dumliauskas [55])

         (10) In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
         residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a  weighty
         factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even when such  prospects  have
         significant weight they are not a trump card, as what the Directive
         and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
         assessment. Both recognise  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
         reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the greater
         the right to interfere with the right of residence (Dumliauskas  at
         [46] and [54]).

38. The judge did not cite MC (Portugal).  She did cite  R  (Essa)  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 and Essa [2013] UKUT 316 (IAC).  The approach  she
    adopted was not contrary to that required by  MC  (Portugal),  however.
    The judge did not assume that the rehabilitative measures available  to
    the appellant in Portugal would be lesser than those available  to  him
    in the UK.  Instead, at [43], she found that any such courses would  be
    of little use to the appellant 'since the nub of his offending  is  his
    Paranoid  Schizophrenia'.   This  was  not  a  decision  which  turned,
    therefore,  on  the  absence  of  access  to  a  Probation  Officer  or
    equivalent; it was one in which the judge drew on the relevant  matters
    in (9) of  the  headnote  to  MC  (Portugal)  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's well-being and his rehabilitation would be  compromised  by
    deportation.  I should  add  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  judge's
    decision which suggests that  she  attached  anything  more  than  some
    weight to the impact deportation would have on the appellant's  efforts
    at rehabilitation.  There is certainly no  reason  to  think  that  she
    treated rehabilitation as a weighty factor, contrary  to  (10)  of  the
    headnote of MC (Portugal).

39. Ultimately, there is clearly no legal error in  the  judge's  decision.
    Some judges might have concluded that the threat posed by the appellant
    was sufficient to outweigh  the  significant  public  interest  in  the
    appellant's deportation.  This judge did not.  She  made  detailed  and
    cogent findings of primary fact and balanced the appellant's  situation
    in Portugal against the significant public interest in his deportation.
      She  was  entitled  to  conclude   that   the   appellant's   unusual
    circumstances rendered  deportation  disproportionate.   That  was  the
    assessment of the specialist Tribunal and there is no basis upon  which
    it can properly be impugned as erroneous in law.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point  of  law.   The  respondent's  appeal  is  dismissed.   The
decision of the FtT shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction was first made by the FtT and it shall continue in  force  due  to
the risk to the appellant's mental health if he is named in public.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                                19 July 2021

