
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00679/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 14 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                  ANNA [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Bahja of counsel, instructed by Solomon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Poland. It is her case  that  she  first
    entered the United Kingdom on 4 July 2014 and started to  live  with  a
    British partner in December 2014.  It was also her case that she worked
    for his firm, as a painter and decorator, and that he subjected her  to
    coercive control and domestic violence. The first record of  her  being
    here is the fact that she was cautioned for assaulting a police officer
    on 24 February 2016.  There is also a letter from Jobcentre Plus, dated
    25 April 2016, which states that she had recently been  issued  with  a
    National Insurance Number.

2.   On 28 February 2018 she wounded her  ex-partner  and  on  24  September
    2018, she was convicted at Aylesbury Crown Court of wounding/inflicting
    grievous bodily harm and was sentenced to 12  months  imprisonment  and
    ordered to pay a victim surcharge of �140.00. On 22 October  2018,  the
    Respondent decided to make a deportation order against her on the basis
    that this was justified on the grounds of public policy. On 26  October
    2018 he also informed her that he had exercised  his  statutory  powers
    and certified her human rights claim with the effect that she could  be
    removed from the United Kingdom before  her  appeal  had  been  finally
    determined.

3.   On 29 October 2018 the  Appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  to
    deport her. Meanwhile, on 20 November 2018, her appeal was listed for a
    Pre-hearing review in Birmingham on 13 December 2018 and listed  for  a
    full hearing at Coventry Magistrates Court on 10 January 2019. The pre-
    hearing review and the full hearing were adjourned on 10 December 2018.
    On 12 December 2018 the Appellant was told that her pre-hearing  review
    would be heard at Yarl's Wood Hearing Centre on 21 December 2018.

4.   Meanwhile, on 12 December 2018 she was informed that  her  full  appeal
    hearing had been set down for 10 January 2019 at  Yarl's  Wood  Hearing
    Centre.  After  that  hearing,  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Mitchell
    dismissed her appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  14  January  2019.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted her permission  to  appeal
    on 30 January 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   At the start of the hearing I  provided  both  representatives  with  a
    copy of the Appellant's Reply to an  IAC  Notice  of  Hearing  and  two
    statements by the Appellant, which were attached to  it.   Counsel  for
    the Appellant addressed me on all three of the grounds of  appeal.  The
    Home Office Presenting Officer accepted that, in paragraph  55  of  his
    decision, the conclusions made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell in
    relation to the Appellant's risk of re-offending and her  risk  to  the
    community were both speculative



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   The Appellant is  an  EEA  national  and,  therefore,  The  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  apply  to  her  appeal.  In
    particular, regulation 23(6) states that:

         "Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an EEA national who has entered
         the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State  has  decided  that  the  person's
             removal is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 27".

7.   Regulation 27 states that:

         "(1) In  this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  in the best interests of the person concerned, as provided
                  for in the Convention on the Rights of the  Child  adopted
                  by the General Assembly of  the  United  Nations  on  20th
                  November 1989(17).

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.)".

8.   Schedule 1 states:

         "Considerations of public policy and public security

         1.   The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
         or  public  security  values:  member  States  enjoy   considerable
         discretion, acting within the parameters set by  the  EU  Treaties,
         applied where relevant by the EEA agreement, to  define  their  own
         standards of  public  policy  and  public  security,  for  purposes
         tailored to their individual contexts, from time to time.

         Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom

         2.   An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
         extensive familial and societal links  with  persons  of  the  same
         nationality or language does  not  amount  to  integration  in  the
         United Kingdom; a significant degree of wider cultural and societal
         integration must be present before a  person  may  be  regarded  as
         integrated in the United Kingdom.

         3.   Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.

         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the  United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at  or  around
         the same time as-

             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;

             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
                  in custody.

         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for  example,  through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.

         6.   It is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
         requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions may be  taken
         in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right  otherwise
         conferred by these Regulations in the case of abuse  of  rights  or
         fraud, including-

             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or

             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.

         The fundamental interests of society

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)  maintaining public order;

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)  protecting public services;

             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);

             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)  protecting the public;

             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);

             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
                  values".

9.   The Appellant's first ground of appeal  was  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mitchell had erred in  law  when  he  refused  to  grant  her  an
    adjournment in order to obtain legal representation.

10.   Rule  4(3)(h)  of  The  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  ("the  Procedure  Rules")
    provides a First-tier Tribunal Judge  with  a  discretionary  power  to
    grant a party an adjournment but does not specify the  basis  on  which
    such an adjournment should be granted. Instead, the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge is required  to  take  into  account  the  overriding  objectives
    contained in Rule 2 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 2(2)  refers  to  the
    need to deal with cases fairly and justly. This includes "ensuring,  so
    far as practicable, that the parties are able to fully  participate  in
    the proceedings" and "avoiding delay, so far as compatible with  proper
    consideration of the issues"

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell did  not  explicitly  refer  to  the
    Procedure Rules, but this was not necessarily a procedural breach if he
    reminded himself that he had  a  discretionary  power  to  adjourn  and
    applied the overriding objectives. In  paragraph  2  of  his  decision,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell noted that  an  application  for  an
    adjournment was made and found  that  "the  interests  of  justice  and
    fairness do not require that this matter be  adjourned  merely  on  the
    possibility that the appellant may obtain emergency funding to pay  for
    legal representation at some indeterminate time in the future".

12.  In reaching this decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  into
    account the fact that  the  lawyers  that  the  Appellant  proposed  to
    instruct had not attended the hearing or written  to  the  Tribunal  to
    explain  whether  her  application  for  funding  was  likely   to   be
    successful. However, this  was  in  keeping  with  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had explained that they were seeking  funding  so  that  they
    could represent her in the future.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  also
    found that the Appellant had left it to the last minute to obtain legal
    representation.

13.  In her Reply to an IAC Notice of Hearing, the Appellant had  said  that
    she had been in a relationship with Shaun Nobles for  three  years  and
    three months and engaged to him for three years.  She  also  said  that
    they planned to marry each other in  2019.  Furthermore,  at  the  Case
    Management Review Hearing, the Appellant informed  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kaler that she would be legally represented at  the  full  appeal
    hearing and that her partner had  changed  solicitors  for  her.   This
    hearing took place the Friday before Christmas 2018 and  the  Appellant
    remained and remains in detention.  She  was  directed  to  inform  the
    Tribunal of the name and address of  her  new  solicitors  as  soon  as
    possible.

14.  However, in the written statement that the Appellant prepared  for  her
    full appeal hearing and submitted on the morning of that  hearing,  she
    explained that, although she had reconciled with her partner whilst  in
    detention and he had visited her every week, he then started to subject
    her to coercive control again, as the hearing  date  approached.  As  a
    consequence,  she  decided  that  she  could  not  continue  with   the
    relationship. Then as she explained in her  statement,  "my  ex-partner
    left [her] deliberately without [legal] help just before the appeal".

15.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell did  not  take  this  evidence  into
    account but merely found in paragraph  2  of  his  decision  that  "the
    appellant  has  seemingly  made   little   effort   to   obtain   legal
    representation".

16.  Furthermore, it was not clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  fully
    understood the funding regime as it now applies to deportation appeals.
    He referred to the possibility of  the  Appellant  obtaining  emergency
    funding when the correct terminology was that  used  by  the  Appellant
    when she explained that she had found a lawyer's office, which was able
    to help her and had  submitted  an  application  for  Exceptional  Case
    Funding".

17.  In paragraph 2 of his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    noted that "the appellant had indicated that she would call three  male
    witnesses at this appeal hearing but there were  no  witnesses  at  the
    hearing". In the Reply to an IAC Notice of Hearing  she  had  explained
    that one of these three witnesses was her  partner  and  in  her  later
    statement she had explained that he was no longer  prepared  to  assist
    her.

18.  I have also reminded  myself  of  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284".

19.  In Nwaigwe, the Upper Tribunal also found  that  "as  a  general  rule,
    good reason will  have  to  be  demonstrated  in  order  to  secure  an
    adjournment". It appears to me that good  reasons  were  given  by  the
    Appellant. She was in detention and had relied  on  her  ex-partner  to
    instruct a solicitor on her behalf. He had not done so when she decided
    not to submit to his coercive behaviour.

20.  In her second ground of appeal it was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to adequate reasons  to  show  that  she  did
    constitute a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society  taking  into  account  her
    past conduct.  The nature of her offence potentially made her a  threat
    to others. However, the Appellant's one offence and  the  circumstances
    which led to her one caution arose in the context of  the  relationship
    that she had with her ex-partner.  In  paragraph  43  of  his  decision
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell referred to the Appellant's  violent
    behaviour and need to curb her drinking and the fact that she  had  not
    attended any courses about drinking whilst in prison.

21.  In paragraph 46 of his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mitchell
    mentioned in passing that the sentencing judge described her as someone
    who had been subjected to domestic  violence.   However,  he  makes  no
    mention of the Appellant's own evidence which  clearly  identifies  the
    coercive behaviour she was subjected to and which was the  context  for
    her criminal behaviour. In addition, the  criminal  judge's  sentencing
    remarks noted that it was his view that she had over a period  of  time
    been subjected to domestic violence which  was  quite  unspeakable  and
    wrong. This was clearly relevant to her "past conduct" and should  have
    been taken into account.

22.  I also agree with the Home Office Presenting Officer  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's finding that there was a  medium  risk  that  the
    Appellant would re-offend in the future and  a  medium  risk  that  she
    would pose a risk to the community was merely speculative. In addition,
    I agree with counsel that the finding in paragraph 62 of  his  decision
    that "in this case there is cogent evidence  that  the  appellant  does
    constitute a  genuine  threat  to  public  policy"  was  insufficiently
    reasoned.

23.  In paragraph 52 of this decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    noted that he had not been provided with any probation reports  or  any
    assessment by independent experts as regards the risk of the  appellant
    offending in the future.  The sentencing remarks also  advised  her  to
    curb her drinking but acknowledged that whilst  in  detention  she  had
    obtained certificates and was making efforts to address her behaviour.

24.  In  all  the  circumstances  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell did err in law in his decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell, Hodgkinson or Kaler.


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 11 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

