
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00503/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 December 2012 and 23 May 2013           |On 5 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                               derrick kinsasi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Byass, Counsel instructed by Lawrence
     Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    (Hearing on 17/12/12) Mr I Jarvis, Home Office
Presenting Officer
     (Hearing on 23/05/13) Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal  by  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  the  Democratic
    Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)  born  on  15  November  1991  against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against
    the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  20  July  2012,  to  make  a
    deportation order by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

Background

2.   There was no record of the appellant's lawful  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  He claimed that he and his brother entered the United Kingdom
    with an agent on 9 April 2002.  On 10  April  2002  they  attended  the
    Asylum Screening Unit and claimed asylum as unaccompanied  minors.   On
    12 July 2002, asylum was refused but the appellant and his brother were
    granted exceptional leave to remain until 10 October 2006.

3.   On 31  January  2005,  the  appellant  was  included  on  his  mother's
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  (ILR)  under  the  family
    exercise.  On 29 January 2005, the appellant, his siblings  and  mother
    were granted ILR in the United Kingdom.

4.   On 24 October 2011  at  Wood  Green  Crown  Court,  the  appellant  was
    convicted of burglary and  theft  and  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment at a Young Offenders Institution.  He did not  appeal  the
    conviction or sentence.

5.    The  appellant's  representations  were  assessed  in  line  with  the
    "Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules" that came into force on
    9 July 2012.

6.   In sentencing the appellant, His Honour Judge S Lyons  noted  that  the
    appellant had pleaded guilty to a count of burglary which took place in
    the course of the second day of widespread disturbances in London.   He
    noted that the appellant, with a number of others, "were engaged in the
    violent entry to the back of a store  containing  high  value  portable
    desirable items.  There was one group breaking in the  front  of  Comet
    Store while you  and  others  were  at  the  back.   All  of  this  you
    admitted".

7.   The judge continued inter alia:

         "You were arrested and pleaded guilty after having admitted to  the
         police your part in this particular matter.


         I am going to treat you as being of previous good character and you
         are nineteen years old.


         For three days the citizens of London found it difficult to believe
         they were actually in London or in England as widespread  disorder,
         burglary, looting and robbery took place...


         Had you gone to trial on this matter sentences is in the region  of
         two and  a  half  to  three  and  a  half  years  would  have  been
         contemplated.  Taking into account your age and your previous  good
         character, the sentence at the very bottom end of that range of two
         and a half years would have been appropriate.   I  then  take  into
         account your very early plea of guilty.  One third  off  will  take
         you down to twenty months and because you admitted  your  guilt  to
         the police and saved everyone an enormous  amount  of  time,  I  am
         reducing your sentence again to one of eighteen  months'  detention
         in a Youth Offender Institute".


8.   By letter dated 18 November 2011 the appellant was  informed,  that  in
    the light of his conviction, he was liable  to  deportation  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and might be subject to automatic  deportation  in
    accordance with Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 unless he fell
    within one of the exceptions set out in Section 33.  This would include
    the  contention  that  the  appellant's  removal  in  pursuance  of   a
    deportation would breach  his  Convention  rights  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

9.   In the event, the appellant  asserted  that  to  deport  him  from  the
    United Kingdom would indeed be a breach of his rights under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

10.  In the respondent's subsequent Notice of Decision it  was  pointed  out
    that paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules stated as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
              contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
              Rights Convention and


              (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of
                  imprisonment of at least 4 years;


              (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because they had  been  convicted  of  an
                  offence for which they had been sentenced to a period  of
                  imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12  month;
                  or


              (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good because, in the view of the Secretary  of
                  State, their offending caused serious harm or they are  a
                  persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for
                  the law."

11.  The Secretary of State considered that in  the  appellant's  particular
    circumstances, paragraph 398(b) applied in  his  case  because  he  was
    sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.  It  was  in  that  context
    that the appellant's Article 8 rights were considered.

12.  It was the view of the Secretary of State that although  the  appellant
    had family ties in the United Kingdom with his mother and siblings  and
    wider family members, the relationship between an adult  applicant  and
    their mother, siblings and wider family, did not constitute family life
    for the purposes of Article 8, without evidence of further elements  of
    dependency  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.   The  appellant  had  not
    provided any such evidence to demonstrate that he was dependent on them
    or vice-versa.

13.  It was noted that the appellant did not have a partner or any  children
    in the United Kingdom.  It was therefore concluded that  the  appellant
    had not  established  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules did not apply to his case.

14.  The Secretary of State was mindful that the provisions of 399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules applied by way of the provisions of paragraph  398(b)
    that  were  applicable.   It  was  concluded  that  the  provisions  of
    paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not  apply  to   the
    appellant's case  because  it  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  lived
    continuously in the UK for at  least  twenty  years/half  of  his  life
    immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting
    any period in prison) because he  had  been  resident  in  the  UK  for
    approximately ten years.  Although the appellant was 21 years  of  age,
    the time he had spent in prison detracted from his length  of  ordinary
    residence in the United Kingdom and further, it was not  accepted  that
    he had no ties to his country of origin,  the  DRC,  to  which  it  was
    intended to deport him, because he spoke the language of  that  country
    and was aware of the  cultures  and  traditions  due  to  spending  his
    formative years in the DRC.

15.  Having considered the factors in the appellant's  case,  the  Secretary
    of State did not accept that the  appellant's  right  to  private  life
    outweighed the public interest in seeing him deported and therefore his
    deportation would not amount to a breach of his rights under Article  8
    of the ECHR.

16.  Whilst account was  taken  that  the  evidence  that  showed  that  the
    appellant had attended secondary school and college in the UK,  it  was
    considered that whilst he may have  built  relationships  with  friends
    during that time, adult friends often maintained their relationships at
    great distance both within and between countries, using modern channels
    of communication, and there was no evidence to  suggest  the  appellant
    would be unable to maintain contact with any friends in the UK were  he
    to be deported.

"Exceptional Circumstances"

17.  The Secretary  of  State  proceeded  to  consider  whether  there  were
    exceptional factors about the appellant's case that would  still  cause
    his deportation to be a breach of Article 8.  The  Secretary  of  State
    concluded on the evidence available that there was nothing  exceptional
    about the appellant's case.

18.  Although he had been resident in the UK since  2002,  no  evidence  had
    been provided of his being engaged in employment or owning any property
    in the UK.  Neither was there any evidence of any  financial  standing.
    It was considered that the skills and academic qualifications that  the
    appellant had acquired could be utilised in the DRC if he  were  to  be
    deported there.  It was  not  considered  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to be able to readjust to life in the DRC.

19.  Account was taken of the appellant's representations of May  2012  when
    he claimed that he was financially dependent on his mother, but it  was
    considered that financial support  could  continue  in  the  DRC  where
    monies  could  be  sent  through  money  transfers  or  other   banking
    facilities.

20.  The appellant's claim to have no family left in the DRC and nothing  to
    go back to, was considered, but the Secretary of  State  repeated  that
    the appellant having spent his formative years in the DRC,  meant  that
    he would have no difficulty speaking the language or be estranged  from
    the culture of his country  of  origin.   Further,  the  appellant  had
    failed to provide any evidence to substantiate his claim of  having  no
    relatives left in DRC.  As the appellant was a healthy  adult  who  had
    acquired skills in the  UK,  it  was  considered  not  unreasonable  to
    expect, that he should be able to re-establish and support himself upon
    his return to the DRC.

21.  It was further considered that it would  be  open  to  the  appellant's
    mother and siblings to visit him in the DRC, should they wish to do  so
    or otherwise continue their relationships with the appellant  by  using
    modern means of communication.

22.  These factors  were  not  considered  to  be  exceptional  because  the
    appellant had not met the criteria in terms of the family/private  life
    test and his criminal activity.

23.  It was therefore believed that the appellant's  deportation  would  not
    be in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR and the Human Rights Act 1998.

24.  It was pointed out to the  appellant  that  his  deportation  would  be
    pursued under paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules, as  he  was  a
    foreign  national  offender  who  was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment, because his case did not fall into any exception  of  the
    Immigration Rules and because his case met the criteria for deportation
    under the UK Borders Act 2007.

The Finding of the First-tier Tribunal

25.  The Tribunal did not find either the appellant  or  his  mother  to  be
    credible  witnesses.   They  proceeded  to  set   out   a   series   of
    discrepancies identified within the witnesss' respective evidence.

26.  The Tribunal noted that the appellant left  the  DRC  when  he  was  10
    years old.  His mother did not speak very much English.  He  had  lived
    with her until he was imprisoned.  Although  the  appellant  now  spoke
    English fluently, the Tribunal did not  accept  his  evidence  that  he
    spoke only 25% Lingala.  It was his first language that he  still  used
    at home with his mother.

27.  The Tribunal therefore found that  the  appellant  was  minimising  his
    abilities in Lingala and that if he was deported to the  DRC  he  would
    have little difficulty communicating.

28.  The Tribunal also noted that the appellant's  claim  to  have  no  real
    recollection of the DRC, was lacking in credibility bearing in mind  he
    was 10 years old when he left that country.  It was considered that the
    appellant's evidence in this regard  "was  a  further  attempt  by  the
    appellant to minimise his knowledge of the DRC and his  links  to  that
    country".

29.  The Tribunal found as a fact that the appellant did have some  extended
    family in the DRC.

30.  The Tribunal took account of the judge's sentencing remarks.

31.  The Tribunal pointed out, that whilst they had taken into account  what
    they had been told about the appellant's  younger  brother's  offending
    and the outcome of his deportation appeal, they intended to  deal  with
    this appellant's appeal on its own particular merit.   In  that  regard
    the Tribunal were of the  view  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    brother's appeal was successful, did  not  mean  that  the  appellant's
    appeal would necessarily succeed.  There was, said  the  Tribunal,  "an
    important distinction between the two appeals in that this appellant is
    some 2 years older than his brother".

32.  In terms of Article 8, the Tribunal reminded  themselves  of  the  five
    stage step-by-step process identified by Lord Bingham in Razgar.

33.   The  Tribunal  considered   the   evidence   about   the   appellant's
    relationship with his mother and siblings and in  so  doing  took  into
    account the fact that the appellant was  now  20  years  old.   It  was
    appreciated that since the appellant's arrival in the UK, he had always
    lived with his mother, save at the time since his imprisonment.

34.  By reference to relevant case law, the panel accepted that family  life
    did not cease when a  child  attained  the  age  of  18  and  that  the
    appellant had family with his mother and with his  siblings,  "although
    that family life has been  disrupted  by  the  detention  of  both  the
    appellant and his younger brother.  As a result of his sentence he  has
    been separated from his two younger siblings since October 2011".

35.  The panel appreciated that the deportation of the appellant would  have
    consequences of sufficient severity as to engage Article 8.

36.  The panel found that the decision to deport the  appellant  was  lawful
    and in pursuit of a legitimate aim, namely the protection of the public
    from those who had committed serious criminal offences.

37.  The panel proceeded to consider the proportionality of the decision  to
    deport the Appellant and in so doing made reference  to  relevant  case
    law guidance.

38.  At paragraphs 45 and 46 of the determination it was stated that:

         "45. The question for us  is  whether  the  interference  with  the
             family life of the  Appellant  is  outweighed  by  the  public
             interest.


           46.    We take into account that we must consider the  impact  of
             an adverse decision upon other members of the  family  in  the
             United  Kingdom.   We  also  consider  the  interest  of   the
             Appellant's siblings."


 39. It was noted that the Appellant's Counsel Mr Byass (who  also  appeared
    before me) did not  make  any  submissions  on  the  interests  of  the
    children of the family, evidence was adduced on the  closeness  of  the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  younger  siblings  and  of  their
    feelings about him and the possible separation.  It was recognised that
    the interest of the children were  a  primary  consideration.   However
    their primary carer was their  mother.   It  was  considered  that  the
    deportation of the Appellant would not affect his mother's care  or  be
    contrary to the interests of the two  younger  children,  save  to  the
    limited extent they would miss someone who had been part of the family.
     Account was taken of the considerable age gap  between  the  Appellant
    and the younger children and the likelihood that  the  Appellant  would
    have left the family home at some time, either to go to  university  or
    to establish himself as an independent adult.  Account was  also  taken
    of the fact that the Appellant was already separated from  the  younger
    children as  a  result  of  his  sentence  and  subsequent  immigration
    detention.

40.  The panel pointed out that having regard to  all  those  factors,  they
    did not find that the deportation of the Appellant would be contrary to
    the interests of his younger siblings.

41.  Insofar as the Appellant's younger brother was concerned,  he  was  now
    over 18.  Submissions addressed to the panel on the importance of  this
    relationship to the Appellant were borne in mind.  Account was taken of
    the fact, that the brothers were both adults who had been separated  by
    their offending and consequent custodial sentences.  It was noted  that
    if the Appellant's younger brother  reoffended  and  was  sentenced  to
    twelve months or more  there  was  a  risk  that  he  would  also  face
    deportation.

42.  At paragraph 15 of their determination, the  panel  pointed  out,  that
    they had considered the case law to which Mr Byass had  referred  them,
    but noted that all those cases were decided before the  recent  changes
    to the Immigration Rules.

43.  At paragraph 51 of their determination,  the  panel  pointed  out  that
    they based their assessment of proportionality on  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was a citizen of the DRC aged 20 who had lived in the  United
    Kingdom since he was 10.  They had  rejected  his  claim  that  he  had
    little memory of the DRC.  They were satisfied that the Appellant spoke
    Lingala sufficiently well to be able to communicate with his mother and
    found on a balance of probability that he had extended  family  in  the
    DRC.

44.  The panel proceeded to consider Mr Byass' written  submissions  on  the
    Maslov criteria.

45.  In that regard, the panel observed that  the  Appellant's  offence  was
    serious as reflected in the Judge's sentencing remarks.  The panel were
    mindful of the length of the Appellant's stay in the United Kingdom but
    did not accept that as submitted, the Appellant had been  in  a  loving
    and supportive relationship  with  his  family  having  regard  to  his
    offence and resulting imprisonment and separation from them.

46.  The panel took account of the Appellant's early plea of guilty and  his
    expressions of regret and statement about his  determination  to  avoid
    offending in the future.  They also took account of the letter  written
    by the Appellant to the Respondent in that regard.   Whilst  the  panel
    accepted that the Appellant's existing ties to  the  UK  were  stronger
    than his existing ties to the DRC, they found that he  did  have  links
    with that country through his family and his language.

47.  Insofar as the public interest was  concerned,  the  panel  noted  that
    there was a presumption that where a person was liable to be  deported,
    he would be deported.  They continued at paragraph 53:

         "53. The public is entitled to expect that an offender will not  be
             permitted to remain in the United Kingdom having committed  an
             offence of this gravity unless paragraph 399 or 399A apply  or
             there  are  exceptional  circumstances.    Neither   paragraph
             applies in this case.  As was said in Masih [2012] UKUT 00046,
             the public  interest  in  the  removal  of  foreign  criminals
             concerns the prevention of future offending and the  deterring
             of others from committing serious offences."

48.  The panel considered that the reasoning in Masih was "to  some  extent,
    reflected in the Rules which had been issued since that decision."   It
    was noted that paragraph 399A made provision for a  case  in  which  an
    offender aged  less  than  25  had  spent  at  least  half  his  living
    continuously in the United Kingdom and had no ties to  his  country  of
    origin.  It was noted that in Masih the offender was 24 and  had  spent
    fourteen of those years in the UK.  Further that the Tribunal in  Masih
    stated that in such a  case  very  serious  reasons  were  required  to
    justify expulsion.

49.  The panel continued by concluding at paragraph 54 as follows:

         "54. Whilst we accept that the deportation of someone  age  20  who
             had lived in the United Kingdom for almost half his life is  a
             serious step, we must take into account the new Rules, and  we
             are unable to describe the circumstances which weigh in favour
             of the Appellant as amounting  to  exceptional  circumstances.
             In any event, serious reasons for taking such a step exist  by
             reference to the gravity of the offence.   We  find  therefore
             that the interference with  the  Appellant's  family  life  is
             outweighed by the public interest."

50.  The panel proceeded to dismiss the appeal.

The Proceedings

51.  The Appellant successfully sought permission to  appeal  that  decision
    and in granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler
    noted that the grounds in support of that  application  submitted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its assessment under Article  8
    by directing itself that it would be  disproportionate  to  deport  the
    Appellant only if there were exceptional circumstances; and in applying
    paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

52.  Judge Pooler considered  it  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  misdirected
    itself in law in relation  to  Article  8  by  requiring  there  to  be
    exceptional circumstances in the Appellant's favour and in that  regard
    what the First-tier Tribunal had to say at paragraph 54 (see above) was
    noted.

53.  Judge Pooler further observed that the grounds argued  that  paragraphs
    399 and 399A were contrary to Article 8.  He continued:

         "It would however be appropriate for the Tribunal to  consider  the
         Immigration  Rules  as  an  indication  of  where  the   Respondent
         considers  the  public  interest  to  lie.    Nevertheless,   since
         permission is to be granted all grounds may be argued".

54.  Directions were subsequently issued that the parties should appear  for
    hearing on  the  basis  that  it  would  be  confined  to  whether  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for  legal
    error and, if so, whether the decision in the appeal  could  be  remade
    without having to hear oral evidence.

55.  Thus the appeal came before me on 17th  December  2012  when  my  first
    task was to determine  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law that might otherwise have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

56.  Immediately prior to that  hearing,  the  Tribunal  received  from  the
    Appellant's solicitors two  bundles  of  documents,  Part  A  of  which
    included documents relating  to  the  application  for  permission  and
    evidence previously presented before the First-tier Tribunal.  Bundle B
    contained a series of case law authorities that included  the  guidance
    of the Tribunal in MF (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393
    (IAC).  This was a decision  heard  on  18  September  2012,  that  was
    promulgated on 25 September 2012 and thus post-dated the  determination
    in the present case  However, I would point out that  Judges  interpret
    existing legal principles.  They reveal the law.  They  do  not  do  so
    prospectively.   Therefore,  if  for  example,   a   First-tier   Judge
    misunderstands those legal  principles,  then  notwithstanding  that  a
    leading case on the issue post-dates the determination, it would  still
    amount to an error on a point  of  law  that  may  well  in  the  given
    circumstances, be considered to have been material to  the  outcome  of
    that appeal.

57.  I further took account of the Respondent's response to the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24 dated 24 October  2012  that  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had correctly applied the  Immigration  Rules
    to the Appellant's case.  That it was only in exceptional circumstances
    that paragraphs 399 or 399A would not apply.  In the Appellant's  case,
    the Judge had concluded that  the  Appellant  was  not  in  exceptional
    circumstances.  That finding was open to him on the established  facts.
    The Judge had properly  taken  into  account  the  seriousness  of  the
    offence in  considering  whether  deportation  was  a  disproportionate
    interference.

58.  It was submitted that the European Court in Maslov  did  not  have  the
    benefit of considering Article 8  in  the  light  of  the  Respondent's
    policy  as  encapsulated  in  the  Immigration  Rules.    Those   Rules
    represented the public interest  as  determined  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It was argued that in any event, the Appellant fell outside the
    Maslov criteria as he had spent  less  than  half  his  pre-adult  life
    lawfully in the United Kingdom.

59.  It was contended that the grounds of challenge,  amounted  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with findings open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the evidence before them.

60.  Before me, Mr Byass advanced two grounds of  challenge.   Firstly  that
    the guidance in MF came into play, from which it was apparent that  the
    new Immigration Rules did not provide a complete code for Article 8  as
    a result of which the Tribunal had fallen into error  in  a  number  of
    ways.  For example, they had applied an exceptionality test and nothing
    more, when considering the proportionality of the Appellant's  removal.
    Further, they had  failed  to  adequately  if  at  all,  explain  their
    conclusion that the Appellant's particular  circumstances  demonstrated
    very serious reasons to justify his deportation.

61.  There was no indication within the determination  that  the  panel  had
    considered Article 8 outside of the Rules.

62.  Mr Jarvis submitted inter alia, that the  new  Immigration  Rules  were
    extremely important to a consideration of  proportionality  outside  of
    the Rules.   He  maintained  that  the  Appellant's  challenge  to  the
    determination, failed to take proper account of the  panel's  reasoning
    starting with their  findings  of  fact  from  paragraph  34  of  their
    determination.

63.  Mr Jarvis continued that it was accepted that  the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the new Rules and therefore those findings had
    to be read in to the panel's conclusion and could not be ignored.

64.  Mr Jarvis  maintained  that  the  panel  had  conducted  a  very  close
    scrutiny of the facts and made findings for and against  the  Appellant
    in terms of his credibility.

65.  They had taken account of the Judge's sentencing  remarks  against  the
    backdrop of the aggravating context of the riot made  in  this  offence
    akin to violent disorder.  The panel had taken careful account  of  the
    Maslov criteria that they applied  against  the  backdrop  against  the
    Appellant's particular circumstances. Mr Jarvis  maintained  that  this
    was very important, as the panel had reached their consideration on two
    footings, namely exceptionality  required  by  the  Rules  and  in  the
    alternative, their application of the Appellant's circumstances to  the
    guidance as found in both Masih and Maslov.  Either way,  submitted  Mr
    Jarvis, the panel were entitled to conclude that in the light of  their
    findings, the Appellant's deportation was justified.

66.  Mr Byass in response submitted that the panel had failed to  carry  out
    a two stage assessment as MF made clear and to that extent  alone,  the
    panel's proportionality assessment was clearly flawed.

67.  I reserved my decision but in so doing  ascertained  from  the  parties
    that in the event that I decided that the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal indeed disclosed errors  on  a  point  of  law  that  the
    appropriate course would be to  have  a  resumed  hearing  reserved  to
    myself on the basis of submissions only.



Assessment

68.  I concluded that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  indeed
    disclosed errors on a point of law that were material to the outcome of
    the appeal.

69.  The error that I in particular  identified  and  considered  sufficient
    for this purpose (see EK v ECO (Columbia) [2006] EWCA Civ 926)  related
    to the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of  the  proportionality  of
    the appellant's removal in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR  which  on  a
    careful consideration  of  the  determination  satisfied  me  that  the
    panel's approach to the proportionality of the appellant's removal  was
    essentially predicated upon a consideration of whether there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's particular situation  that
    would outweigh the public interest in deportation  in  accordance  with
    the provisions of paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules.

70.  It was apparent to me, that there was nothing in the  determination  to
    suggest, that the panel had  undertaken  a  separate  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  In such circumstances and in the light of
    the guidance in MF, I was satisfied that the panel had materially erred
    in law.

71.  In that regard I was in particular mindful of  paragraphs  (vi),  (vii)
    and (viii) of the head note to MF in which the following is stated:


          "(vi)   Even if a decision to refuse an Article 8 claim under  the
             new Rules is found to be correct, Judges must  still  consider
             whether the decision is in compliance with  a  person's  human
             rights under s.6 of the Human Rights Act (see s.84(i)(c),  (g)
             and (e) and s.86(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act) and, in automatic
             deportation cases,  where  removal  would  breach  a  person's
             Convention rights (s.33(2) UK Borders Act  2007).   Thus,   in
             the context of deportation and removal case, the  need  for  a
             two stage approach in most Article 8 cases remains  imperative
             because the new Rules do not encapsulate the guidance given in
             Maslov v Austria at App number 1683/03 [2008] ECHR 546,  which
             has been endorsed by the higher courts.


         (vii)    When considering Article 8 in the context of an  Appellant
             who fails under the new Rules, it will  remain  the  case,  as
             before, that 'exceptional circumstances' is not to be regarded
             as a legal  test  and  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is  to  be
             regarded as an incorrect criterion.


         (viii)   However, as a result of the introduction of the new Rules,
             consideration by Judges of Article 8 outside the Rules must be
             informed by the greatest specificity which they  give  to  the
             importance the Secretary  of  State  attaches  to  the  public
             interest.  For example, the new Rules set  out  thresholds  of
             criminality by reference to terms  of  imprisonment,  so  that
             Article 8 private life claims can only  succeed  if  they  not
             only have certain periods of residence but can also show their
             criminality has fallen below these thresholds".

72.  It was abundantly clear to me, that the First-tier Tribunal had  simply
    failed to conduct that necessary two stage approach and  to  appreciate
    that whilst in the present case, the Appellant  failed  under  the  new
    Rules,  that  in  considering  his  Article  8   appeal,   'exceptional
    circumstances' was not to be regarded as a  legal  test.   It  followed
    that the First-tier Tribunal's Article  8  findings  in  terms  of  the
    proportionality of the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  to
    the DRC was tainted by error of  law  such  that  their  findings  from
    paragraphs 40 to 54 of the determination could not be preserved.

73.  I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  directed
    that there be a resumed hearing reserved to  myself  in  terms  of  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR  for  the  purposes  of
    making a fresh decision.

 74.   Immediately prior to the resumed hearing on 23 May 2013 the  Tribunal
    received from the appellant's solicitors two bundles of documents.  The
    first bundle comprised the evidence that was indeed before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It also included Mr Byass's skeleton argument dated  23
    October 2012 that I had indeed already considered prior to the Error of
    Law hearing.

75.  The second bundle comprised various case law authorities that  included
    Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC), in relation  to
    which it would be appropriate were I to set out below the head note  to
    that decision as follows:

         "1.  In cases to which the new Immigration Rules introduced as from
             9 July 2012 by HC194 apply, judges  should  proceed  by  first
             considering whether a claimant is able to  benefit  under  the
             applicable provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  designed  to
             address Article 8 claims.  Where the claimant  does  not  meet
             the requirements of the Rules it will be necessary to go on to
             make  an  assessment  of  Article  8  applying  the   criteria
             established by law.  The Upper Tribunal's  observation  in  MF
             (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] 00393 (IAC) to the same
             effect is endorsed.


         2.   The procedure adopted in relation to the introduction  of  the
             new Rules provided a  weak  form  of  Parliamentary  scrutiny;
             Parliament has  not  altered  the  legal  duty  of  the  judge
             determining appeals to decide on proportionality  for  himself
             or herself.


         3.   There can be no presumption that the Rules  will  normally  be
             conclusive of  the  Article  8  assessment  or  that  a  fact-
             sensitive inquiry is normally not needed.  The  more  the  new
             Rules restrict otherwise relevant and  weighty  considerations
             from being taken into account, the less regard will be had  to
             them in the assessment of proportionality.


         4.   When considering whether a decision is in accordance with  the
             law, it has been authoritatively  established  by  the  higher
             courts  that  the  test  to  be  applied  is  not  exceptional
             circumstances or insurmountable obstacles.


         5.   The UKBA continues to accept that EU law  prevents  the  state
             requiring an EU law citizen from leaving the  United  Kingdom,
             although contends  with  good  reason,  that  this  is  to  be
             distinguished from a  case  where  an  independent  adult  can
             choose between continued residence in the  United  Kingdom  or
             continued cohabitation abroad."


76.  At the outset of the resumed hearing I agreed with  the  parties,  that
    on reflection,  paragraphs  40  to  44  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination could be preserved and which are set out below below:

         "40. We have  considered  the  five  stage  step  by  step  process
             identified by Lord Bingham in Razgar.  We  take  into  account
             each claim under Article 8 is  fact  sensitive  and  that  the
             burden of proving the facts on which he relies  rests  on  the
             appellant.


         41.  We started by considering the evidence about  the  appellant's
             relationship with his mother and his siblings.  We  take  into
             account that the appellant is  now  20  years  old.   However,
             since his arrival in the United Kingdom  he  has  always  been
             with his mother, save for the  time  since  his  imprisonment.
             Having regard to the case of HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA  Civ  583
             we accept that family life does not cease when a child attains
             the age of 18 and we accept that the appellant has family life
             with his mother and with his  siblings  although  that  family
             life has been disrupted by the detention of both the appellant
             and his younger brother's.  As a result of his sentence he has
             been separated from his two  younger  siblings  since  October
             2011.


         42.  The deportation of the appellant  will  have  consequences  of
             sufficient severity as to engage Article 8.


         43.  We find that the decision to deport the  appellant  is  lawful
             and is in pursuit of a legitimate aim, namely  the  protection
             of the public from those who have committed  serious  criminal
             offences.


         44.  We went on to consider the proportionality of the decision  to
             deport.  In considering proportionality  we  have  taken  into
             account the case of Miao v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2006] EWCA Civ 75 in which Sedley LJ paragraph  12
             said this:


                  'The  assessment  of  proportionality  is  not  a   simple
                  weighing of two cases against each other.  It arises  only
                  when  the  Claimant  has  established  that  he  enjoys  a
                  protected right which is  threatened  with  violation;  at
                  that point the burden shifts to the State  to  prove  that
                  the violation is nevertheless justified.  To do  this  the
                  State must show not only that the proposed step is  lawful
                  but  that  its  objective  is  sufficiently  important  to
                  justify limiting a basic right, but that  it  is  sensibly
                  directed to that objective; and that it  does  not  impair
                  the right more than  is  necessary.   The  last  of  these
                  criteria commonly requires an appraisal  of  the  relative
                  importance of the State's objective and the impact of  the
                  measure on the individual'."

77.  Mr Byass confirmed to me that the appellant's brother's appeal  against
    deportation (in relation to which I was informed he was convicted of an
    offence of greater seriousness than that of the  appellant  before  me)
    had been allowed in a determination promulgated on 1 August 2012.

78.  Ms Tanner accepted  that  if  the  appellant's  Article  8  appeal  was
    allowed,  it  would  follow  that  the  appellant's  former  grant   of
    Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  would  be   in
    consequence, reinstated.

79.  Having  heard  the  parties'  respective  submissions,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

Assessment

80.   Having  most  carefully  considered  the  evidence  in  its   totality
    including the parties' most helpful submissions I have  concluded  that
    the appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal must be allowed.

81.  No doubt acting on instructions, Ms Tanner referred me to the  case  of
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  I am not sure, with  great  respect  to
    her as to why, because I find that it  does  not  help  me.   It  is  a
    decision of the Administrative Court and therefore not binding  on  me.
    In Nagre, the Administrative Court approved the guidance of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Izuazu and the two stage approach recommended by the  Upper
    Tribunal in MF. Sales J added the proviso that it would not  always  be
    necessary to move on  to  the  second  stage  and  consider  Article  8
    proportionality apart from the provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Where the Rules and the learning on Article  8  were  in  harmony,  the
    answer given by the Rules  might  render  further  inquiry  unnecessary
    unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances.   In  that  case   the
    difference  between  the  Rules  and  the  Strasbourg  principles   was
    marginal.  In my experience, there will only be a very few cases  where
    this can properly be said and it is likely  to  be  confined  to  those
    cases where the Rules recognise that the removal would be  contrary  to
    the person's rights under Article 8. Save for those unlikely cases, the
    appellant's rights will have to be considered in  accordance  with  the
    Human Rights Act  and  that  will  almost  always  involve  a  separate
    consideration.

82.  Indeed the Upper Tribunal in a decision chaired by  the  President,  in
    Green (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC) observed that  it
    followed from Izuazu and MF and the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060  (IAC)  that
    judges hearing appeals against decisions made after 9 July 2012  should
    consider how the Immigration Rules would apply and  make  any  relevant
    findings in that context, before considering the wider  application  of
    Article 8 and the jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal, and  the  Higher
    Courts, and either decide whether there  are  exceptional  factors  not
    contemplated by the Rules or that the decision is an unlawful  one  and
    is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim.   In  Green,  the  Tribunal
    considered that pending any further guidance from the Court of  Appeal,
    judges of both Chambers should apply the principles set out in  Izuazu.



83.  The Tribunal in Green repeated that paragraph 398  of  the  Immigration
    Rules make  no  reference  to  persons  who  had  committed  crimes  as
    juveniles.  By contrast, the decision of the Grand  Chamber  in  Maslov
    was clear that "when assessing the nature and the  seriousness  of  the
    offences committed by an applicant, it has to  be  taken  into  account
    whether he or she committed them as a juvenile or as an adult".

84.  It was held that  as  explained  in  Izuazu  and  Ogundimu,  where  the
    Immigration Rules did not  reflect  the  established  principles  under
    human rights law, it was the law as laid down  in  primary  legislation
    that must be followed.

85.  I have of course applied those principles against the backdrop  of  the
    appellant's particular circumstances.

86.  In that regard there are  key  facts  that  are  accepted  between  the
    parties.  The appellant is 21 years of age.  He  was  a  juvenile  when
    convicted and sentenced.  He came here from the DRC aged 10 and has now
    been in the United Kingdom for more than half of his life.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that he still enjoyed family life with  his  mother
    and two younger siblings who are now aged 7 and 3  years  respectively,
    both born here in the United Kingdom.  They found as a  fact  that  the
    appellant had some ties with relatives in the DRC but  no  higher  than
    some extended family members, but the appellant has had no contact with
    them.

87.   It  is  further  apparent   on   reading   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    determination and in terms  of  their  preserved  findings,  that  they
    concluded that the appellant's existing ties to the United Kingdom were
    stronger than those with the DRC, an observation that Mr  Byass  before
    me aptly described as a "simple matter of commonsense".

88.  It was accepted that the appellant  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully for almost .the whole of his stay. He came  here  on  9  April
    2002 and claimed asylum the following  day  aged  10  and  was  granted
    extended leave to remain and from that, ILR.  It  follows  that  he  is
    therefore a person lawfully in the United Kingdom throughout his period
    of residence which is a factor that is clearly relevant to the issue of
    proportionality.

89.  I am mindful  that  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
    burglary as  part  of  the  London  Riots  in  August  2011.  This  was
    undeniably a unique event and conduct that properly was  considered  by
    the courts to go beyond the normal boundaries of criminality  and  thus
    attached higher sentences.

90.  I am mindful in that context, of Mr  Byass's  submission  that  if  the
    appellant's first offence of burglary had been outside the  context  of
    the London Riots he would likely  have  received  a  far  more  lenient
    sentence.  Nonetheless the appellant had accepted that the  context  in
    which he was sentenced was important.

91.  I am mindful that  the  judge  in  his  sentencing  remarks  took  into
    account, in addition to the backdrop of  the  London  riots,  that  the
    appellant had pleaded guilty at a very  early  stage.   He  had  handed
    himself in.  He had admitted his guilt to the police and had maintained
    his guilt throughout.  His very  early  acceptance  of  his  wrongdoing
    resulted in the judge giving him credit and of  course  the  sentencing
    judge  was  mindful  that  the  appellant  had  otherwise  no  previous
    convictions and he was treated as a person of previous good  character.
    That resulted in a sentence of eighteen months' imprisonment.

92.  I have had regard to the NOMS Report that concludes  that  future  risk
    of serious harm was "low".  It is said that the index offence "does not
    denote high risk of harm features" and advises that "it  was  committed
    within the context of the rioting and looting that took place in London
    in 2011".  The report records that whilst  an  aggravating  feature  of
    this offence was that which  had  occurred  in  the  midst  of  lawless
    behaviour by rioters and looters, the  appellant's  personal  behaviour
    appeared to be tempered the fact that he acted out of character and co-
    operated fully with the police and the Courts.  The  report  recognises
    that there was no evidence of any previous  anti-social  discriminatory
    attitudes of behaviour on the part of this appellant.  It  was  further
    noted the appellant attended Enfield College where he had  studied  for
    the past four years and that he was in the second and final year  of  a
    Level 3 course on Art and Design and planned to read Graphic Design  at
    university.  I have noted the Offender Group Reconviction Scale  (OGRS)
    that estimates the probability that offenders with a given  history  of
    offending will be reconvicted for any  recordable  offence  within  two
    years of sentence.  It is estimated that in the appellant's case, he is
    in the banding category of medium within the first two years.   However
    this relates to the period  "within  two  years  of  sentence".   I  am
    mindful in that regard that the appellant has already been  in  custody
    for twenty months since that sentence was imposed.  I also observe that
    the OGRS scale does not measure the severity of predicted  reoffending.
    The appellant has only positive entries as for his time in prison.

93.  The reference in the NOMS Report as to friction  with  the  appellant's
    mother at home was clarified to me  by  Mr  Byass  and  I  accept  that
    observation in its context.  The appellant had breached bail which  had
    been subject of a curfew in that  he  had  left  his  home  due  to  an
    argument.  However, immediately upon  leaving  home  he  had  contacted
    police that he was living at an alternative address and he provided the
    police with details of that address and indeed  reported  back  to  the
    police the following morning.  This was  not  an  explanation  that  in
    fairness was challenged by Ms Tanner but I would agree  with  Mr  Byass
    that such a response was markedly mature  in  letting  the  authorities
    know what the appellant had done in circumstances where  arguably  they
    would not otherwise have been aware that there had  been  such  breach.
    The police indeed clearly were  satisfied  and  they  took  no  further
    steps.

 94.   It was clear that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules in that he  had  not  spent  his
    life in the UK immediately preceding the  immigration  decision  for  a
    requisite period,  he  was  in  fact  just  three  months  short.   The
    consequence is that in terms of the Rules the  appellant  had  to  show
    "exceptional circumstances".

 95.   I am mindful that  whilst  the  circumstances  of  the  offence  were
    serious it was not a case in consequence  of  the  mitigating  features
    that the sentencing judge accepted, that resulted in a lengthy sentence
    but I am of course  mindful  that  the  sentence  imposed  was  in  the
    particular context of the London riots.  This is an appellant  who  had
    never been convicted of offences in the past.  He had  been  until  his
    conviction, a young man of previous good character.  I am also aware of
    the evidence before me that in addition to the mitigating  factors  the
    sentencing judge  recognised,  there  has,  since  the  sentence,  been
    evidence of positive  conduct  and  clear  expressions  of  significant
    remorse for the appellant's  involvement  in  this  offence.   Such  is
    apparent from his written statement (see F2 of  the  Tribunal  bundle).
    In circumstances when he was  not  represented,  he  expressed  remorse
    inter alia in the following terms:

         "I know what I did it was wrong  and  I  have  been  given  maximum
         sentence for my crime and this is my first time  breaking  the  law
         and I am sorry for that.   I  promised  myself  I  would  never  do
         anything like that again as long as I am still  alive...   I  don't
         have no one (in the DRC) there is no family to go back to.  I got a
         good life here - one more year till I go to university... I got  my
         mum three brothers and little sister.  Prison aint a place  for  me
         to be and I never come back again.  I'm trying to keep my head down
         doing education and get help to sort out my bad habit so when I get
         back out there I know what to do to stay keep out of trouble and is
         going well for me."


96.  The appellant has spent more than  half  of  his  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom he has been here since the age of 10.  The consequence  of  his
    removal to the DRC would amount to a  splitting  of  the  family  unit.
    There is no suggestion on the part of the  respondent  that  the  whole
    family could relocate to the DRC.

97.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal refer to "some"  ties  but  not
    strong ties.  I am mindful that in contrast, this is an  appellant  who
    has strong ties in the United Kingdom having come here at the age of 10
    following circumstances in which his father was killed.

98.  I am mindful that the appellant's private life  is  reflected  in  many
    ways within the guidance in Maslov.

99.  This appellant's criminal activity is in  the  context  of  the  London
    riots and it is established that the particularly repugnant  nature  of
    riots and this kind of public disorder must attract condign punishment.
     However I would repeat that it is plain from  the  judge's  sentencing
    remarks in the present case, that the  condign  punishment  appropriate
    was much diminished by  reason  of  the  responsibility  the  appellant
    showed after he had committed the offence, coupled with the  fact  that
    this was otherwise a young man with  no  previous  convictions  and  of
    previous good character.

100. It is certainly not the case that a person convicted of an  offence  of
    this kind and punished with eighteen months'  imprisonment  has  to  be
    deported if he is not a British national.  I am bound to take  note  of
    the well-established jurisprudence in these  matters  and  particularly
    the case of Maslov.  They are indeed incorporated in  the  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in JO (Uganda) [2010] 1WLR 607 where  at  paragraph
    21 their Lordships had this inter alia to say:

         "...for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or  the  major
         part of his or her childhood and youth in the  host  country,  very
         serious reasons are required to justify expulsion; and this is  all
         the more so where  the  person  concerned  committed  the  relevant
         offences as a juvenile."

101. The appellant is now aged 22.  He came to the United Kingdom  from  the
    DRC when he was 10.  He has been in the United Kingdom for rather  more
    than half his life and although I  respect  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    finding that he has some contacts with the country and can  speak  some
    of the language, his memories of the country will be those of a 10 year
    old boy who knows almost nothing about life there now and is singularly
    ill-equipped to deal with it.

102. I find that removing him to the DRC has echoes of 'exile'  rather  than
    exclusion and it is unlikely to be proportionate.

103. I bear in mind the deep regret that the  appellant  has  expressed  for
    his actions that he has shown at every stage, which supports my finding
    that he is unlikely to get into any further trouble.  I have  also  had
    regard to the NOMS Report which regards the risk of reoffending as low.

104. This is a case where in all the circumstances and as I find,  it  would
    be clearly disproportionate to remove him.  In reaching that conclusion
    I am also mindful that as held in Masih the impact on this appellant of
    not only his term of imprisonment but indeed his  period  in  detention
    can properly be given weight.  The appellant's ties in the  UK  include
    his family, with whom he enjoys a  close  relationship,  in  particular
    with his mother, who continues to give him  ongoing  financial  support
    and his younger siblings.

105. It cannot possibly be in such circumstances, in the  interests  of  the
    appellant's  younger  siblings,  that  the  appellant  should  now   be
    deported.  He is part of  their  family  unit  notwithstanding  that  I
    recognise and indeed note that it was accepted by  the  appellant  that
    his mother would continue to care for his siblings if he was deported.

106. The appellant's private life also includes his  schooling,  the  course
    of  education  that  he  was  following  with  the  view  to  attending
    university and of course the ties that he has developed since  arriving
    here as a young boy aged 10.

 107.  I have hunted for a sensible reason to  justify  removal  and  in  so
    doing I have had regard to the importance of  respecting  the  properly
    devised scheme of immigration control which was approved by Parliament.
     Mindful not least of the guidance in Maslov and the other case law  to
    which  I  have  referred,  it  cannot  be  said   in   the   particular
    circumstances of this appeal and this appellant, that  there  are  very
    serious reasons demonstrated to justify his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom. I conclude that it would  not  in  all  the  circumstances  be
    proportionate to remove this appellant to the DRC.

Conclusions

108. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

109. I set aside the decision.

110. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed                                  Date 4 June 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

