
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00192/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th February 2020                        |On 21st April 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AHMED [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Tobin, Counsel instructed by Kalsi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr
      [A].  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I
      adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to Mr [A]
      as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   2. The respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Colvin promulgated on 2nd July 2019 allowing the appellant's appeal
      under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the
      EEA Regulations 2016") against the respondent's decision to make a
      deportation order.


Background


   3. The appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands.  He claims to have
      arrived in the UK when he was 9, in 2003, with his parents and three
      siblings.  Between January 2010 and October 2016 he was convicted on
      seven occasions for eight offences that resulted in a community order,
      fines, a suspended sentence, an unpaid work requirement and a
      rehabilitation activity requirement.  On 24th May 2017, the appellant
      was encountered at Coquelles Car Control, the UK border control
      operated in France.  The appellant claimed that he was returning home
      to the UK from Germany.  He was refused entry as there was no evidence
      of him having exercised treaty rights whilst in the UK.  He lodged an
      appeal against that decision and his appeal was allowed for reasons
      set out in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham promulgated
      on 7th March 2018.


   4. On 10th May 2018, the appellant was convicted at Leicester Crown Court
      of two counts of conspiring to commit a violent disorder. On 12th
      October 2018 he was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.  As a result of
      that conviction he was issued with a notice of liability to
      deportation and after considering representations made by his
      representatives, the respondent reached a decision to make a
      deportation order.  The appellant's appeal against that decision was
      allowed by FtT Judge Colvin.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 6th
      September 2019.  She noted that it is arguable that the judge has
      erred in that she found that the appellant was entitled to the highest
      level of protection from removal under the EEA Regulations when it had
      not been established by either Judge Colvin or the previous Judge in
      2018, that the appellant had acquired permanent residence in the UK,
      which is a precondition for the highest level of protection; B
      (Citizenship of the European Union - Right to move and reside freely -
      Enhanced protection against expulsion) (C-316/16) and (C-424/16),  a
      decision of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Justice handed
      down on 17th April 2018.


   6. The respondent claims in reaching her decision, FtT Judge Colvin
      erroneously proceeds upon the basis that the test for deportation to
      be applied is whether there are "imperative grounds of public
      security".  In B v Land Baden-Wurttemberg Case C-316/16 (Joined Cases
      C-316/16, C-424/16), the Court of Justice held that a prerequisite for
      that enhanced protection, is that the person has acquired a permanent
      right of residence.  Here, in March 2018 Judge Graham had accepted the
      appellant has lived in the UK for more than 10 years, but at paragraph
      [17] of her decision,  had made it clear that she had not considered
      whether the appellant has acquired the right to reside in the UK
      permanently as set out in Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations 2016,
      because the appellant had not provided evidence that he was dependent
      on his mother who was exercising treaty rights in the UK throughout
      the relevant 5 year period.  It is said Judge Colvin erroneously
      adopted the previous conclusions of Judge Graham without considering
      whether the appellant had acquired the right to reside in the UK
      permanently for herself. Acquiring the highest level of protection
      against deportation required the appellant to have acquired a
      permanent right of residence (i.e. by exercising treaty rights or as a
      dependent of his mother), but no such determination had in fact been
      made.


   7. Furthermore, in B the Court of Justice held the 10-year period of
      residence must be calculated by counting back from the date of the
      deportation decision and that period must, in principle, be
      continuous.  Here, the 3-year sentence of imprisonment interrupted, in
      principle, the continuity of the 10 years residence.  The judge was
      required to complete an overall assessment of the situation of the
      appellant at the time when the question of expulsion arose, and
      although the period of imprisonment did not automatically deprive the
      appellant of enhanced protection, the judge was required to consider
      the strength of the integrative links the appellant had forged with
      the UK before his detention, as well as the nature of the offences,
      the circumstances in which that offences were committed and the
      behaviour of the appellant during the period of imprisonment.  The
      respondent claims the judge failed to consider whether the appellant
      was entitled to the enhanced protection in all the circumstances.  The
      respondent claims that insofar as the judge found the appellant has
      shown integration in the UK over the past 15 years and that this is
      unlikely to have been significantly altered by the prison sentence,
      the judge fails to give adequate reasons, or alternatively, the
      conclusion reached is irrational. The respondent also claims that in
      reaching her decision the judge failed to have regard to the totality
      of the appellant's offending over a number of years which militate
      against a finding that the appellant is a law abiding citizen who
      continues to be integrated into society; Binbuga -v- SSHD [2019] EWCA
      Civ 551.


   8. Mr McVeety adopted the respondent's grounds of appeal and submits the
      FtT Judge relies upon various passages from the decision of FtT Judge
      Graham, in which it appears that FtT Judge Graham accepted the
      appellant has lived in the UK for more than 10 years and is entitled
      to permanent residence in the UK and enhanced protection under the
      Directive.  However, Mr McVeety submits that at paragraph [17] of her
      decision, FtT Judge Graham made it clear that she had not considered
      whether the appellant  has acquired the right to reside in the UK
      permanently as set out in Regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations 2016.
      FtT Judge Graham expressly noted the appellant had not provided
      evidence that he was dependent on his mother who was exercising treaty
      rights in the UK throughout the 5-year period.  In any event, the
      judge failed to consider, counting back from the date of the
      deportation decision, whether the appellant has resided in the United
      Kingdom for a continuous period of at least 10 years, taking into
      account whether the period of detention had broken his integration in
      the UK.


   9. Ms Tobin submits FtT Judge Graham had found that the appellant has a
      right to permanent residence in the UK.  She submits FtT Judge Graham
      was satisfied that the appellant and his mother gave their evidence in
      a cogent and largely consistent manner. She was satisfied that they
      are credible witnesses and she accepted their oral evidence.  At
      paragraph [12] of her decision Judge Graham confirmed that she accepts
      the appellant has resided in the UK continuously for more than 10
      years and the appellant meets Regulation 24(4)(a) (sic).  At paragraph
      [16] of her decision, she stated "... I have accepted that the
      appellant has lived in the UK for more than 10 years, therefore he has
      a right to permanent residence in the UK, under the Regulations". At
      paragraph [19] she stated "... I accept that the appellant is entitled
      to permanent residence in the UK and enhanced protection under the
      Directive ...".  Ms Tobin submits those findings were not challenged
      by the respondent, and Judge Colvin was entitled to rely upon them.


  10. Ms Tobin acknowledges that in B, the Court of Justice held that in
      principle, a period of imprisonment can interrupt the continuity of
      the period of residence, for the purpose of Article 28(3)(a) of
      Directive 2004/38, and it is necessary, in order to determine whether
      the period of imprisonment had broken the integrative links previously
      forged, to carry out an overall assessment of the situation.  However,
      she refers to paragraph [71] of the judgement of the Court of Justice:


         "71. Indeed, particularly in the case of a Union citizen who was
         already in a position to satisfy the condition of 10 years'
         continuous residence in the host Member State in the past, even
         before he committed a criminal act that resulted in his detention,
         the fact that the person concerned was placed in custody by the
         authorities of that State cannot be regarded as automatically
         breaking the integrative links that that person had previously
         forged with that State and the continuity of his residence in that
         State for the purpose of Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 and,
         therefore, depriving him of the enhanced protection against
         expulsion provided for in that provision. Moreover, such an
         interpretation would deprive that provision of much of its
         practical effect, since an expulsion measure will most often be
         adopted precisely because of the conduct of the person concerned
         that led to his conviction and detention."


  11. She submits the fact that the appellant had lived in the UK
      continuously for more than 10 years prior to his imprisonment was
      particularly relevant and his imprisonment could not be regarded as
      automatically breaking the integrative links that he had forged with
      the United Kingdom.  She submits that at paragraphs [25] and [26] of
      her decision, Judge Colvin noted the appellant has been in the UK
      since the age of nine, has been educated in the UK and has lived the
      majority of his life in the UK.  She submits it was open to the judge
      to conclude that the appellant has shown integration in the UK over
      the past 16 years particularly through his education and that this is
      unlikely to have been significantly altered by the prison sentence.
      She submits, taking all matters into account, it was open to the judge
      to conclude that the respondent has not shown on a balance of
      probabilities that there are "imperative grounds of public security"
      for the deportation of the appellant.  She submits the decision was
      one that was open to the judge and the grounds of appeal amount to
      nothing more than a disagreement with that decision.


Discussion


  12. It is useful to begin with the European Regulations 2016.  Regulation
      23(6)(b) provides that an EEA national who has entered the United
      Kingdom may be removed if the respondent has decided that the person's
      removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public security or
      public health in accordance with regulation 27.  Regulation 27 insofar
      as it is material to this appeal provides:


         27.- (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or
         public health.


         ...


         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
             of at least 10 years prior to the relevant decision; or


              ...


         (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-


             (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
         proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)  the personal conduct of the person must represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking into account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need
             to be imminent;


             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
             which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
             justify the decision;


             (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision;


             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.


         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
         resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


    ...


         (8) A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements of
         this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of public
         policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society
         etc.).


  13. To justify interfering with the appellant's rights to free movement
      and residence in the UK, the respondent must establish the appellant's
      removal is justified on grounds of public policy and public security.
      In B the ECJ was requested by a German and a UK court to give a
      preliminary ruling concerning the interpretation of Directive 2004/38
      art.28(3)(a), under which persons who have resided in the host Member
      State for the previous 10 years qualify for enhanced protection
      against expulsion. The requests were made in proceedings, first,
      between B, a Greek national who had resided in Germany, and the Land
      Baden-Wurttemberg (Case C-316/16), and second, the SSHD and Mr Franco
      Vomero, an Italian citizen who had resided in the UK (Case C-424/16).
      In the German case, the Greek national had been living in Germany with
      his mother since 1993 and committed an offence in 2009 of which he was
      convicted. In the UK case, the Italian citizen had resided in the UK
      since 1985 and was convicted of manslaughter in 2001. Expulsion
      measures prompted by the criminal convictions for the offences
      mentioned above were ordered against the persons concerned, following
      their periods of imprisonment. At paragraph [60] of its judgment, the
      Court of Justice stated:


         "60 A Union citizen who has not acquired the right to reside
         permanently in the host Member State because he has not satisfied
         those conditions and who cannot, therefore, rely on the level of
         protection against expulsion guaranteed by Article 28(2) of
         Directive 2004/38 cannot, a fortiori, enjoy the considerably
         enhanced level of protection against expulsion provided for in
         Article 28(3)(a) of that directive."


  14. It is clear therefore that the protection against expulsion provided
      for in the Directive 2004/38 gradually increases in proportion to the
      degree of integration of the EU citizen concerned in the host Member
      State.  There was clearly some discussion at the outset of the hearing
      before FtT Judge Colvin regarding the conclusions reached by FtT Judge
      Graham previously.  At paragraph [3] of her decision, Judge Colvin
      stated:


         "As a preliminary matter Ms Martin for the respondent accepted that
         it has been previously found in the appeal decision of 7 March 2018
         that the appellant has permanent residence and 'enhanced
         protection' under the Directive and therefore the test for
         deportation is whether there are "imperative grounds of public
         security"


  15. At paragraph [11] of her decision, Judge Colvin noted that in the
      respondent's decision, the respondent did not accept that the
      appellant has been continuously resident in the UK for 10 years in
      accordance with the EEA Regulations 2016.  The judge however noted
      that that was subject to what had been said the Presenting Officer and
      recorded at paragraph [3] of her decision.  At paragraphs [21] and
      [22] of her decision, Judge Colvin refers to the previous decision of
      Judge Graham, noting at [21] that FtT Judge Graham was satisfied that
      the appellant had resided in the UK continuously for more than 10
      years and met the test for enhanced protection in Regulation 27(4)(a).
       FtT Judge Colvin noted, at paragraph [22] that Mrs Martin, the
      Presenting Officer "was asked whether she was putting forward any new
      evidence that may alter these findings. She accepted that there was no
      such new evidence to be put forward and accepted that the appellant is
      entitled to the status of enhanced protection ...".  It was against
      that background that Judge Colvin considered the appeal applying the
      test of "imperative grounds of public security".


  16. I have carefully read the decision of FtT Graham and in my judgement,
      she did not in fact find that the appellant had acquired the right to
      reside in the United Kingdom permanently.  She expressly states at
      paragraph [17] of her decision that  she has "not considered whether
      the appellant meets Regulation 15, for permanent residence after five
      years residence in the UK because the appellant has not provided
      evidence that he was dependent on his mother who was exercising Treaty
      rights in the UK throughout the five-year period.".  Although she
      refers to the appellant having a right to permanent residence in the
      UK, what is said at paragraphs [16] and [19] of the decision of FtT
      Judge Graham appears to be at odds with what is said at paragraph
      [17]. In my judgement, the final sentence of paragraph [12] of her
      decision provides some assistance.   Judge Graham appears to accept
      the appellant has resided in the UK continuously for more than 10
      years and the appellant is entitled to the enhanced protection
      provided for in Regulation 27(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations 2016. In
      view of the conflicting findings set out in the decision of FtT Judge
      Graham, in my judgement it was for FtT judge Colvin to determine
      whether the appellant has in fact acquired permanent residence.


  17. Judge Colvin cannot be criticised for relying upon the concession that
      appears to have been made by the Presenting Officer.  It is
      unfortunate that the decision of the European Court of Justice handed
      down on 17th April 2018 in B was not brought to the attention of Judge
      Colvin.  That was a decision that post-dates the decision of FtT Judge
      Graham, but pre-dates the hearing before FtT Judge Colvin.  At
      paragraph [12] of her decision, FtT judge Graham accepted the
      appellant has resided in the UK continuously for more than 10 years
      and the appellant meets Regulation 27(4)(a).  That is, a decision may
      not be taken except on imperative grounds of public security in
      respect of an EEA national who has inter alia resided in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 10 years prior to the relevant decision.
       In reaching that finding Judge Graham did not consider whether the
      appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence and as I have
      already said, at paragraph [17] of her decision, she expressly states
      she has not considered whether the appellant has acquired a permanent
      right of residence.  In B, the Court of Justice, at paragraph [60] of
      its judgment confirmed that in order to establish an entitlement to
      the enhanced protection under Regulation 27(4) of the EEA Regulations
      2016, the appellant must first establish that he would qualify for the
      protection afforded to those with a right of permanent residence under
      Regulation 15 as set out in Regulation 27(3).


  18. In my judgment, the decision of FtT Judge Colvin proceeds upon a
      mistaken premise and this is an appeal where the decision should be
      revisited so that the law is properly applied.  It was far from clear
      that FtT Judge Graham had found the appellant had acquired a permanent
      right of residence, such that the finding could be adopted.  There
      appears to have been little consideration by the parties and the
      Presenting Officer in particular, as to the particular findings made
      by FtT Judge Graham and there was no reference by Judge Colvin to
      paragraph [17] of the decision of FtT Graham.  Furthermore, as at the
      date of the decision of FtT Judge Graham, it was not altogether clear,
      as a matter of law, whether an individual relying upon Regulation
      27(4)(a) of the EEA Regulations 2016 simply had to demonstrate that
      they had resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
      least 10 years prior to the relevant decision, or whether they had, in
      addition, to establish a permanent right of residence under Regulation
      15.  FtT Judge Graham appears to have proceeded at paragraph [12] of
      her decision, upon the premise that the appellant had resided in the
      UK continuously for more than 10 years and therefore qualifies for the
      enhanced protection.  The position was made clear by the ECJ in B,
      intended down in April 2018.


  19. In my judgement the decision of FtT Colvin is vitiated by a material
      error of law and the decision must be set aside so that the decision
      can be made applying the correct test.  In the circumstances I do not
      need to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.  In determining the
      test to be applied, the FtT judge must plainly have regard to the
      question whether the appellant has resided in the UK for a continuous
      period of at least 10 years, counting backwards and taking into
      account the extent to which, if any, the sentence of imprisonment is
      relevant or impacts upon his integration.  As to disposal, in my
      judgement the appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to
      the FtT for hearing afresh with no findings preserved.  That  will
      ensure the appellant has a fair and proper opportunity to ensure the
      First-tier Tribunal has before it all of the evidence required to
      establish whether he has acquired a permanent right of residence and
      whether he is entitled to the enhanced protection provided for in
      Regulation 27(4(a) of the EEA Regulations 2016. It is now clear that
      that the acquisition of permanent residence is a prerequisite for the
      entitlement to the enhanced protection. In all the circumstances,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012 I am satisfied that the nature and
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The
      parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
      in due course.


Notice of Decision


  20. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of FtT Judge  Colvin  promulgated
      on 2nd July 2019 is set aside, and I remit the matter  for  re-hearing
      de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings preserved.

Signed                                                    Date 9th April
2020
         V. Mandalia
 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






_____________________________________________________________

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:





2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email






