
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                               Oluwafemi Longe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe, Counsel instructed by Linga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  Nigeria,  born  on  6
    November 1988 against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
    sitting at the Royal Courts of Justice on  27  August  2014  and  in  a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 12 September  2014  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellant against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 29 April 2014 refusing his claim for asylum and under  the  Human
    Rights Act and against the making of a deportation order.

2.   The basis upon which the appeal  came  before  me  was  most  helpfully
    summarised by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A  Cox  in  his  reasons  for
    granting to the Appellant permission to appeal dated  3  October  2014,
    when having carefully considered the original Judge's determination  in
    relation to the Appellant's grounds had this to say:

         "The grounds in essence contend that the Judge  acted  unfairly  in
         refusing  (the  Appellant)  an  adjournment  to   produce   further
         documentary evidence which might  go  to  his  risk  on  return  to
         Nigeria.  One of the matters he mentioned is his medical  condition
         - he has TB for which, according to the evidence  recorded  by  the
         Judge he still receives ongoing treatment.


         The Judge does not refer in his determination to any application to
         adjourn.  I do not find his manuscript Record of  Proceedings  easy
         to read but I can devine that there was some preliminary discussion
         and that the case was put back for a short period.  I note from the
         file that an application to adjourn had been submitted  in  writing
         by the  Appellant's  solicitors  in  advance  of  the  hearing  but
         rejected on the basis that there had been ample time to prepare his
         case.  This certainly  lends  colour  to  the  contention  that  an
         application was made to adjourn on  the  day.   The  Appellant  was
         legally represented, as he had also  been  at  the  preceding  case
         management hearing on 29/7/2014 when a listing  for  a  substantive
         hearing was discussed.


         It is on consideration of the legible record of that CMRH  and  the
         ancillary documents, that I am persuaded that it is  arguable  that
         the decision to refuse an adjournment may have  been  unfair.   The
         review was conducted by Judge Black who noted  the  several  issues
         arising in the appeal amongst which was 'Health x 2  -  TB  +  back
         pain'.  He later notes that the Appellant's representative  was  to
         obtain a medical report and that would take four weeks.   He  notes
         other evidence to be  obtained  and  served.   Critically,  on  the
         yellow listing request form he wrote 'Relist after 29/9/2014'.   No
         doubt that direction took account of the anticipated timescale  for
         the obtaining, filing and service of the  evidence  that  had  been
         discussed, including the medical report.  Indeed on a separate pink
         CMRH Directions form he made a specific Direction for such a report
         to be obtained and served.  Clearly, his listing instructions  were
         either overlooked or ignored because the appeal was actually listed
         for a substantive hearing on 27/8/2014 more than  a  month  earlier
         than the Judge had directed and less than a month  from  the  CMRH.
         It  is   therefore   hardly   surprising   that   the   Appellant's
         representatives sought an adjournment on 11/8/2014  on  receipt  of
         the Notice of Hearing so that they could comply with Judge  Black's
         Directions and perhaps  regrettable  that  they  were  not  sent  a
         response until 21/8/2014 refusing their application.  It  does  not
         assist me that Judge Miller made no  reference  to  an  adjournment
         application and his reasons for refusing it in  his  determination.
         If he had done so, it might have been that one could conclude  that
         his reasons were sound and did not arguably render the  proceedings
         unfair.  However, on the face of what is before me, I must find the
         issue arguable.


         The grounds disclose an arguable  material  error  of  law  in  the
         determination and permission is granted".

3.   Thus the appeal came before me on 23 February 2015, when my first  task
    was to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

4.   At the outset of the  hearing,  Ms  Anifowoshe  was  able  to  draw  my
    attention to a certified typed copy of the First-tier Judge's Record of
    Proceedings from which it is apparent at sections  C  and  D  that  the
    Judge recorded inter alia as follows.  "It was said at  the  CMH  there
    would be no hearing for two months".  There is also  reference  to  the
    following: "No mention in letter from  Appellant's  solicitors  seeking
    adjournment on 11/8/2014 that no Respondent's bundle - just  that  they
    needed additional time for their enquiries?".

5.   I was able to draw to the parties' attention  the  recent  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in GS (India) & Ors v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  40  in
    which  inter  alia,  following  a  consistent  line  of  domestic   and
    Strasbourg authority, it was held (indeed upholding the Upper Tribunal)
    that foreign nationals may be removed from the UK even where by  reason
    of a lack of adequate healthcare in the destination State, their  lives
    would be drastically shortened.  Such action would  not,  save  in  the
    most exceptional case infringe Articles 3 or 8 of the  ECHR.   However,
    Laws LJ at paragraph 86 went on to say,:

         "If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm".

6.   Notably the court espoused fully what had  been  said  in  its  earlier
    decision in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8 is where it is an additional factor to  be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article  8.   Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  Appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing treatment here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the
         family here for support,  together  establish  private  life  under
         Article 8...


         Such a finding would not offend the principle expressed above, that
         the United Kingdom is under no  Convention  obligation  to  provide
         medical treatment here when it is not available in the  country  to
         which the Appellant is to be deported".

7.   Under the subheading "The Article 8 Claims" at  paragraph  85  Laws  LJ
    continued as follows:

         "85. It is common ground that in cases where the  claimant  resists
             removal to another State  on  health  grounds,  failure  under
             Article 3 does not necessarily entail failure under Article 8.
              In her skeleton argument at paragraph 55  Ms  Giovanetti  for
             the Secretary of State cites JA (Ivory Coast) & ES  (Tanzania)
             v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1353, in which the Appellants had  been
             given a 'de facto commitment' that they would  be  allowed  to
             remain in the UK for treatment.  Sedley LJ with whom  Longmore
             and Aikens LJJ agreed said this at paragraph 17:


                  'There is no fixed relationship between Art. 3 and Art. 8.
                   Typically a finding of a violation of the former may make
                  a decision on the latter unnecessary; but  the  latter  is
                  not simply a more easily accessed version of  the  former.
                  Each has to be approached and applied on  its  own  terms,
                  and Ms Giovannetti is accordingly  right  not  to  suggest
                  that a claim of the present kind must come within  Art.  3
                  or fail.  In this respect as in others, these  claims  are
                  in Mr Knafler's submission distinct from cases such  as  D
                  and N in  both  of  which  the  Appellant's  presence  and
                  treatment in the UK were owed entirely to  their  unlawful
                  entry...'"

8.   Thus it followed that Article 8 might be taken in  circumstances  where
    the combination of family life and problematic health could lead to  an
    Article 8 "health case".

9.   There was in such circumstances common ground between  myself  and  the
    parties that it could not be said that had an adjournment been granted,
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal would  be  bound  to  have
    been the same, at the resumed hearing, notwithstanding what the medical
    evidence about the Appellant's TB might in the event, state.

10.   The  parties  agreed  with  me,  that  coupled  with  the  problematic
    procedural history identified by FTJ Cox (above) it followed that there
    was procedural  unfairness  and  that  in  all  the  circumstances  the
    Appellant had been denied a fair hearing and that the case should thus,
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing with none of
    First-tier Judge Miller's findings preserved.

11.  I would add the observation, that in such circumstances,  it  does  not
    matter whether or not the Judge at the hearing  entertained  a  renewed
    adjournment request, although it does appear that  the  Judge  may  not
    have taken into account, Judge Black's  earlier  listing  instructions,
    that the case was not to be listed until after  29  September  2014  to
    enable the Appellant to obtain the medical evidence he sought.  In  the
    event, the appeal was listed for a substantive hearing before the Judge
    on 27 August 2014.

12.  I was told by Ms Anifowoshe that there would be oral evidence given  by
    the Appellant and three other witnesses comprising his  mother,  sister
    and brother.  No interpreter would be required.

13.  It was thus apparent to me that there were  highly  compelling  reasons
    falling within paragraph 7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, as to why the decision should not be  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was clearly in the interest of justice that the appeal of
    the Appellant be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  For the reasons that I have given  above  and  by  agreement  with  the
    parties, I concluded therefore that the appeal should be remitted to  a
    First-tier Judge other than Judge K S Miller, to determine  the  appeal
    afresh at Taylor House Hearing Centre on the first available date  with
    a time estimate (given the number of witnesses) of three hours.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside and none of their findings preserved.  I remit the making  of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House before  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Miller.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date: 25 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein


