

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00578/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Nottingham                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19th May 2015                         |On 22nd May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                               MARIUSZ BREGULA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person (no legal representation)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a Polish national. A notice of  decision  to  make  a
      deportation order under regulation 19(3)b of the Immigration (European
      economic Area) Regulations 2006 was made and served upon him  on  26th
      March 2014. The First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated  on
      10th June 2014 dismissed his appeal under the EEA Regulations.


   2. Permission to appeal was sought, and granted, on the grounds

   a. That the First-tier Tribunal had misunderstood or ignored the evidence
      provided by  the  appellant  that  he  had  been  undertaking  alcohol
      treatment/rehabilitation and that this had led to  a  failure  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal to properly consider  whether  the  principles  in
      Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718 applied.
   b. That the First-tier Tribunal had erred in finding that the appellant's
      wife and child could move to Poland with him,  thus  interfering  with
      their rights to free movement, and
   c. That the First-tier Tribunal had failed to have  regard  to  the  best
      interests of the appellant's son who has been in the UK since the  age
      of two and had, at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, been in the UK for  some  8  years  and  had  commenced  his
      education in the UK.


   3. Although UT  Judge  Rintoul  in  granting  permission  considered  the
      grounds as regards alcohol/Essa and the best interests of the child to
      be weak, he granted permission on all grounds.


   4. Mr Bregula provided me with further documents in a small bundle and  a
      written submission in addition to his oral submissions.

   5. Mr Bregula was very clear that his criminal problems have arisen as  a
      result of his alcoholism. He has permanent residence in the UK, as  do
      his wife and child, and he has worked save for the periods he has been
      in prison. He was adamant that he was addressing  his  alcoholism  and
      the additional documents he produced confirmed this, although I cannot
      take these into account in determining whether there is  an  error  of
      law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal such  that  it  is
      set aside to be remade. Mr Bregula stressed the very difficult  issues
      that arise from alcoholism and how hard he is trying  to  combat  this
      addiction.

   6. It does appear that the First-tier Tribunal  may  have  misinterpreted
      the information put to them as to the courses and treatment Mr Bregula
      has been receiving although more in terms  of  the  months  undertaken
      than the nature of what he was doing. The evidence given to me at  the
      hearing before me was not before the First-tier Tribunal judge and  he
      cannot therefore be criticised for failing to take it into account. It
      does appear that  there  has  been  interruption  in  the  appellant's
      treatment due to moving between prisons.  The  issue  however  is  not
      whether the appellant has been  undertaking  relevant  or  appropriate
      treatment but whether that treatment (whether it is  through  specific
      rehabilitation courses or through attendance at  AA  meetings)  is  at
      such a level that his deportation would seriously interfere  with  his
      overall rehabilitation. There was  no  suggestion  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that  Mr  Bregula  would  not  be  able  to  access  relevant
      treatment or rehabilitation facilities in Poland or indeed  that  such
      treatment or facilities did not exist. There was no suggestion to  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  extent  of   engagement   with   such
      treatment/rehabilitation as there is at present in  the  UK  was  such
      that a break in such treatment would have serious consequences  in  Mr
      Bregula's overall rehabilitation.


   7.  There  is  clearly  a  European  dimension  that  has  to  be   taken
      specifically  into  account;  this  widens  consideration  beyond  the
      interests  of  the  expelling  state   and   the   foreign   criminal.
      Consideration is to be given to the risks of compromising  the  social
      rehabilitation of an EU citizen in the country in which he has  become
      genuinely integrated.

   8. In this case the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant was  not
      undergoing rehabilitation such that his expulsion would compromise his
      social rehabilitation.  Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  not
      completely accurate in their description of  what  the  appellant  was
      doing with regards to his alcoholism, it cannot be concluded  that  if
      they had correctly referred to  it,  that  there  would  have  been  a
      different conclusion reached. The conclusion reached was a  conclusion
      open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence before them. There  is
      no material error of law in the conclusion reached by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal as to rehabilitation and Essa.

   9. The First-tier Tribunal addressed the impact on the  appellant's  wife
      and child in the determination. In particular in paragraphs 22, 23 and
      26. The First-tier Tribunal state that

             22. There is nothing to prevent the Appellant's wife  and  son
             returning to Poland with the Appellant, other  than  the  fact
             that they would prefer to stay in the UK...
             23. We have come to the conclusion, given that a  lot  of  the
             Appellant's offending is related  to  his  domestic  situation
             that although the Appellant has family life  in  the  UK  this
             does not outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
             deportation....
             ...
             26. We considered the best interests of the child  and  accept
             that  the  Appellant's  son  would  prefer  to  stay  in   the
             UK...Given that a lot of the Appellant's convictions relate to
             his domestic situation it may be that the Appellant's wife and
             child will choose to stay in the UK.  This  is  a  matter  for
             them. The Appellant's wife and child are both Polish nationals
             and there is nothing to prevent them returning to Poland  with
             the Appellant if they so wish. The appellant's son is not at a
             critical stage in his education in the UK and will be entitled
             to education if he returned to Poland.



  10. It had not been submitted by or on behalf of the appellant that  there
      was an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in the decision  making
      process followed by  them.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the
      appellant's personal conduct and reached a conclusion that was not the
      subject of challenge namely that his  conduct  represented  a  genuine
      present and sufficiently serious  threat  that  affected  one  of  the
      fundamental interests  of  society.  The  grounds  in  essence  are  a
      challenge  to  the   final   stage   in   consideration   namely   the
      proportionality of the decision and included in this is the rights  of
      free movement of the appellant's wife and child, the best interests of
      the child and the overall circumstances. Mr Mills submitted  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal took fully into account that  the  deportation  of
      the appellant from the UK would sever his family ties if his wife  and
      child did not go with him. Mr Mills drew an analogy with a  non  -  EU
      foreign criminal being deported and the  possible  ensuing  separation
      for a British Citizen wife and child. He submitted that an EU national
      could not be in a stronger position than the British Citizen wife  and
      child and that the situation facing this appellant and his family  was
      similar. This appellant has been in prison and separated from his wife
      and child during those periods of imprisonment; the social work report
      refers to the wife not wishing to live with the  appellant  if  he  is
      drinking; a number of the crimes of which the appellant was convicted,
      although alcohol fuelled, were directed at his  wife.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal had found that it was not that the wife and child  should  go
      but that whether they went or not was the choice  of  the  appellant's
      wife and child. Mr Mills submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
      set out that it was a choice of whether to go or stay and this did not
      interfere with her rights of free movement.


  11. The First-tier Tribunal state (in  [19])  that  they  found  the  case
      difficult and took full account of the fact that the appellant's  wife
      and child were present to support him. The free movement rights of the
      appellant's wife, although not specifically referred to in the  First-
      tier Tribunal determination are one  element  of  the  proportionality
      assessment to be undertaken. The Tribunal was  plainly  aware  of  the
      wife's permanent residence and that she had made  her  home  here  for
      herself and the child. The Tribunal considered the best  interests  of
      the child and reached a conclusion that was open to it  on  the  facts
      presented. Having assessed all of  the  circumstances,  including  the
      potential separation of the appellant from his  wife  and  child,  the
      First-tier Tribunal reached a  conclusion  that  the  deportation  was
      proportionate.

  12. Although  a  differently  constituted  Tribunal  may  have  reached  a
      different conclusion, the knowledge of the wife's status in the UK and
      their length of residence and the length of time the child had been in
      the UK and was attending school was plainly in the Tribunal's mind  on
      reaching their decision. The Tribunal did not  fail  to  consider  all
      relevant matters in reaching its decision on  the  proportionality  of
      the deportation.

  13. There is no error of law such that the decision is  set  aside  to  be
      remade.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


[pic]


                                    Date 19th May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
