
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00042/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th March 2019                   |On 29th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                 Hussein [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on  26th  January  1990  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Denmark.

2.   This  is  an  appeal  which  falls  within  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  appellant  was  involved  in  an
    event of gang violence which resulted in a death.  On 17th  April  2007
    at the Central Criminal Court he was convicted of murder  and  received
    on 11th May 2007 an intermediate custodial sentence to serve a  minimum
    of ten years' imprisonment.  The  Secretary  of  State,  by  notice  of
    2nd February 2016, indicated the intention to make a deportation order.



3.   The appellant upon his release exercised the right  of  appeal  against
    the decision and in particular against  the  certification  applied  by
    virtue of Regulation 24AA.  The decision was upheld that  he  would  be
    removed to Denmark on 22nd December 2016, and indeed he was.

4.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cameron  for  hearing
    of that appeal on 26th March 2018 and in a decision promulgated on 18th
    April 2018 the appeal was dismissed.

5.   The appellant through his legal  representatives  sought  to  challenge
    that decision, and permission  to  do  so  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  And  thus  it  was  that  the  matter  came  before  Justice
    Cockerill and Upper Tribunal Judge King for hearing  on  11th  December
    2018.  For the reasons set out in an error of law decision  promulgated
    on 20th December 2018 it was the conclusion of the panel that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had acted in error of law such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

6.   Thus, the matter comes before us to remake the appeal.

7.   The relevant Regulation for the purposes of this appeal  is  Regulation
    21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

8.   The decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct  of  the
    person concerned and must comply with the principle of proportionality.



9.   The personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

10.  Matters isolated from the particulars of the case or  which  relate  to
    considerations of general prevention do not justify  the  decision  nor
    does a person's previous criminal convictions in themselves justify the
    decision.

11.  The appellant does not have a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, as such he enjoys the lowest level of protection within
    the Regulation.

12.  Regulation 21(6) provides that before taking  a  relevant  decision  on
    the grounds of public policy  or  public  security  in  relation  to  a
    person's residence in the United Kingdom a  decision  maker  must  take
    into account considerations such  as  age,  state  of  health,  family,
    economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence  in
    the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural  integration  into
    the United Kingdom and the  extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
    country of origin.

13.   The  appellant's  close  family  live  in  the  United  Kingdom,  they
    consisting  of  mother,  father  and  sister.   It  was  indicated  the
    appellant was removed to Denmark where he now resides.

14.  In terms of wider context the appellant, within his  witness  statement
    dated 25th November 2016, indicated he had been born in Somalia and had
    come to England with  his  mother  and  five  siblings  in  2005.   The
    appellant was 4 years old when his family settled in Denmark  where  he
    was brought up in a stable family environment.  The family came to  the
    United Kingdom when he was 14 or 15.  The index offence took  place  on
    28th January 2006 shortly after his 16th birthday, and thus he had been
    in the United Kingdom for a short time before the offence took place.

15.  Ms  Isherwood  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  essentially  makes  two
    submissions.  The first is that the past conduct of the appellant is so
    serious and that itself must be considered a threat to the requirements
    of  public  policy.   The  second  submission  is  that  the  appellant
    continues to present a current, present and sufficiently serious threat
    to the public such that he should continue  to  be  excluded  from  the
    United Kingdom.

16.  In terms of the submission as to conduct alone reliance is placed  upon
    the decision of R v Bouchereau [1978] 1 QB 732 as affirmed  in  SHHD  v
    Robinson (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 85.

17.  The principle is set out by the Court of  Appeal  in  paragraph  71  as
    follows:-

         "It is important to recognise that what the ECJ (in Bouchereau) was
         there talking about was not a threat to 'the public' but  a  threat
         to 'the requirements of public policy'.  The latter  is  a  broader
         concept.  At paragraph 28 the ECJ said that past conduct  can  only
         be taken into account insofar as it provides evidence  of  personal
         conduct constituting a  'present  threat  to  the  requirements  of
         public policy'.  As the ECJ said at paragraph 29 'in general'  that
         will imply that the person concerned has a 'propensity  to  act  in
         the same way in the future' but that need not be so in every  case.
         It is possible that the  past  conduct  'alone'  may  constitute  a
         threat  to  the  requirements  of  public  policy.   In  order   to
         understand in what circumstances that might be so, I consider  that
         it is helpful and appropriate to have regard to the opinion of  the
         advocate general in Bouchereau, when he referred  to  'deep  public
         revulsion'.  This is the kind of extreme case in which past conduct
         alone  may  suffice  as  constituting  a  present  threat  to   the
         requirements of public policy".

18.  In that connection our attention was also drawn  to  the  case  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Straszewski  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 145.

19.  It is important therefore to look at the context of the offence and  in
    particular to the sentencing remarks of His Honour Judge Kramer QC.

20.  Shortly after 10:30 p.m. on Saturday 28th  January  2006,  Mahir  Osman
    was set upon by eight individuals out of a wider group acting as a gang
    on the night in question.

21.  Mahir Osman belonged to a gang from Camden called the Centric Gang  and
    there would seem to have been some problems and fighting  between  that
    gang and the gang who subsequently attacked him.  The  group  in  which
    the appellant was consisted of some 25 or 30  persons  seemed  to  have
    come to Camden looking for Mahir Osman or members  of  his  gang.   The
    group were armed with knives, bottles, sticks.

22.  The appellant was one of those found to have taken part in  the  attack
    upon Mahir Osman.  He died very quickly from some twelve  stab  wounds,
    three of which were fatal.   This  was  described  as  a  frenzied  and
    sustained attack by a number of people on a man from a rival gang.

23.  In terms of the appellant it was noted specifically by the  Judge  that
    he was not armed with a weapon except for a bottle which he never  used
    and which he left intact on a ledge of a nearby public house as he left
    the scene of the  killing.   His  part  in  the  joint  enterprise  was
    stamping on the body of Mahir Osman at  the  time  that  he  was  being
    attacked.  Though the appellant had been of good character it was found
    that he was part of a group intent on violence in public and he  played
    a part in the subsequent attack.

24.  The case advanced on behalf of the appellant was that he was  not  part
    of any gang but on his way home in the Camden area he  and  his  cousin
    become involved with the youths and with the subsequent events.  He was
    15 at the time of the offending behaviour.

25.  It is clear from a number of  authorities  in  particular  set  out  in
    Nazli and Others  (External  relations)  [2000]  EUECJC-340/97  and  in
    particular paragraph 59 thereof that  the  European  Court  of  Justice
    concluded that community law precludes the expulsion of a national of a
    member state on general preventive grounds, that is to say an expulsion
    ordered for the  purpose  of  deterring  other  aliens.   An  important
    feature of the case of Straszewski  was  the  contention  made  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Tribunal had wrongly failed  to  take  into
    account the public revulsion as a  factor  that  was  relevant  to  the
    assessment of Mr Kersys' conduct for the purpose  of  deciding  whether
    there were serious public policy grounds  justifying  his  deportation.
    He had in 2013 been convicted of offences of identity fraud  for  which
    he and his wife had used bank cards belonging to a  vulnerable  elderly
    neighbour whom they had befriended to obtain  �112,000  from  the  bank
    account.  It was described by the Judge as a "mean spirited  and  nasty
    piece of offending".  That argument was rejected by the Court of Appeal
    and in paragraph 31 was the following comment:-

         "For the  reasons  given  earlier,  I  do  not  think  that  public
         revulsion at the  offender's  conduct  has  any  part  to  play  in
         deciding whether there are sufficiently serious grounds  of  public
         policy to justify his deportation, save in exceptional cases  of  a
         kind in which failure to remove the offender might itself  tend  to
         undermine confidence in the state's ability to administer  justice.
         This case falls far short of that.  However,  even  if  it  were  a
         factor to be taken into account in this case, I find it  impossible
         to accept that a rational Tribunal could have  come  to  any  other
         conclusion.  Although the offences for which Mr Kersys was sent  to
         prison did not represent his first brush with the law, his previous
         convictions must have been of a modest kind, since the  Judge  when
         passing sentence was  content  to  treat  him  as  a  man  of  good
         character.  Moreover, a report made by NOMS concluded that he posed
         a low risk of further offending and a low risk of causing  harm  to
         the  public.   In  those  circumstances  I  find  it  difficult  to
         understand how behaviour,  although  properly  described  as  'mean
         spirited, nasty and despicable' could possibly be said to represent
         a genuine and present and sufficiently serious threat to one of the
         fundamental interests of society to justify overriding the right of
         free movement on which the permanent right of  residence  remains".



26.  In terms of Mr Straszewski he had attacked another  with  broken  glass
    causing serious injuries to face and neck.  Whilst  on  bail  for  that
    offence he broke in to a flat for the purposes of burglary and  punched
    and kicked two women before making  his  escape.   Notwithstanding  the
    very unpleasant nature of those offences once  again  the  decision  to
    deport him was not upheld.

27.  Given the reasoning set out in Straszewski we  do  not  find  that  the
    nature of offending of this appellant  falls  within  that  exceptional
    category that was envisaged of past conduct alone.  As a minor  he  did
    not use a weapon but became caught up in a  serious  and  unfortunately
    incident arising out of gang culture.  Whilst in no sense making  light
    of the very serious offence of murder he does not seem to us to exhibit
    the characteristics  of  such  an  extreme  case  causing  deep  public
    revulsion.  We turn to the decision  of  Robinson,  in  particular  the
    comments of Lord Justice Singh set out at paragraphs 85 and 86.

28.  The cases in which past conduct alone is sufficient  would  be  one  in
    which the facts were very extreme,  for  example  a  person  committing
    grave offences of sexual abuse or violence against young children.  The
    court went on to comment:-

         "I would not wish to belittle the seriousness of the offence in the
         present case but it is not the sort  of  offence  in  which  public
         revulsion at the past events alone will be sufficient.  I note that
         in Straszewski Moore-Bick LJ  referred  to  'the  most  heinous  of
         crimes' at paragraph 17.  That gives an indication of the  sort  of
         offence the ECJ had in mind when it said a past offence alone might
         survive".

29.  The court went on to consider at paragraph 86  of  Robinson  that  such
    cases would need to be "especially horrifying" and  "repugnant  to  the
    public" such as the importation of a large amount of  heroin  committed
    by a medical doctor in ex parte Marchon.

30.  It seems to us to apply the reasoning of these various  decisions  that
    the nature of the offending of the appellant who was  a  minor  at  the
    time of the offence does not constitute past conduct such as in  itself
    sufficient to justify expulsion and deportation.

31.  We turn therefore to the issue of whether the  appellant  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society.  We notice that he has  no  right  of
    permanent  residence  and  as  such  falls  to  the  lowest  level   of
    protection.

32.  We  note  in  the  appellant's  bundle  that  there  are  many  helpful
    documents charting the progress of the appellant and  his  response  to
    detention.  In general they are all positive  about  his  attitude  and
    progress over the years.  He attended an anger and emotional management
    programme in 2012.  A report of the same noted his motivation to change
    and his positive response to the programme itself.  We have  regard  to
    the OASys assessment of 1st October 2015.

33.  The OASys assessment concludes that as a result of his  conviction  for
    murder he presents a serious risk of harm to  the  public  if  such  an
    offence is repeated and in terms of risk of offending in the  community
    that is  assessed  as  low.   Throughout  his  sentence  the  appellant
    displayed a very positive and mature attitude to  maintain  and  manage
    his own risk in the future and he has undertaken a number of programmes
    and interventions aimed at reducing his risk to  the  public.   He  has
    undertaken various types of employment whilst at  HMP  Highpoint  which
    helped him to exercise responsibility, assertiveness and an ability  to
    refrain from pressure or influence from prisoners.  He has had  a  good
    relationship with  prison  staff  and  exhibited  exemplary  behaviour.
    There were a number of adjudications in the early part of his sentence,
    but since 2009 the only adjudication  was  in  2015  for  possessing  a
    memory stick.  He engaged in offending behaviour work and  an  addendum
    parole assessment report dated 16th  August  2016  moving  towards  the
    appellant being released to open conditions to explore  employment  and
    training opportunities states that he remained positive and no concerns
    were raised regarding his risk management.

34.  It was found that the appellant was focused upon  progression  and  his
    expression of such motivation was considered to be genuine and sincere.
     It was noted he had good family support with frequent visits by family
    members.  Thus it was that a recommendation was made for his release.

35.  There is in the bundle also a letter from  the  Parole  Board  of  20th
    September 2016 noting the improvement in his behaviour and the positive
    steps which he has taken to improve his situation.  It was  noted  that
    the appellant's scores placed him within the low risk band category and
    at page 271 was the comment by the parole board as follows:-

         "If you do reoffend, you are assessed, using OASys as posing a high
         risk of causing serious harm to the public in the community.   Most
         unusually your offender supervisor assessed risk of serious harm as
         low.  The panel felt that risk of serious harm  was  probably  best
         described as medium".

36.  Ms Isherwood relies heavily upon that comment, and also focused on  the
    fact that  the  assessments  were  carried  out  whilst  he  was  in  a
    protective framework and none had been  made  testing  his  ability  to
    adapt to the community.  She submits his protestation of motivation  to
    lead a proper and law-abiding life was also  largely  untested  in  the
    community.  It is to be recognised of course that following his release
    from custody the appellant went on administrative detention, thereafter
    being deported  without  the  opportunity  of  having  demonstrated  an
    ability to exhibit good behaviour whilst living in the community in the
    UK.

37.  The Parole Board however ultimately decided as follows with respect  to
    the appellant: "The Panel concluded that you had considered  and  taken
    responsibility for your offending and were clearly highly motivated  to
    lead a pro-social life  and  avoid  any  return  to  custody.  You  had
    demonstrated that you were able to avoid  or  deal  with  confrontation
    whilst in custody and you had realistic and achievable plans  for  your
    future, with strong family support. In these circumstances,  the  panel
    was satisfied that it is no longer necessary for the protection of  the
    public that you be confined."

38.  We find it difficult to understand without more why  the  Parole  Board
    should consider risk in the community to  be  medium,  when  all  other
    assessments was that he posed a low risk to the society.  However,  the
    ultimate conclusion was that the appellant's imprisonment was no longer
    required for the protection of the public, and this  expert  assessment
    of the level of risk that  he  poses  must,  we  find,  be  given  very
    significant weight in our decision-making.

39.  Had the appellant remained in the United Kingdom in  the  community  he
    would of course have  been  subject  to  supervision  as  part  of  his
    sentence of life and that his progress could have been monitored in  an
    official capacity.  Nevertheless it is to be noted that at the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge on 26th March 2018 he was  present
    as were members of his  family  and  gave  evidence.   He  adopted  his
    statement of 25th November 2016 and oral evidence was received  by  his
    mother who in turn adopted her statements of 1st November 2016 and 26th
    March 2018.  Both the appellant and his  mother  were  the  subject  of
    cross-examination.  From this evidence we understand that  the  current
    situation is that he is studying in Denmark for  the  equivalent  of  A
    levels in Danish and maths.  He is supported by money he receives  from
    the government from attending school.  There are a number of references
    positively speaking of his behaviour and good character.  So far as the
    appellant's sister is concerned she too provided a statement, she lives
    with her mother, father and two  sisters  and  is  currently  attending
    college.  She has learning difficulties.  The appellant's mother has  a
    number of health problems also.  She travelled to Denmark  in  December
    2016 to settle in her son.  Four  family  members  indicate  that  they
    would like the appellant to be at home to assist them  to  re-establish
    life as a family.  The appellant is now 26.  There is  no  evidence  to
    indicate otherwise than that the appellant has been adjusting  to  life
    in Denmark and seeking to improve his  position.   There  has  been  no
    suggestion that he has reoffended whilst in Denmark.  Such we regard to
    be a significant matter.

40.  The appellant is living in the community in Denmark and would  seem  to
    have adjusted well to that community, and there is nothing suggested to
    his detriment arising from his significant period that he has now spent
    in Denmark.  He is not subject to any supervision of an  official  kind
    in Denmark and that again is something perhaps to be held to his credit
    that he has managed to develop his own life largely as a result of  his
    efforts and of family support.

41.  We also take note of the report and assessment  from  Deborah  Kelland,
    forensic psychologist, dated 10th January 2017.  It is a  psychological
    report addressing the issue of risk of reoffending and risk of  serious
    harm.  This was a report prepared based on an assessment by Ms  Kelland
    on 8th December 2016  whilst the appellant was held in HMP Highpoint in
    immigration detention pending deportation.  It noted that following his
    conviction the appellant  had  never  lived  in  the  community  as  an
    independent adult and had not had the opportunity to resettle through a
    period of open conditions.  It noted that the appellant matured  during
    his time in custody and had developed a non-criminal identity.   It  is
    the opinion of the author of the report that the appellant posed a  low
    risk of violent re-offending in the community and a low risk of serious
    harm to the public. We give weight also to this opinion.

42.  We find overall that the evidence is that the appellant has managed  to
    stand on his own feet as a young citizen and has not  been  violent  or
    engaged in antisocial behaviour so far.

43.  We observe that it is perhaps unfortunate that up-to-date  evidence  as
    to the appellant's current situation and circumstances and that of  his
    family had not been obtained.  Equally however there would seem  to  be
    no past challenge to the truthfulness of  family  members  and  of  the
    appellant in his speaking about  his  current  and  social  involvement
    plans.

44.  Clearly remixing with a gang culture  or  with  a  similar  peer  group
    would be likely in the circumstances increase the risk of harm.   There
    is however no indication that there has been any  contact  between  the
    appellant and former gang members or indeed any desire to live  in  the
    area of gang culture.

45.  The appellant was directed to be released from custody  by  the  Parole
    Board on the basis that his detention was no longer necessary  for  the
    protection of the public and  we  find  that  his  subsequent  life  in
    Denmark has confirmed his ability to live as  a  citizen  without  such
    risk arising to the public.  He  is  a  young  man  who  has  developed
    considerably over the past eleven years also in terms of  maturity  and
    also in terms of a positive approach to his responsibilities.

46.  Further it is to be noted that if the appellant were to return  to  the
    United Kingdom he would be the subject to  a  requirement  to  live  in
    Probation Premises accommodation and have ongoing  supervision  by  the
    Probation service which is in itself a useful monitoring tool  as  well
    as a means of support.

47.   In  considering  therefore  the  factors  which  arise  by  reason  of
    Regulation 21 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 we do not find,
    having regard to the totality  of  the  evidence,  that  the  appellant
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society.  In coming to that view we
    have regard to the factors which are set out herein.

48.  In the circumstances the appellant's appeal is allowed  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

Conclusion

49.  The appellant's appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Fiona Lindsley                                 Date 24th April 2019

p.p. Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

