
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00799/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2019                  |On 28 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                                     GD
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Rene of counsel, instructing by Littlestone
                          Cowan Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL






1.   The Respondent is a national of Ghana. She entered the United  Kingdom,
    as a student, on 2 September 2000 and then her leave  was  extended  in
    the same capacity until 30 January 2006. Subsequently, on 26 July  2006
    she was granted leave to remain as a work permit holder until  28  July
    2011.

2.   On 14 September 2010 the Respondent applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence but on 12 October 2011,  she  was
    convicted of causing or allowing the death of a child and sentenced  to
    three years in prison. In his sentencing remarks the Common Sergeant of
    London noted that the Respondent's daughter had died on 3 March 2010 as
    a result of being force-feed by her. This led to her daughter breathing
    food into her lungs and developing pneumonia.  As  a  consequence,  the
    Respondent's application for indefinite leave  was  refused  and  on  9
    February 2012 she was notified that she was liable to deportation.

3.   A deportation order was made in relation to her on 9  April  2013.  The
    Appellant appealed and, in a decision promulgated on 11 February  2014,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodhouse and Mrs. Cross de Chavannes allowed
    her appeal. However, on 4 March 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reed
    granted the Appellant permission to  appeal.  In  a  further  decision,
    promulgated on 13 May 2014, The Honourable Mrs Justice Andrew  DBE  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede upheld the initial decision in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

4.   The Secretary of State appealed against the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    and his appeal was allowed by the Court of Appeal and remitted to First-
    tier Tribunal on 25 July 2017.  The appeal then came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clark and she  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15 August  2018.  The  Appellant  appealed  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup granted him permission to appeal on 20
    November 2018. The Respondent filed and served a Rule 24 response on  4
    February 2019.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for  the  Appellant
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.




ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup granted the Appellant permission to
    appeal on a number of different grounds. The primary one was that it
    was arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark had made a material
    misdirection in the application of the considerations under paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules and, in particular, failed to identify
    what, in addition to the harshness that may well follow deportation,
    made it unduly harsh for the children to either follow the Respondent
    to Ghana or, more particularly, to remain in the United Kingdom without
    her.

7.   The grant of permission also noted that the issue may have to be re-
    considered in the light of the recent decision in KO (Nigeria) & Others
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

8.   The Respondent had been sentenced to three years imprisonment and
    therefore section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and she was
    subject to automatic deportation unless to do so would amount to a
    breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.

9.   In keeping with this statutory provision, paragraph 397 of the
    Immigration Rules states that:

     "A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal pursuant
    to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations under the
    Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention..."

10.  However, this statement is qualified by the contents of paragraphs 398
    and 399 of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 398 states that:

     "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to the
    UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and

     (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
    public good because they   have been convicted of an offence for which
    they have been sentenced to a period of      imprisonment of less than
    four years but at least 12 months...

     the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will only be in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in deportation will
    be outweighed by other factors".

11.  The relevant part of paragraph 399, at the date of the decision under
    appeal, stated that:

     "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) applies if

     (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    a child under the age  of 18 years who is in the UK, and
     (i) the child is a British citizen; or
     (ii)     the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7
    years immediately preceding     the date of the immigration decision;
    and in either case
     (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK;
    and
     (b) there is no other family member who is able to care for the child
    in the UK"

12.  Section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    states that:

     "(1)     This part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
    determine whether a decision    made under the Immigration Acts-
     (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
    under Article 8, and
     (b) as a result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998.
     (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
    must (in particular) have  regard-
     (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
     (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals to the
    considerations listed in   section 117C".

13.  Section 117C states:

     "Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
    criminals

     (1) The deportation of a foreign criminal is in the public interest.
     (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, that
    greater is the    interest in deportation of the criminal.
     (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of    imprisonment of four years or more, the public
    interest requires C's deportation unless     Exception 1 or Exception 2
    applies.
     (4) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying  partner or a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the    effect of C's
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh".

14.  The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that the Respondent had
    failed to identify which factors rendered the effect of the
    Respondent's deportation unduly harsh. Counsel for the Appellant
    submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark clearly had this test in
    mind.

15.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark did remind herself of Hesham Ali
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60
    where in paragraph 50 Lord Reed found that:

     "In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its task on the basis
    of the facts as it finds them to be on the evidence before it, and the
    law as established by statute and case law. Ultimately, it has to
    decide whether deportation is proportionate in the particular case
    before it, balancing the strength of the public interest in the
    deportation of the offender against the impact on private and family
    life. In doing so, it should give appropriate weight to Parliament's
    and the Secretary of State's assessments of the strength of the general
    public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders, as explained
    in paras 14, 37-38 and 46 above, and also consider all factors relevant
    to the specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal
    will generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength of the
    public interest in the deportation of the offender in the case before
    it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it. In
    general, only a claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as
    it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed".

16.   Therefore, a tribunal or court must apply relevant immigration rules
    and statutes. This included section 117C of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

17.  In the current case it is not disputed that the Respondent has three
    children under the age of 18 who are living in the United Kingdom and
    with whom she has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

18.  In paragraph 57 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark
    stated that "whilst a deportation case is clearly different from
    routine immigration cases, where it is the public interest in firm
    immigration control which is balanced against the private or family
    life rights of a child - the threshold is much higher than
    "unreasonableness" and is expressed in the current rules as "unduly
    harsh".  However, she had earlier said that the previous version of the
    Rules applied and when providing her reasons for her decision she did
    not explicitly refer to section 117C (4) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. She also adopted this approach in
    paragraph 60 of her decision where she stated that she found that the
    children's "integration in the UK and their prospects in Ghana are such
    that it would be unduly harsh (to borrow the language of the current
    Rules) to expect them to uproot and live there".

19.   She also accepted, in paragraph 46 of her decision, that paragraph
    399(b) could not apply, as at the date of decision, the Respondent's
    children were not yet British citizens. She did find one of the three
    children had lived in the United Kingdom for the necessary continuous
    period of over seven years but also noted that the evidence indicated
    that, if the Respondent were deported from the United Kingdom, his
    father would be able to care for him. Therefore, her focus should have
    been on whether the test in section 117C (4) was met.

20.  Nevertheless, she relied on the reasonableness test contained in the
    previous version of paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, in
    paragraph 57 of her decision, where she found that "the longer a child
    has lived in the UK, the more the balance will begin to swing in terms
    of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK".

21.  In paragraph 57 of her decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did
    list a number of factors, which would have an adverse effect on the
    children's best interests. These included the length of time the
    children had lived in the United Kingdom, the stage which they had
    reached in their education, the death of their sister, the loss of
    friends and community links in the United Kingdom and the possibility
    that the family would be economically precarious in Ghana. However, the
    latter factor was somewhat undermined by her later finding, in
    paragraph 59 of the decision, that the Respondent had a father and
    sister in Ghana and that she was apparently fit and healthy and capable
    of work. Furthermore, in paragraph 58 of her decision First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clark also accepted that, if the children were to remain
    here with their father, the continuity of their private life and their
    education would be preserved.

22.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark did not refer to any definition of in
    what circumstances it would be "unduly harsh" on the children for the
    Respondent to be deported.  She went no further than finding later in
    paragraph 57 that "the consequences of either separation from their
    mother or relocation to Ghana with her for these children would be
    extremely serious".  This did not comply with the test already adopted
    by the Upper Tribunal and which was then confirmed in paragraph 27 of
    KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC
    53, where Lord Justice Carnwath found that:

     "Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of  "unduly  harsh"  in  this
    context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President  and  UT
    Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a  decision
    given on 15 April 2015. They referred to  the  "evaluative  assessment"
    required of the tribunal:

     "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does  not
    equate  with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,   undesirable   or   merely
    difficult. Rather, it poses a  considerably  more  elevated  threshold.
    'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It is  the
    antithesis of pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the
    adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher."

23.  In paragraph 23 Lord Justice Carnwath also found that:

     "... the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to  introduce
    a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"  under  section  117B(6),
    taking account of the public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element of  comparison.
    It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a  level
    which may  be  acceptable  or  justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
    "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level".

24.  The Respondent's counsel submitted that in  terms  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clark did apply this test in paragraph 58 of her decision,  where
    she found that it would be damaging for the  children  to  remain  here
    with their  father  and  that  they  would  be  thrown  back  into  the
    circumstances that they experienced when the Respondent was in  prison.
    However, breaches of Article 8 of the ECHR need to be assessed  in  the
    light of the circumstances at the time of the appeal.  Instead,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clark placed reliance on a letter from  the  London
    Borough of Waltham Forest, dated 10 June 2011, a final statement by the
    Children's Guardian in the previous  care  proceedings  in  the  Family
    Court, dated 13 February 2012, a letter from Cynthia Franklin, dated 29
    January 2012, and information from  the  National  Offender  Management
    Service, which also dated back to the time that the Respondent  was  in
    prison.  This evidence was not capable of identifying that in  2018  it
    would be unduly harsh on the children for their mother to be deported.

25.  In any event, the Family Court orders disclosed to the  Upper  Tribunal
    do not indicate  that  the  Family  Court  had  granted  the  necessary
    permission for  the  Children's  Guardian's  report,  the  Respondent's
    husband's statement and the independent social workers'  report  to  be
    disclosed to the First-tier Tribunal and counsel for the Respondent was
    not able to confirm that permission had been granted.

26.   The  Respondent  also  relied  on  contemporaneous  letters  from  her
    children and her husband. In  addition,  the  Respondent's  two  oldest
    children and her husband gave evidence at the appeal hearing.  However,
    counsel for the Respondent was not able to  take  me  to  any  of  this
    evidence which met the "unduly harsh" test. It was not sufficient  that
    she now took the lead in their day to day care.

27.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark found in paragraph 59 of  her  decision
    that the Respondent's absence from the  United  Kingdom  would  have  a
    serious damaging effect on the children or the family's  relocation  to
    Ghana and "would be more acute than in the majority of cases, given the
    tragic death of [D] and the children's perception that their mother was
    unjustly punished for it". However, there was no  evidence  to  suggest
    that the children had not resolved some of the anger and confusion they
    experienced when the Respondent was first imprisoned in 2011.

28.  Counsel for the Respondent also submitted that the grounds had  "cherry
    picked" aspects of the decision to criticise but that reading the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision  in  its  totality  the  test  was  met.
    However, he was not able to direct me to  evidence  which  cumulatively
    would meet the test. The recent statement by the  Respondent  does  not
    address the test.

 29. There was a letter from Ms Chintoh, who is a retired civil servant  and
    family friend,  dated  18  July  2018.  However,  her  evidence  merely
    confirmed that the Respondent had now  built  a  strong  base  for  her
    family, that she was a doting mother and that her priority  had  always
    been her children. It did not address the effect on the children of her
    being deported.  Her  comments  about  the  effect  on  children  being
    brought up in a single parent household were general in nature and  did
    not refer to any evidence base.

30.  There was also no evidential basis for  her  finding  in  paragraph  60
    that "their integration in the UK and their prospects in Ghana are such
    that it would be unduly harsh ...to expect  them  to  uproot  and  live
    there".

31.  In his skeleton argument, counsel for the Respondent submitted that
    the Respondent's deportation would create unbearable and exceptional
    circumstances for her children. In paragraph 57, First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Clark had reminded herself that "the separation of children from
    a parent or the requirement to relocate outside the UK is a frequent
    and unavoidable consequence of criminality by a foreign offender".
    However, what Sir Stanley Burnton found in paragraph 43 of PF (Nigeria)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA Civ 251 was
    somewhat more complex and read:

     "In my judgment, the determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not
    identify, as it should have done, what were the features of the
    Appellant's case that amounted to compelling reasons, or were
    exceptional circumstances, justifying the success of his appeal.
    Indeed, I would go further and state that I have been unable to
    identify in the determination findings of fact that could properly be
    categorised as exceptional or amounting to compelling reasons for him
    to be allowed to remain in this country, given the seriousness of his
    repeated criminal conduct. I fully recognise that if the Judge's
    factual findings are well founded, there will be a real and damaging
    impact on his partner and the children; but that is a common
    consequence of the deportation of a person who has children in this
    country. Deportation will normally be appropriate in cases such as the
    present, even though the children will be affected and the interests of
    the children are a primary consideration"

32.  For all of these reasons, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clark
    did make errors of law in her decision.

 Decision

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clark is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Clark, Pickup or Woodhouse.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 25 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


