


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00138/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 14 April 2016                     |On : 19 April 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               hasmukh carsane
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Carsane's  appeal
against the decision to deport him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
regulation 19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

For the purposes  of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Carsane  as  the  appellant,
reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, originally from India,  born  on  22
February 1970. He claims to have first come to the United Kingdom  in  1999.
On 24 January 2002 he was issued with an EEA Residence Permit,  valid  until
24 January 2007. On 17 July 2007 he  was  granted  permanent  residence  and
given a permanent residence card on the basis  of  having  exercised  treaty
rights for  five  years.  His  wife  and  children  were  granted  permanent
residence in line with his residence.


On 19 February 2014 the appellant was convicted at  Harrow  Crown  Court  of
battery and threats to kill and was sentenced to  12  months'  imprisonment,
suspended for 24 months. He also received a supervision order for 18  months
and an activity requirement of 25 days. On 27 October 2014 he was  convicted
of common assault, affray, threatening  to  kill  and  breach  of  suspended
sentence and was sentenced to  a  total  of  21  months'  imprisonment.  His
earlier suspended sentence was activated. On 31 December 2014 he was  served
with a liability for deportation notice and on 1 April 2015  the  respondent
made a decision to deport him under regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations.

In the reasons for deportation letter,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
appellant had acquired the right to permanent residence but did  not  accept
that he had been continuously resident in the UK for 10 years in  accordance
with the Regulations. The respondent  then  considered  whether  deportation
was justified on serious grounds of public policy or public security.


The respondent considered  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  offence
which occurred on 24 October 2014, when his 11 year old daughter called  the
police and told them that he was hitting her mother, his wife, and  that  it
happened a lot. The appellant and his  family  were  having  dinner  in  the
family home celebrating Diwali and he was consuming alcohol. He then  became
aggressive and he threatened his wife and raised his crutch to  assault  her
and shouted that he would kill her. That offence also put the  appellant  in
breach of the suspended sentence order imposed on 19  February  2014  for  a
similar offence of domestic violence when under the  influence  of  alcohol,
when he had demanded money from his wife who refused  and  later  threatened
her and put two knives in his pocket threatening to  kill  her.  The  police
were again called by his daughter and they found  the  two  knives  under  a
duvet.


The respondent noted  that  the  appellant  had  previously  received  three
cautions on 1 July 2007, 23 February 2011 and 18 October  2012  for  assault
occasioning actual bodily harm, common  assault  and  battery,  relating  to
incidents involving a ticket inspector on a bus, his brother-in-law and  his
wife. The respondent  noted  that  the  appellant's  offences  all  involved
violence and considered that he had a lack of regard for the law, a lack  of
remorse for his offending behaviour and  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the
negative impact his  offending  behaviour  had  on  others.  The  respondent
considered that there remained a risk  of  the  appellant  re-offending  and
continuing to pose a risk of harm to the public, a  known  adult  and  known
children. It was considered that the appellant's deportation  was  justified
on serious grounds of public policy and, having regard to the principles  of
proportionality in Regulation 21(5)(a) and the factors in Regulation  21(6),
the respondent concluded that it was reasonable to expect him to  return  to
India or Portugal and resume life there and  that  deportation  to  Portugal
would  not  prejudice  his  prospects  of  rehabilitation.  The   respondent
considered  further  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  not  breach
Article 8 of the ECHR. Whilst he had a wife and two children, it  was  noted
that they were Indian nationals. It was not accepted that he had  a  genuine
and subsisting relationship with them. It was considered not  to  be  unduly
harsh for them to accompany him to Portugal or India or to remain in the  UK
whilst he was deported. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant
met the requirements of paragraph 399 or 399A of the  immigration  rules  or
that  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
interest in his deportation for the purposes of paragraph 398.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  initially
heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 10 August 2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ross. Judge Ross allowed the appeal to the extent  that  the  decision
was not in accordance with the law, on the basis that the  respondent  ought
to have considered the appellant's position  as  an  EEA  national  who  had
lived continuously in the UK for 10 years, so that  the  higher  "imperative
grounds" threshold had to be met. That decision was set aside in  the  Upper
Tribunal following an appeal by the Secretary of State, on  the  basis  that
consideration had not been given to the case of Secretary of State  for  the
Home Department v MG (Judgment  of  the  Court)  [2014]  EUECJ  C-400/12  in
regard to the calculation of the relevant 10  year  period.   The  case  was
then remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

The appellant's appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Malley
on 14 January 2016.  As  previously,  the  appellant  was  not  present  but
appeared in person and gave oral evidence before the judge. He confirmed  to
the judge  that  he  had  three  children,  two  girls  who  had  Portuguese
passports and a boy who had a British  passport.  His  wife  had  an  Indian
passport but had indefinite leave to remain. He  was  not  living  with  his
wife and children and had not done so since his last  offence.  He  was  not
allowed to see them and was waiting for  a  social  services  report  to  be
completed. His wife had a non-molestation  order  in  place  which  she  had
applied for before he left prison. He referred to his  own  health  problems
consisting of difficulties with his leg and ankle and a heart problem  which
required surgery. He denied  having  used  violence  against  his  wife  and
denied having threatened her with a knife. He confirmed that he had gone  to
India with his family in July 2014 and had stayed with  his  wife's  mother.
He disputed references in his medical records to having sold his  medication
in prison for drugs and tobacco. He confirmed that he  had  had  no  alcohol
since leaving prison. He confirmed that he had worked until July  2013  when
he underwent operations on his leg and heart and that he  currently  had  no
income.

Judge O'Malley found that the appellant  had  not  been  in  the  UK  for  a
continuous period of ten years counting back from the date of  the  decision
and that he could not rely  on  the  protection  afforded  under  Regulation
21(4)(a)  on  "imperative  grounds".  She  therefore  considered  that   the
respondent had applied the correct "serious grounds"  test.  She  considered
that the appellant's offences  were  of  escalating  violence  and  involved
serious threats exacerbated by the use of knives on one occasion;  that  the
appellant's claim not to have been violent to his wife was untruthful;  that
he had a violent nature; that his pattern of offending involved a  disregard
for the safety of others, in particular his  wife  and  children;  that  his
behaviour was grave and serious and repellent to society; that he had  shown
a disregard for the legal system as he had failed to  be  persuaded  by  the
suspended sentence to change his behaviour; that he had failed to adhere  to
the terms of his probation including his unauthorised trip  to  India;  that
his denial of the extent of his criminality and violence  towards  his  wife
was not consistent with someone taking  real  steps  to  rehabilitation  and
indicated his controlling behaviour and attitude; and  that  he  remained  a
current threat. She concluded that the appellant remained  a  real,  current
and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
society.

The judge then went on to consider proportionality and the  requirements  in
Regulation 21(6).  She  took  account  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
relationship with his three children would be significantly affected  if  he
was deported and that their separation would be prolonged.  She  found  that
deportation would affect  his  rehabilitation  as  he  was  currently  being
supported in sobriety. She  found  that  deportation  would  compromise  his
ability to  engage  with  the  social  services  process  in  regard  to  an
assessment of his suitability to  have  contact  with  his  children,  which
would in turn affect his future  relationship  with  his  children  and  may
affect his continued  sobriety.  She  considered  that  the  fact  that  the
appellant worked and paid taxes until his health was compromised,  and  that
he had purchased a property  and  had  three  children  in  the  UK  was  an
indication of  integration.  She  noted  that  the  appellant's  mother  and
siblings were in the UK and that he had no links to Portugal.  Overall,  the
judge found the appellant's deportation to be  disproportionate.  She  found
that there was some opportunity for rehabilitation in the UK and that  there
were safeguards in place for his wife and children. For  those  reasons  the
judge then allowed the appeal under the EEA Regulations.


The respondent sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
following grounds: that the judge's approach  to  the  significance  of  the
appellant's integration in the UK was unlawful; that the judge's  acceptance
of the appellant's alleged sobriety was unlawful; that the judge  had  erred
in her findings on rehabilitation; that the judge had erred in her  approach
to the appellant's future relationship with his family  and  had  unlawfully
speculated; and that the judge had unlawfully sought to minimise the  threat
posed  to  the  appellant's  wife  and  children  by  relying  upon  current
safeguards in place.

Permission to appeal was granted on 26 February 2016 on all the grounds.

The appeal came before me on 14 April 2016. The appellant  was  not  present
at the  hearing.  Information  recently  provided  to  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
indicated that the appellant had failed to report to his  probation  officer
or to respond to attempts to contact him and that  he  had  also  previously
mentioned to his probation officer  about  being  homeless.  Accordingly  it
seemed to me that, whilst there were doubts as to whether the appellant  had
received the notice of hearing, the notice had been properly served  at  his
last known address and there  was  no  reason  why  the  appeal  should  not
proceed in his absence.

Ms Brocklesby-Weller made submissions on the error of  law,  expanding  upon
the grounds, and asked that the First-tier Tribunal's decision be set  aside
and re-made by dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Error of Law

There is no challenge to  Judge  O'Malley's  finding  that  the  appellant's
conduct represented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, for the  purposes  of
Regulation 21(5)(c) and indeed I find no errors of law in  her  decision  in
that regard. The judge gave detailed and cogent reasons for concluding  that
the appellant remained such a threat, as I have summarised at [10] above.

However, having made such  findings,  and  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
respondent in her grounds and expanded upon  by  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,  the
judge's  findings  and  conclusions  on  proportionality  under   Regulation
21(5)(a) and on Regulation 21(6) are undoubtedly  perverse  and  irrational.
The reasons set out by the respondent in the grounds are  comprehensive  and
clear and there is little need for me to expand upon  them.  Nevertheless  I
make the following observations.


The basis upon  which  the  judge  formed  her  view  on  those  matters  is
summarised at [73] of her decision. As  the  respondent  asserts  at  ground
one, the judge's approach to integration was to give  particular  weight  to
the appellant's period of employment,  his  financial  contribution  to  the
economy and his purchase of a house in the UK, and his family  ties  to  the
UK. However, as she herself noted at [70] and  [73],  his  English  language
skills were limited despite his length of  residence  in  the  UK,  his  job
involved working  with  members  of  his  own  community,  he  had  shown  a
disregard for the laws of the UK by offending whilst subject to a  suspended
sentence and by leaving the country in  breach  of  the  conditions  of  his
licence, none of his family members had attended the hearing to support  him
and, at [72] he had not  fully  integrated  into  the  UK.  Accordingly  the
judge, in placing substantial weight upon  matters  indicating  a  level  of
integration, simply ignored the other matters which  she  herself  found  to
indicate a lack of integration.


The judge also  placed  significant  weight  upon  the  appellant's  claimed
sobriety and the support he was receiving in that regard,  noting  that  his
risk of re-offending was reduced if he remained  sober.  Yet,  in  accepting
the appellant's claim to be sober and to be  able  to  remain  alcohol-free,
she ignored her own findings that the appellant had also  refused  to  admit
having been violent towards his wife and having threatened her  with  knives
and, furthermore, ignored her own comments at [68], with  reference  to  the
OASys report, about him minimising his alcohol use to professionals and  not
attending any courses outside  prison.  There  was,  in  fact,  no  evidence
before the judge to suggest that the  appellant  would  be  able  to  remain
sober and accordingly it was irrational for her to  place  such  significant
weight upon his assurances that he would.


The judge took into account the appellant's sobriety and the support he  was
given in placing  the  weight  that  she  did  upon  his  opportunities  for
rehabilitation in the UK. She also considered  rehabilitation  in  terms  of
the appellant receiving  support  from  social  services  in  assessing  his
ability to have contact with his children. Yet, again, that  was  simply  no
more than speculation and indeed was completely at  odds  with  her  earlier
findings at [62], that the appellant's behaviour, in terms of his denial  of
violence  towards  his  wife  and  his  criminality,  and  his   controlling
attitude, was not consistent with someone  who  was  taking  real  steps  to
rehabilitation. Furthermore, as the respondent asserted in ground  4,  there
was no proper basis  for  the  judge's  speculation  about  the  appellant's
potential future relationship with his children  and  the  weight  that  she
attached to that, when she herself noted his lies about using  violence  and
threats in front of the children and when the evidence in  relation  to  the
social services provided no indication of any  likelihood  of  contact.  The
judge's reliance upon safeguards in  place  for  the  appellant's  wife  and
children as a matter weighing in his favour completely ignored  the  reasons
for the safeguards and the fact that  those  safeguards,  including  a  non-
molestation order, was an indication that he presented as a danger to them.

Accordingly, as her own findings reflected, there was no  proper  basis  for
the significant weight the judge gave  to  any  of  the  matters  which  she
considered in her assessment of proportionality  and  her  assessment  under
Regulation 21(6). In light of the many adverse  findings  she  made  against
the appellant, such findings having  been  properly  made  on  the  evidence
before her, the judge's reasons for allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  were
simply perverse and irrational. I therefore set aside her decision  in  that
regard.

Re-making the Decision

For the same reasons as given in above it is clear that,  in  re-making  the
decision, the appellant's appeal cannot succeed.

In terms of proportionality  under  Regulation  21(5)(a),  the  respondent's
decision to deport the appellant undoubtedly complied  with  the  principles
of proportionality. The factors in favour  of  integration  in  the  UK  are
limited to little more than the appellant's length of residence here  and  a
period of past employment, but that in itself is greatly outweighed  by  his
disregard for the law and his  criminality  and  violence.  He  has  clearly
failed to show that he has integrated into  British  society.  There  is  no
evidence to show that he has sought to address the  claimed  source  of  his
violence, namely his alcohol problem, and indeed  the  information  supplied
by Ms Brocklesby-Weller confirms that he has relapsed into  alcohol  misuse.
There is no evidence of attempts made towards  rehabilitation  and  thus  no
reason to believe that rehabilitation could be achieved  better  in  the  UK
than in Portugal. Neither is there any  evidence  to  suggest  that  contact
with his children is likely to occur in the near future, if at all, or  that
the appellant's presence in the UK would be in their best interests.


For all of these reasons,  and  considering  the  fact  that  the  appellant
remains a threat to his wife and children and has not sought to address  his
violent nature, that he has shown disregard to the laws of this country  and
has made no attempt to address his  controlling  and  violent  behaviour,  I
find that his deportation is justified on serious grounds of  public  policy
and public security. I find that the higher threshold of  "serious  grounds"
has  been  met,  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  21(3),  and  that   the
respondent's decision was therefore in accordance with the EEA  Regulations.



For the same reasons I find that the appellant's removal  would  not  breach
his  human  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  He  cannot  meet  the
requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  or  (b)  as  he   has   no   subsisting
relationship with his wife or children. Neither  is  he  able  to  meet  the
requirements of paragraph 399A,  having  spent  the  majority  of  his  life
outside the UK and not being socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK.
There are no very compelling reasons  outweighing  the  public  interest  in
deporting him for the purposes of section  398  of  the  immigration  rules.
None  of  the  factors  in  sections  117B  and  117C  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum 2002 apply  so  as  to  provide  any  weight  in  the
appellant's favour in assessing proportionality. His deportation is  clearly
not in breach of Article 8.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly  allowed  and
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  re-make  the
decision by dismissing Mr Carsane's appeal on all grounds.











                               Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
