

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: DA/00339/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |promulgated                         |
|On 31 October 2017                       |        On 22 February 2018         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:               Mr C Yeo instructed by Renaissance
Solicitors
For the Respondent:            Mr Bramble Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. The history of this matter shows that on 10 September  2014  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Warren Grant dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal pursuant to article 8 ECHR
        against the respondent's decision to refuse to revoke a deportation
        order made against the appellant on 17 February 1998,  pursuant  to
        section 5(1) Immigration Act 1971.
     2. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal which was granted by a Designated Judge of the  First-tier
        Tribunal on 1 October 2014. On 11  December  2014,  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Moulden found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  err
        in law and dismissed the Secretary of States appeal.
     3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Court  of
        Appeal for which permission was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 18
        March 2015. By an order dated 24 July 2015, sealed on 27 July 2015,
        the Right Honourable Lord Justice Richards, considering the renewed
        application for permission to appeal,  granted  permission  finding
        that for the reasons set out in  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  the
        application met the second appeal criteria.
     4. By an order sealed on 20 July 2017  the  Court  of  Appeal,  having
        heard counsel for both parties, allowed  the  Secretary  of  States
        appeal ordering that the respondent's appeal against the  Secretary
        of State's refusal to revoke the deportation order made against him
        is remitted for reconsideration by a different constitution of  the
        Upper Tribunal. That judgment is reported as Secretary of State the
        Home Department v SU [2017] EWCA Civ 1069.
     5. Following  preliminary  discussions  at  the  commencement  of  the
        hearing both advocates agreed that the effect of the order  of  the
        Court of Appeal is that the earlier decisions of both the Upper and
        First-tier Tribunal have been set aside. When discussing whether in
        light of this it was appropriate for the matter to  remain  in  the
        Upper Tribunal or be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  both
        advocates agreed that they were happy  for  the  matter  to  remain
        before the Upper Tribunal.
     6. In light of the fact no  CMR  had  been  listed  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal, as is ordinarily the case with an appeal remitted by  the
        Court of Appeal, Mr Bramble indicated he wanted  time  to  consider
        the Court of Appeal decision on the papers as he thought the matter
        had been listed for an error of law hearing and was unaware of  the
        true nature of the hearing in light of the developments before  the
        Court of Appeal. Mr Yeo confirmed that  he  was  relying  upon  the
        First-tier Tribunal bundle.
     7. The matter was accordingly put back to  allow  Mr  Bramble  further
        time after which he confirmed no evidential issues  arose,  it  was
        accepted that oral evidence would not be necessary,  and  that  the
        matter could proceed by way of submissions only. It is accepted  by
        Mr Bramble that the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal are
        not disputed.
     8.  The  procedure  adopted  was  for  Mr  Yeo  to  make  his  initial
        submissions followed by Mr Bramble and then for Mr Yeo to reply.



Background


     9. The facts, taken from the judgment of the Court of Appeal,  are  as
        follows:


         The facts
              3.  The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan who was  born  in
                  May 1959. He entered the UK illegally in  March  1994  but
                  shortly  afterwards  lodged  a  claim  for  asylum.   That
                  application was refused in November 1997  and  his  appeal
                  against the refusal was dismissed in June 1998. In October
                  1995, he married MPP, an Indian national with a  right  of
                  residence in the UK whom he had met while  living  in  the
                  UK. He was granted leave to remain as a spouse until March
                  1997. In September 1996, he was convicted on two counts of
                  conspiracy   to   defraud,   sentenced   to   42   months'
                  imprisonment  and  recommended  by  the  trial  judge  for
                  deportation. In February 1998,  a  deportation  order  was
                  made against him. He appealed against  the  order  but  by
                  August 1998 his appeal rights had been exhausted  and,  in
                  October 1998, he was deported to Pakistan.
              4.  In 2000, the respondent illegally re-entered the UK.  His
                  marriage to MPP was  dissolved  in  January  2002  and  he
                  subsequently married JU, who  had  come  to  the  UK  from
                  Pakistan and become a  British  citizen  by  virtue  of  a
                  previous marriage. In June 2003, he applied for  leave  to
                  remain as JU's spouse. In November 2005,  he  applied  for
                  indefinite leave to remain as part of the "family exercise
                  2003" but his application was dismissed in September  2006
                  on the grounds that he did not meet the relevant criteria.


              5.  No progress was made with the  original  application  for
                  leave to remain as JU's spouse until December  2013,  when
                  the Secretary of State wrote to the respondent  requesting
                  information, to which the respondent promptly replied.
              6.  The Secretary of  State  determined  that  it  was  first
                  necessary  to  decide  whether  to   revoke   the   extant
                  deportation order made in  1998.  In  February  2014,  she
                  determined not to revoke it, setting out her reasons in  a
                  letter dated 5 February 2014.
              7.   As  earlier  mentioned,  the   respondent   successfully
                  appealed to the FTT against  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
                  deportation   order   and   the   Secretary    of    State
                  unsuccessfully  appealed  that  decision  to   the   Upper
                  Tribunal.
              8. The respondent's application for leave to  remain  as  JU's
                 spouse has yet to be determined,  pending  the  outcome  of
                 these proceedings.



The law


    10. The Court of Appeal summarised the applicable law  before  them  in
        the following terms:


             The relevant legislation and rules
              9.  The statutory framework for deportation  orders  and  the
                  system of appeals against them (and against a  refusal  to
                  revoke a deportation order) relevant to this appeal are or
                  were set out in a number of  statutory  provisions.  There
                  have since been some further changes  but  I  shall  refer
                  only to the applicable provisions.
              10.       Section  3(5)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  (as
                  amended) (the 1971 Act) provides that a person who is  not
                  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to  deportation  if   the
                  Secretary of State deems it to be conducive to the  public
                  good, and section 3(6) (as amended) provides that a person
                  who is not a British citizen is also liable to deportation
                  if, after he has attained the age of 17, he  is  convicted
                  of an  offence  punishable  by  imprisonment  and  on  his
                  conviction he is recommended for deportation  by  a  court
                  empowered by the Act to do so. Section 5(1) provides that,
                  where a person is liable to deportation under section 3(5)
                  or (6), the Secretary of  State  may  make  a  deportation
                  order against him.
              11.      Section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007  (the  2007
                  Act) provides that, for the purposes of  section  3(5)  of
                  the 1971 Act, "the deportation of a  foreign  criminal  is
                  conducive to the public good". A "foreign criminal"  is  a
                  person who is not a British citizen, is convicted  in  the
                  UK  of  an  offence  and  is  sentenced  to  a  period  of
                  imprisonment of at least 12 months. Further, section 32(5)
                  provides  that  the  Secretary  of  State  must   make   a
                  deportation  order  in  respect  of  a  foreign  criminal,
                  subject to section 33. So far as relevant to  the  present
                  appeal, the obligation to make a deportation  order  under
                  section 32(5) is displaced by section 33 where deportation
                  would breach "a person's Convention  rights",  i.e.  their
                  rights  under  the  Convention   on   Human   Rights   and
                  Fundamental Freedoms.
              12. The grounds on which an appeal  can  be  made  against  a
                  deportation order (or a refusal to revoke  an  order)  are
                  set out in section 84(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
                  and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and  include  that  the
                  decision is not in accordance with immigration rules, that
                  the decision, or removal pursuant to  a  decision,  is  or
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998 as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention
                  rights, or the decision is  otherwise  not  in  accordance
                  with the law.
              13. The relationship generally between immigration  decisions
                  and Convention rights, and particularly between  decisions
                  to deport foreign criminals and their  Convention  rights,
                  is the subject of provisions contained in Part 5A  of  the
                  2002 Act, which was introduced by the Immigration Act 2014
                  with effect from 28 July 2014.
              14. Section 117A provides:
                  "(1) This Part  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
                  required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the
                  Immigration Acts-


                  (a) breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and
                  (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the
              Human Rights Act 1998.


                  (2) In considering the public interest question, the court
                  or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                  (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section
              117B, and
                  (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of   foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.


                  (3) In subsection  (2),  "the  public  interest  question"
                  means the question  of  whether  an  interference  with  a
                  person's right to respect for private and family  life  is
                  justified under Article 8(2)."
              15. The decision of the FTT in the present case was  made  on
                  10 September 2014 and accordingly, by  virtue  of  section
                  117A, it was required to  apply  Part  5A  in  determining
                  whether  the  refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation  order
                  against the respondent breached  the  respondent's  rights
                  under Article 8 of  the  Convention:  see  YM  (Uganda)  v
                  Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
                  1292; [2015] INLR 405, at [38].
             16.  Section  117B(1)  provides  that  "[t]he  maintenance   of
                 effective immigration controls is in the public  interest".
                 Section 117B(4) provides:
                 "(4) Little weight should be given to-


                  (a) a private life, or
                  (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that
                  is established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully."
              17.      Section 117C(1) provides that "[t]he deportation  of
                  foreign criminals is  in  the  public  interest".  Section
                  117C(3) provides that in the case of  a  foreign  criminal
                  (C) who has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
                  of more than four years, "the public interest requires C's
                  deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies". It
                  is common ground that neither  Exception  applied  in  the
                  present case.
              18. The Immigration Rules applicable to the decision  of  the
                  FTT were those in force at the time of  its  decision:  YM
                  (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  at
                  [39].
              19. The relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are
                  paragraphs 390 - 400, as in  force  immediately  following
                  their amendment with effect from 28 July 2014.
             20. Paragraphs 390 - 392,  under  the  heading  "Revocation  of
                 deportation orders", provided:
                  "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order
                  will be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances
                  including the following:


                  (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
                  (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
                  (iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
                  maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                  (iv)  the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
              compassionate circumstances.


                  390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State
                  will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
                  if  it  does  not,  it  will  only   be   in   exceptional
                  circumstances that the public interest in maintaining  the
                  deportation order will be outweighed by other factors


                  391. In the  case  of  a  person  who  has  been  deported
                  following  conviction  for   a   criminal   offence,   the
                  continuation of a deportation order  against  that  person
                  will be the proper course:


                  (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence  for  which
                  the person was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of
                  less than 4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since  the
                  making of the deportation order, or
                  (b) in the case of a conviction of an  offence  for  which
                  the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                  least 4 years, at any time,
                  Unless, in either case the continuation would be  contrary
                  to the Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, or there  are
                  other exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation
                  is outweighed by compelling factors.


                  391A. In other cases, revocation of  the  order  will  not
                  normally be  authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been
                  materially altered, either by a  change  of  circumstances
                  since the order was made, or by fresh  information  coming
                  to light which was not before the appellate authorities or
                  the Secretary of State. The  passage  of  time  since  the
                  person was deported may also in itself amount  to  such  a
                  change of circumstances as to warrant  revocation  of  the
                  order.


                  392. Revocation of a deportation order  does  not  entitle
                  the person concerned to re-enter the  United  Kingdom;  it
                  renders him eligible to apply  for  permission  under  the
                  Immigration Rules. Application for revocation of the order
                  may be made to the Entry Clearance Office or direct to the
                  Home Office."
              21. Those paragraphs were considered  by  this  court  in  ZP
                  (India) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                  [2015] EWCA Civ 1197; [2016] 4 WLR 35 at [20] -  [27].  In
                  that case, ZP had been deported from the UK pursuant to an
                  order made on 28 November 2008, following  her  conviction
                  of  offences  for  which  she  received   two   concurrent
                  sentences of  12  months'  imprisonment.  While  still  in
                  India, she applied for the revocation of  the  deportation
                  order on Article 8 grounds and, by a decision made  on  17
                  April 2014, the Upper  Tribunal  allowed  her  appeal  and
                  revoked the order. In this court,  the  parties  were  not
                  agreed as to which of the paragraphs  governed  the  case.
                  Underhill LJ, with whom  Christopher  Clarke  LJ  and  Sir
                  Timothy Lloyd agreed, held that paragraph 390  applied  to
                  all applications, albeit that its  provisions  are  "at  a
                  very general level" and were in practice,  in  that  case,
                  superseded by the more specific provisions that follow.
              22. The court held that paragraph 390A applied only in a case
                  where the applicant had not  yet  been  deported.  In  the
                  present case, the respondent was deported pursuant to  the
                  deportation order in October 1998,  having  exhausted  all
                  appeals procedures. The  fact  that  he  subsequently  re-
                  entered the country illegally and so made his  application
                  for revocation of the deportation order from within the UK
                  does not provide grounds for applying  paragraph  390A  to
                  it. Any  doubt  on  this  question  was  resolved  by  the
                  introduction of paragraph 399D, to which I refer below.
             23. The court held that paragraph 391 applies  to  applications
                 to revoke a deportation order by  a  person  who  has  been
                 deported following conviction for a criminal offence. In ZP
                 (India),  the  applicant  applied  for  revocation  of  the
                 deportation order less than 10  years  after  it  had  been
                 made. Accordingly,  continuation  of  the  order  was  "the
                 proper course" unless, so  far  as  relevant,  continuation
                 would be contrary to her Convention rights  "or  there  are
                 other exceptional circumstances that mean the  continuation
                 is outweighed by compelling factors".  In  addressing  that
                 issue, and taking account of the relationship  between  the
                 Immigration Rules and Article 8 rights as explained  in  MF
                 (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
                 [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544 (and, in large part,
                 subsequently confirmed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  Ali  v
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC  60;
                 [2016] 1 WLR 4799), Underhill LJ said at [24]:
                 "Decision-takers will have to conduct an assessment of  the
                 proportionality of maintaining the order in place  for  the
                 prescribed  period,  balancing  the  public   interest   in
                 continuing it against the interference with the applicant's
                 private and family life; but in striking that balance  they
                 should take as a starting point the  Secretary  of  State's
                 assessment  of  the  public  interest  reflected   in   the
                 prescribed periods and should only order revocation after a
                 lesser period if there are compelling reasons to do so."
              24. In the  present  case,  the  application  to  revoke  the
                 deportation order, and the FTT's decision, was made over 10
                 years after the order was made. The effect of paragraph 391
                 in these circumstances was the subject of consideration and
                 decision below, and forms part of the Secretary of  State's
                 grounds of appeal. The unusual feature of the present case,
                 that the applicant had been deported but  subsequently  re-
                 entered the country illegally, is  expressly  addressed  in
                 paragraph 399D.
              25.  Paragraphs  A398,  398,  399,  399A-399D  and  400   are
                 contained in a section headed "Deportation and Article  8".
                 Paragraph A398 provides:
                 "A398. These rules apply where:


                  (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation  claims  that
                  his deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's
                  obligations  under  Article  8   of   the   Human   Rights
                  Convention;
                  (b) a foreign criminal applies  for  a  deportation  order
                  made against him to be revoked."
              26. Paragraphs 398 - 399A apply where the applicant  has  yet
                  to be deported; this formed part of this court's reasoning
                  in ZP (India)  and  follows  from  the  express  terms  of
                  paragraph 398: see ZP (India) at [22].
             27. Paragraph 399D was introduced with effect from 28 July 2014
                 and so was applicable at the time of the FTT's decision  in
                 the present case. It provides:
                  "399D. Where a foreign  criminal  has  been  deported  and
                 enters the United Kingdom in breach of a deportation  order
                 enforcement of the  deportation  order  is  in  the  public
                 interest and will be  implemented  unless  there  are  very
                 exceptional circumstances."
             28. No reference was made to paragraph 399D in the decisions of
                 either the FTT or the UT, nor does it  appear  that  either
                 Tribunal was referred to it.


    11. Mr Yeo also refers in his skeleton argument to the General  Grounds
        for Refusal in Part  9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with  specific
        reference to paragraph 320(2) which provides that a person must  be
        refused entry if he or she "has been convicted of  an  offence  for
        which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  for  at
        least 12 months but less than 4 years, unless a period of 10  years
        has passed since the end of the sentence". It is argued that  these
        are the circumstances applying to the appellant in this case as  he
        was sentenced to 42 months imprisonment, his sentence ending at the
        latest in 2000, and the 10-year period therefore expiring in 2010.
    12. The specific rule recognises that where paragraph  320(2)  applies,
        unless refusal would be contrary to the Human Rights Convention  or
        Refugee Convention, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances
        that the public interest in maintaining refusal will be  outweighed
        by competing factors.
    13. Mr Yeo also seeks to rely upon law relating to the issue  of  delay
        which he submits is capable of being  taken  into  account  in  the
        context of deportation proceedings.
    14. In relation to the general approach to delay, in EB (Kosovo) (FC) v
        SSHD [2008] UKHL 41 the House of Lords said  that  delay  could  be
        relevant in three ways. First the applicant may during  the  period
        of any delay develop closer personal and social ties and  establish
        deeper roots in the community than he  could  have  shown  earlier.
        The longer the period of delay the likelier this is to be true.  To
        the  extent  that  it  is  true  the  applicant's  case   will   be
        strengthened.  Secondly, delay may  be  relevant  to  an  immigrant
        without leave to enter or remain who is in a precarious  situation,
        liable to removal at any time.  Any relationship into which such an
        applicant enters is  likely,  initially,  to  be  tentative,  being
        entered into under the shadow of severance by administrative order.
         This is more true where the other party  to  the  relationship  is
        aware of the precarious nature of the position and  is  treated  as
        relevant to the quality of the relationship.  With delay the  sense
        of impermanence in such a relationship will  fade.   Thirdly  delay
        may be relevant in reducing the  weight  that  would  otherwise  be
        accorded to fair and firm immigration control if the delay is shown
        to  be  the  result  of  a  dysfunctional   system   which   yields
        unpredictable and unfair results.
    15. The Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 considered  (para  52),
        referring to EB (Kosovo), that the cogency of the  public  interest
        in the removal of a person living in the UK unlawfully  was  liable
        to diminish or looking at the matter from the opposite perspective,
        the weight to be given to precarious  family  life  was  liable  to
        increase if there was a protracted  delay  in  the  enforcement  of
        immigration control.
    16. In relation to case law specifically addressing the issue of  delay
        in the context of deportation proceedings, in Kaplan and  Others  v
        Norway (Application no. 32504/11) ECtHR (First Section) it was held
        that there was a breach of Article 8 in removing  the  claimant  to
        Turkey despite a 1999 conviction for aggravated  assault,  in  part
        because family life had been established before  going  to  Norway,
        because of the burden on the youngest autistic  child,  because  on
        the facts the offence was not that serious, but  also  because  the
        authorities took no measures to deport the Claimant for  about  six
        years and apart from minor offences he had not offended again.
    17. In KD (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 418 the Jamaican appellant  arrived
        here in 1999. In 2003, he was convicted of supplying class A drugs.
        Thereafter he committed two relatively minor  offences.   A  deport
        order was signed in 2007 but he was not deported. It was held  that
        the Secretary of State's  delays  and  administrative  failings  in
        taking steps to deport the foreign national had given him  time  to
        achieve rehabilitation  and  form  strong  family  bonds  with  his
        British-born children, which amounted to exceptional  circumstances
        outweighing  the  high  public  interest   in   deporting   foreign
        criminals. Conversely in ZZ (Tanzania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1404
        when there was an extensive delay, the Court of  Appeal  took  into
        account  when  dismissing  the  appeal  that  the  Respondent   was
        overworked and under-resourced.
    18.  In KD (Jamaica) the  Jamaican  appellant  had  a  British  citizen
        partner and three children, aged thirteen, ten and seven.  In  2003
        he was sentenced to five for class A drugs offences.  In  2007/2008
        he received non-custodial sentences for possessing  class  A  drugs
        and  driving  without  insurance.  Due  to  administrative  errors,
        neither the subsequent  notice  of  intention  to  deport  nor  the
        deportation order was  served  upon  the  Claimant.  In  2008,  the
        Claimant applied for leave to remain as the unmarried partner. More
        than  three  years  after  receiving  the  application,  the   SSHD
        requested further information about  the  Claimant's  family  life,
        which was supplied. She decided to  treat  the  application  as  an
        application to revoke the  deportation  order.  The  2012  decision
        letter never reached  the  Claimant  because  the  offices  of  his
        solicitors  had  closed  down.  Although  the  Upper  Tribunal,  in
        allowing the appellant's appeal, applied the wrong Rules the  Court
        of Appeal upheld the decision noting that  it  was  thirteen  years
        since  the  Claimant's  conviction  for  a  serious  offence,   the
        Secretary of State had delayed inordinately in taking any effective
        steps to deport him, the Claimant had put that period of respite to
        good use and had achieved  rehabilitation,  he  had  established  a
        family of which he was a crucial member  and  built  up  such  firm
        relations  with  his  three  children  that  deportation  would  be
        devastating for the family.
    19. In MN-T (Columbia) v SSHD [2106] EWCA Civ 893 the Court  of  Appeal
        held that the Upper Tribunal was entitled to find  very  compelling
        circumstances over and above the section 117C(4) exceptions in  the
        case of a 48 year old Colombian woman who had lived in the UK since
        the age of 9 and had served eight  years  in  prison  for  a  drugs
        offence.  Delay was a major reason for the  court  coming  to  that
        conclusion.   The  court  explained  the  reasons  why  delay   was
        significant - if the appellant became rehabilitated  he  no  longer
        posed a danger to the public; the deterrent effect of the policy of
        deporting foreign criminals was weakened if the Secretary of  State
        for the Home Department did not act promptly; it could not be  said
        to express society's revulsion if there was a delay of many years.
    20. It was held in RLP (BAH revisited -  expeditious  justice)  Jamaica
        [2017] UKUT 330 that in cases where the public  interest  favouring
        deportation of an immigrant is potent and pressing, even  egregious
        and unjustified delay on the part of the Secretary of State in  the
        underlying decision-making process is unlikely to tip  the  balance
        in the immigrant's favour in  the  proportionality  exercise  under
        Article 8(2) of the ECHR.   In this case, although it had taken the
        Secretary of State 10  years  to  make  a  deportation  order,  the
        appellant had been in the UK unlawfully for more than 16 years,  he
        had been sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment  and  his  family  life
        consisted only of the indirect contact he had with his  15-year-old
        daughter - see [23] of the decision.
    21. Mr Yeo seeks to distinguish the decision in RLP on the  basis  that
        in that case the delay by the Secretary  State  was  to  enforce  a
        decision to remove whereas is in the instant  case  it  is  in  the
        making decision in the first place, that the facts of RLP are  very
        different in that appellant was  described  as  having  a  "flimsy"
        family life whereas in the instant case the appellant  is  married,
        has family life, contributes positively his time, and his  offences
        were not as serious as the one in RLP.


Submissions

    22. Whilst not in  verbatim  form,  the  advocate  submissions  can  be
        summarised in the following terms:
    23. Mr Yeo: The appellant does not dispute that he committed a  serious
        offence and that he re-entered the United Kingdom in breach of  the
        existing deportation order. It is not disputed by  either  advocate
        that the issue was the proportionality of the respondent's decision
        that the deportation order should be enforced.
    24. The appellant accepts that his action  in  re-entering  the  United
        Kingdom in breach of the  deportation  order  was  wrong  and  that
        ordinarily there will be no decision to revoke a deportation  order
        for at least 3 years from the date the order was made in accordance
        with the terms of the rules in force at the date of  the  Secretary
        State's decision.
    25. Mr Yeo accepted that the period of eleven years delay in making the
        decision was perhaps the appellants strongest point; especially  as
        had the Secretary State acted in removing the appellant in 2003  it
        would have been highly unlikely the appellant would  have  had  any
        realistic prospects of defending the decision to  remove  him  from
        the United Kingdom. It is however submitted that  as  a  result  of
        delay the situation has now changed.
    26. In EV (Kosovo) it was accepted that delay, which enabled  a  person
        to develop and strengthen protected rights in the  United  Kingdom,
        family or private life, may make their position more secure. If the
        Secretary of State tolerates a  person's  presence  in  the  United
        Kingdom for a substantial period  of  time,  such  as  occurred  in
        relation to the appellant and his wife, this arguably  reduces  the
        weight otherwise to be given to  the  requirements  of  immigration
        control.
    27. It is submitted both the appellant and his wife have formed  family
        life in the United Kingdom to the extent they have in light of  the
        Secretary of States delay. It is also the case that family  in  the
        United  Kingdom  includes   the   presence   of   the   appellant's
        stepdaughter who, although now an adult, form part of the appellant
        and  his  wife's  private  life.  The   evidence   also   indicates
        contribution by the appellant to the community.
    28. Mr Yeo also refers to the age of the appellant and  his  wife.  The
        appellant is now 58 years of age and it was submitted  it  will  be
        harder for him to reintegrate and rebuild a life in Pakistan  after
        his time in the United Kingdom. The appellant's wife has  lived  in
        the United Kingdom since 1974 and  been  a  British  citizen  since
        1979. It is also  said  the  appellant's  wife  has  health  issues
        although it is not submitted they are sufficient to enable  her  to
        succeed pursuant to Article 3 as medical treatment is available  in
        Pakistan.
    29. It was submitted there are very exceptional circumstances made  out
        on the facts of this appeal.
    30. The appellant is also  a  Christian  which  it  is  claimed  is  an
        obstacle to his reintegration into Pakistan. The appellant  attends
        events in the United Kingdom and would be concerned as a result  of
        acts of persecution against Christians in Pakistan.
    31. It was submitted that in addition to the Rules, it was necessary to
        have regard to section 117  of  the  2002  Act.  It  was  submitted
        section 117B was relevant but Mr Yeo was not sure how it applied as
        the appellant is a foreign criminal. It is accepted however section
        117B(iv) provides that little weight should be given to a  person's
        protected rights relied upon if they  are  in  the  United  Kingdom
        unlawfully.
    32. It was  submitted  the  test  remains  that  of  "very  exceptional
        circumstances" and it is arguably unreal to seek enforcement  after
        the deportation had been made and the appellant brought himself  to
        the attention of the authorities who took no  immediate  action  to
        remove him but who are responsible for the  considerable  delay  in
        making the decision under challenge.
    33. On behalf the Secretary of State, Mr  Bramble  accepted  the  legal
        provisions relied upon by Mr Yeo but submitted that in relation  to
        a revocation application it was necessary to consider paragraph 390
        of the Rules.
    34. Mr Bramble placed reliance upon a decision of the Upper Tribunal in
        the case of Smith  (paragraph  391  (a)-revocation  of  deportation
        order) [2017] UKUT 166 and specifically head note (iii) in which it
        is stated "paragraph 391(a)  will  only  be  engaged  in  a  'post-
        deportation' case if the person is applying for revocation  of  the
        order from outside the UK. Nothing in the strict  wording  requires
        the 10-year period to be spent outside the UK.  However,  the  main
        purpose of deportation is to exclude a  person  from  the  UK.  Any
        breach of the deportation order is likely to  be  a  strong  public
        policy ground for maintaining the order even though a period of  10
        years as lapsed since it was made.
    35. The headnote reflects the finding at [25] of  that  decision  where
        the Upper Tribunal state:


             "however, the whole purpose  of  a  deportation  order  is  to
             exclude the person from the UK for a specified  or  indefinite
             period. Although there is nothing in the wording of  paragraph
             391(a) to require the 'prescribed period' to be spent  outside
             the UK, the fact that a person might return to the  UK  breach
             of the order, and has spent a ten-year period  living  in  the
             UK, is a serious matter that should be given sufficient weight
             in favour of the public interest. A person should not be  able
             to benefit from a clear breach of the order, which  undermines
             the effectiveness of a system  of  immigration  control.  Such
             actions  are  likely  to  provide  strong  justification   the
             continuing the order even if the 10 year period has lapsed."


    36. It is submitted by Mr Bramble that  the  Judge  in  Smith  did  not
        consider paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules which the Court of
        Appeal in SU noted not been referred to in either of the  decisions
        made  by  either  of  the  courts  below  by  that  stage  of   the
        proceedings.
    37. Mr Bramble submitted this provision, introduced with effect from 28
        July 2014, was applicable at the time of the First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision in the present case, which provides:


             "Where a foreign criminal has been  deported  and  enters  the
             United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of
             the deportation order is in the public interest  and  will  be
             implemented unless there are very exceptional circumstances."


    38.  Mr  Bramble  agreed  the  test  is  that  of   'very   exceptional
        circumstances'.
    39. In response to the submission made by Mr Yeo concerning  delay,  it
        was submitted that the appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2000
        but only  made  an  application  in  2003.  It  is  submitted  that
        notwithstanding the period of delay section 117B(iv) provides  that
        little weight should be given to the private life or a relationship
        with a qualified person that is established by a person at  a  time
        that person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  It  is  therefore
        submitted that although delay is a factor the effect of  delay  and
        benefit to the appellant is not as strong as it may  have  been  in
        the past.
    40. Mr Bramble submitted that the appellants  deportation  arose  as  a
        result of criminal matters and that he entered the  United  Kingdom
        in breach of a deportation  order.  It  is  accepted  that  in  the
        seventeen years since the appellant has been in the United  Kingdom
        there is evidence he  has  worked  in  the  community  and  further
        medical evidence regarding his wife's position.
    41. Mr Bramble refers to the  findings  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Grant in the decision promulgated on 10th December  September  2014
        in which it was found that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
        to the appellant's wife joining and living  with  him  in  Pakistan
        [27], that any interference with the appellants private and  family
        life with his wife and her daughter, including private life by  the
        appellant within his church community, was in accordance  with  the
        law  and  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  and   the
        overarching aim of protecting the public  from  criminal  behaviour
        [45]. Mr Bramble also referred to the findings at [47] which are in
        the following terms:


             47. I therefore find that by reason of the particular delay in
             this case  which  is  not  attributable  in  any  way  to  the
             appellant the decision to refuse to revoke the deportation  in
             this  particular  case  would  be  disproportionate   to   the
             legitimate interests of immigration control and protection  of
             the public against criminal behaviour. I bear in mind that the
             conviction related to an offence committed almost 20 years ago
             and  that  there  has  been  no  suggestion  of  any  criminal
             behaviour on the part of the appellant since his return to the
             UK even though as I have found his behaviour towards his wife,
             his community and toward  UK  immigration  control  is  highly
             tainted by dishonesty.


    42. It was submitted that the appellant circumstances have not  changed
        and that he entered the United Kingdom in breach of the deportation
        order which makes this a very different case.
    43. It is submitted that it is necessary  to  consider  the  matter  by
        reference  the  rules  and  article  8  including   the   statutory
        provisions. Paragraph 399D finds the public interest in enforcement
        is still  a  live  issue  if  a  person  returns  in  breach  of  a
        deportation order.
    44. It was submitted by Mr Bramble that a unique factor of  this  case,
        as recognised by Mr Yeo, is that section 117 does not deal with the
        application of a revocation although  117C(1)  provides  that  "the
        deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest".
    45. It is submitted the offences committed by the appellant, two counts
        of conspiracy to  defraud,  are  serious  offences  for  which  the
        appellant received a sentence of three years  imprisonment.  It  is
        accepted by Mr Bramble that  a  considerable  period  of  time  has
        passed since sentence was handed down and that  the  appellant  has
        not been convicted of further criminal activities.
    46. Mr Bramble submitted the exceptions to deportation provided for  in
        section 117C do not apply as this is a revocation decision.
    47. Mr Bramble submits that it was  not  established  very  exceptional
        circumstances have been made out and that in such circumstances the
        appeal should be dismissed.
    48. In relation to the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RLP,  Mr
        Bramble refers to [22 -23] of that decision in which it was found:




             22.         At this juncture we turn to consider the  relevant
             provisions of the Rules, reminding ourselves of  the  emphasis
             in Hesham Ali, these have  the  status  of  neither  statutory
             provisions nor legal rules of any kind.  They are, rather,  an
             expression  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  to  which
             substantial weight must be attributed.   Paragraphs  398,  399
             and 399A are, in a sense, a self-denying ordnance to which the
             Secretary of  State  must  give  effect,  subject  to  and  in
             accordance with established principles of public  law,  having
             opted for the mechanism of a published policy in this way.  We
             have reproduced these provisions  in  Appendix  2  above.   In
             brief  compass,  these  provisions  of  the  Rules  yield  the
             following analysis and conclusions in this case:


             (i)       Paragraph  398(a)  applies,  as  the   sentence   of
             imprisonment was one of four years, with the result  that  the
             deportation of the Appellant is presumptive conducive  to  the
             public good and in the public interest.


             (ii)     Neither paragraph 398(b) nor 398(c) applies.


             (iii)   The next question is whether  paragraph  399  of  399A
             applies: this was not, properly, argued and we answer this  in
             the negative in any event.


             (iv)    Thus the question becomes, per paragraph 398:  is  the
             public interest  in  deporting  the  Appellant  outweighed  by
             "other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A"?


             The submission of Ms Rutherford is that this test is satisfied
             by reason of the extreme delay on the part of the Secretary of
             State during the period 2002 -  2012,  the  hallmarks  whereof
             were incompetence and maladministration.


             23.         We reject this argument.  On  the  one  hand,  the
             delay on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State  can  only  be
             characterised egregious, is exacerbated by the absence of  any
             explanation  and  is  presumptively  the  product  of  serious
             incompetence and maladministration.   However,  on  the  other
             hand, the case against the Appellant is a formidable one:  the
             public interest favours his deportation; the potency  of  this
             public interest has been emphasised in a series  of  Court  of
             Appeal decisions;  the Appellant's case does not  fall  within
             any of the statutory or Rules exceptions; the greater part  of
             his life was spent in his  country  of  origin;  there  is  no
             indication of a dearth of ties or connections with his country
             of origin; he is culturally and socially integrated there; his
             family life in the United Kingdom is at best flimsy; and  most
             of his sojourn in the United Kingdom  has  been  unlawful  and
             precarious.    We take into account all  of  these  facts  and
             factors in determining whether very  compelling  circumstances
             have been demonstrated.   This is  a  self-evidently  elevated
             threshold which, by its nature, will be  overcome  only  by  a
             powerful case. In  our  judgement  the  maladministration  and
             delay of which the Secretary of State  is  undoubtedly  guilty
             fall  measurably  short  of  the  mark   in   displacing   the
             aforementioned potent public  interest  in  the  Article  8(2)
             proportionality balancing  exercise.   We  conclude  that  the
             Appellant's case  fails  to  surpass  the  threshold  by  some
             distance.


    49. In reply Mr Yeo submitted that  the  reference  to  'insurmountable
        obstacles' is  not  the  correct  test  as  applied  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Grant in his decision made three years ago.
    50. It was submitted section 117C applies  if  an  initial  deportation
        decision is being considered so the two exceptions may apply  which
        was argued of relevance as the appellant's  wife  is  a  qualifying
        partner.
    51. It was submitted that regarding the wording; whether it is  'unduly
        harsh'  or  'exceptional  circumstances'  may  make  no   realistic
        difference.
    52. It was submitted  that  if  the  current  rules  applied,  and  the
        appellant stayed outside the  United  Kingdom,  he  would  normally
        succeed which required consideration of the impact of  any  breach.
        The public interest is about enforcement of the rules.
    53. In all the circumstances the appeal should be allowed.



Discussion



    54. The appellant's protection claim was dismissed and is not  part  of
        the proceedings, the appellant has not established  an  entitlement
        to a grant of international protection on any basis  -  AK  and  SK
        (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 569  (IAC)  and  general
        country conditions considered.
    55. It is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
        deportation order and that he entered the United Kingdom in  breach
        of that order. The general rule applicable to an appeal considering
        a refusal to revoke a deportation  order  is  paragraph  390.  This
        provides that the application will be considered in  light  of  all
        the circumstances including (i) the grounds on which the order  was
        made; (ii) any representations made in support of revocation; (iii)
        the interests of the community, including  the  maintenance  of  an
        effective immigration  control;  and  (iv)  the  interests  of  the
        applicant, including any compassionate circumstances.
    56. Paragraph 390A and 398 were found by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  ZP
        (India) to apply to a person against whom a deportation  order  had
        been made but before the deportation order  had  occurred  and  are
        therefore not  applicable  in  the  present  case.  Neither  is  it
        suggested that paragraph 399 or 399A apply on  the  facts  of  this
        appeal.
    57. The argument by Mr Yeo that the  requirement  of  'very  compelling
        circumstances' was  not  in  substance  different  from  the  'very
        exceptional circumstances' required by paragraph 399D was  rejected
        by the Court of Appeal in SU [2017] EWAC Civ 1069 at [45].
    58. Paragraph 399D is applicable to this  appeal.  It  is  a  provision
        which postdates  the  case  law  concerning  the  impact  of  delay
        referred to above, prior to it coming into forces. At  [45]  of  SU
        the Court of  Appeal  noted  the  difference  in  language  between
        paragraphs 398 and 399D which is suggestive  of  a  more  stringent
        requirement  under  399D  reflecting  a  real  difference  in   the
        circumstances covered by each paragraph.  Paragraph  398  addresses
        the question of whether a deportation order should be  made  or  an
        existing order maintained against  a  person  who  has  yet  to  be
        deported whereas 399D addresses the very different case of a person
        who has been deported and then re-enters illegally and in breach of
        the order.
    59. The Court of Appeal in [45] stated "in the latter case any  Article
        8 claim that  was  raised  by  the  deportee  before  his  original
        deportation order will, ex hypothesisi, have been  decided  against
        him. It is readily understandable that  in  the  case  governed  by
        paragraph 399D the Secretary of State should have formed  the  view
        that there is a particularly strong public interest in  maintaining
        the integrity of the deportation system as it  applies  to  foreign
        criminals."
    60. The decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Smith  did  not  consider
        paragraph 399D and so reliance upon the guidance provided  in  that
        case may have to be treated with a degree of caution.
    61. Paragraph 399D provides that it is in the public interest  for  the
        existing deportation order to be implemented unless there are  very
        exceptional circumstances.  The  rule  does  not  define  how  this
        question should be assessed indicating that it must be by reference
        to all applicable facts. The wording of the rule does  not  provide
        that such illegal re-entry is determinative but  a  high  threshold
        must be reached to enable a person lawfully removed as a result  of
        his or her criminal activities,  and  excluded  for  the  requisite
        period, who re-enters the UK illegally in breach of the deportation
        order, to be permitted to remain.
    62. In relation to the question of  the  duration  of  the  deportation
        order this tribunal has not been referred to  any  provision  which
        sets a finite period during which a person may  be  excluded  by  a
        deportation order made against them. It is accepted that the  rules
        provide some guidance, see 391 and 391A, but even with the ten-year
        period for which the deportation order made against  the  appellant
        would ordinarily remain in force before he  was  permitted  to  re-
        enter the United Kingdom, this would not prevent the  appeal  being
        dismissed and the appellants removal if the same was  warranted  on
        the facts, after the ten-year period had expired.
    63. The offence for which the appellant was convicted  relates  to  two
        counts of conspiracy to defraud which  is  a  serious  offence.  It
        warranted a sentence of 42 months imprisonment  and  recommendation
        by the trial judge for deportation. These are not minor offences as
        they involved a conspiracy to defraud British Telecom  in  relation
        to which the exact cost to  the  victim  was  estimated  to  exceed
        100,000. The sentence of imprisonment is composed of a sentence of
        2  and one of 3   years  concurrent.  It  is  accepted  that  the
        conviction is dated 18 September 1996.
    64. The appellant relies upon his claim to both family and private life
        in the United Kingdom. The finding of the First-tier Judge, on  the
        facts, is that the appellant and his  wife  are  able  to  continue
        their family life in Pakistan as it had  not  been  made  out  that
        there were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's  wife  going
        to live with him in Pakistan [decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Grant [27] dated 10 September 2014].
    65. The test being applied by Judge Grant is different from that  found
        in 399D. It is not disputed by Mr Bramble that  there  has  been  a
        change in the  appellant's  wife  circumstances  based  on  medical
        grounds although it is conceded before  this  tribunal  that  those
        medical issues do not allow success on the basis of article 3 or  8
        ECHR as the required threshold has not been shown to be crossed and
        any medical treatment required is available in Pakistan.
    66. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  for  the  reasons
        set out at [47] of that decision namely the delay  which  made  the
        decision disproportionate.
    67. Mr Yeo relied on a number of cases relevant to the issue  of  delay
        although other relevant caselaw is set out above.  In  relation  to
        RLP, whilst I accept Mr Yeo used his best  endeavours  to  seek  to
        differentiate that decision from this current  decision  I  do  not
        accept that the decision of the Upper Tribunal in that case is such
        that no consideration can or should be given to the findings of the
        past President.
    68.  The  impact  of  the  nature  of  the   offending   and   personal
        circumstances of the two appellants  are  factors  that  should  be
        given proper consideration but even considering the same, it is not
        made out that the findings at [23] of RLP should  not  be  factored
        into the decision-making process in  this  appeal.  Indeed,  it  is
        recorded by the Upper Tribunal that the appellant's advocate before
        them, Miss Rutherford, submitted that the test in paragraph  398(a)
        was satisfied by reason  of  the  extreme  delay  on  part  of  the
        Secretary of State during the period 2002  to  2012  the  hallmarks
        whereof were incompetence and maladministration.
    69. At [23] the Upper Tribunal found:


             "we rejected this argument. On the one hand, the delay on  the
             part of the Secretary  of  State  can  only  be  characterised
             egregious, is exasperated by the absence  of  any  explanation
             and is presumptively the product of serious  incompetence  and
             maladministration.  However,  on  the  other  hand,  the  case
             against the Appellant is a formidable one: the public interest
             favours his deportation, the potency of this  public  interest
             has been emphasised in a series of Court of Appeal  decisions:
             the appellant's case does not fall within any of the statutory
             or rules exceptions; the greater part of his life was spent in
             his country of origin; there is no indication of a  dearth  of
             ties or connections with his country of origin; his culturally
             and socially integrated there; his family life in  the  United
             Kingdom is at best fluency; and most  of  his  sojourning  the
             United Kingdom has been unlawful and precarious. We take  into
             account all of these facts and factors in determining  whether
             very compelling circumstances have been demonstrated. This  is
             a self-evidently elevated threshold which, by its nature, will
             be overcome only by a powerful  case.  In  our  judgement  the
             maladministration and delay of which the Secretary of State is
             undoubtedly  guilty  for  measurably  short  of  the  mark  in
             displacing the aforementioned potent public  interest  in  the
             Article 8 (2) proportionality balancing exercise. We  conclude
             that the Appellant's case fails to surpass threshold  by  some
             distance.


    70. The assessment is therefore fact specific.  It  is  argued  that  a
        breach of article 8 is made  out  on  the  basis  the  decision  is
        disproportionate as a result of the delay and that weight should be
        given to the private and family life  relied  upon,  which  may  be
        sufficient to constitute very exceptional circumstances. I  do  not
        find, however, that the fact there has been the delay in this  case
        is sufficient in itself to  allow  the  appellant  to  satisfy  the
        required test per se.
    71. Mr Yeo relied on a number of submissions made before the  Court  of
        Appeal at  the  earlier  stage  in  these  proceedings  which  were
        rejected by that court. There is, for example,  reliance  upon  the
        decision of the Court of Appeal in MNT (Colombia)  in  relation  to
        which the Court of Appeal found that the facts of that case  are  a
        long way from the facts of the present case as the claimant in that
        case had lived lawfully in the United Kingdom with her  mother  and
        sister for twenty 22 years since 1977 when she was 9 years  of  age
        before pleading guilty to drug-related offences and been  sentenced
        to a term of imprisonment of 8 years. It is also a  case  in  which
        although the appellant lost the appeal against a deportation  order
        made in 2008, in March 2009, no steps  were  taken  to  deport  her
        until a claim for further leave to remain was  made  in  June  2012
        which was rejected on appeal. The Court of Appeal considered it  to
        be a borderline decision  in  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
        allowed the appeal but found that Tribunal was  so  entitled  which
        was therefore upheld.
    72. In relation to the  doubt  expressed  by  the  advocates  in  their
        submissions concerning the application of section 117 of  the  2002
        Act to a deportation case, I find that no such uncertainty  exists.
        The position must be that the statutory  provisions  apply  to  any
        case  in  which  article  8  ECHR  is   being   considered   unless
        specifically  stated  not  to  apply.   Paragraph   399D   requires
        consideration of the public interest for which the statute mandates
        a  need  to  consider  section  117B  and   in   cases   concerning
        deportation, section 117C. An application to revoke  a  deportation
        order is a case concerning deportation, albeit not in  the  context
        of a case (ordinarily) concerning the removal of a  person  in  the
        United Kingdom.
    73. Section 117B(1) and C(1) reflect the weight  to  be  given  to  the
        public interest which  is   also  set  out  in  paragraph  399D  in
        relation to those who have re-entered in breach  of  a  deportation
        order.
    74. Section 117(3) is arguably not applicable as the appellant has been
        deported and an appeal to prevent such deportation  failed  and  it
        deemed the public interest requires his  deportation.  This  is  an
        appeal against the refusal to revoke the deportation order.
    75. In terms of the weight to be  given  to  private  and  family  life
        relied upon by the  appellant  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
        provisions of section 117B(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002. The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally
        in breach of a deportation order. The  view  taken  by  the  United
        Kingdom government, arguably accurately reflecting the view of  the
        wider public that such conduct is wholly unacceptable, is reflected
        in paragraph 399D. The statutory  provision  provides  that  little
        weight should be attached to a protected right relied upon in  such
        circumstances. It does not state that no weight should be  attached
        and so only provides guidance as to the weight that is appropriate.
    76. The statutory provisions arguably override earlier case law.
    77. The appellant relies upon family and private life.  The  appellants
        wife told the First-tier Tribunal that she has visited  her  family
        in Pakistan "many times".  It is a country familiar to her  and  in
        relation to which she has connections and family. It was not  shown
        such support as may be required in readjusting to life  there  will
        not be available  if  the  appellant  and  his  wife  relocated  to
        Pakistan where their family life can continue. The appellants step-
        daughters are all adults and do not form part of his  family  life.
        The required degree of dependency was not made out in  relation  to
        his wife and  her  grown  up  children  to  establish  family  life
        recognised by Article 8 between them either. It was not shown  that
        contact could not be maintained between the  appellant,  his  wife,
        and  UK  based  family  and  friends  from  Pakistan  or  that  any
        interference with any such protected right is not disproportionate.
        It was  not  made  out  that  the  consequences  of  enforcing  the
        deportation order will result  in  very  exceptional  circumstances
        such as to displace the  particularly  strong  public  interest  in
        maintaining the integrity of the deportation system as  it  applies
        to foreign criminals.
    78. I find that little weight can  be  given  to  the  protected  right
        relied upon by the appellant in the United Kingdom.   In  light  of
        the fact that family life can continue in Pakistan, it is  hard  to
        see how, on the basic facts, the appellant  is  able  to  establish
        that he can satisfy the test in paragraph 399D on this basis.
    79. I accept that in this appeal the period of delay is substantial and
        an important factor that cannot be ignored. Indeed, Mr Yeo accepted
        that it is probably the strongest aspect of the  appellant's  case.
        However, delay per se is not sufficient. This is not a  case  where
        the appellant has not been removed from  the  United  Kingdom.  The
        appellant was removed but re-entered illegally.
    80. It is accepted that the appellant has not offended and that he  has
        used his time to make a contribution within the United Kingdom.  In
        relation to this aspect, Section 117B(5)  now  specifically  states
        that little weight should be given to a private life established by
        a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
        precarious.
    81.  In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) it  was  held
        that the judgments of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and  Others  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve  to
        re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article  8  of  the
        ECHR and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  that  Article's  limited
        utility in private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed  from  the
        protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity. Earlier
        cases need to be read with that in mind.
    82.  In Hamat (Article 9 - freedom of religion) [2016]  UKUT  00286  it
        was held that matters relied on by way of a  positive  contribution
        to the community are capable in principle of affecting  the  weight
        to be given to the maintenance of effective immigration control and
        should not  be  excluded  from  consideration  altogether  but  are
        unlikely in practice to carry much weight.
    83. The appellant fails to establish that the  contribution  he  makes,
        which forms part of his private life, is such that the consequences
        of the loss of the same to him or others will tip  the  balance  in
        his favour in light of the strong public interest argument.
    84. The Court of Appeal in SU found that paragraph 391 of the Rules did
        not expressly provide that continuation of  the  deportation  order
        was not likely to be the proper course and that  while  under  3991
        there is a presumption that continuation of the  deportation  order
        would be the proper course if less than 10 years have elapsed there
        is no presumption either way after the 10 years period has elapsed.
        The Court found that paragraph 391 simply requires each case to  be
        considered  on  its  merits  taking  account  of   the   applicable
        paragraphs of the rules, including paragraph 390 and the applicable
        statutory provisions. The Court found that the effect of the expiry
        of 10 years is only that the  previous  presumption  in  favour  of
        maintaining the order falls away. The Court  of  Appeal  found  the
        onus was not upon the Secretary State to establish that maintenance
        of the order was a proper course. It was also found  the  paragraph
        391 is not applicable to a case where paragraph 399D applies.
    85. I do not find it made out that the appellant  has  established  the
        existence of "very exceptional circumstances" required by paragraph
        399D. The appellant's case,  at  its  highest,  may  establish  the
        existence of exceptional circumstances as a result of the delay  by
        the Secretary of State, passage of time, and  lack  of  reoffending
        and other  matters  submitted  on  his  behalf  which  have  merit,
        especially in light of the decision in MF (Nigeria) referred to  at
        [33] of SU referring to the judgement of Lord Dyson that a time lag
        of 10 years is capable of been an exceptional circumstance although
        such judgement specifically sets no precedent but merely  permitted
        or even required consideration of the position outside the Rules.
    86. The position pursuant to Article  8  ECHR  arguably  reflects  that
        contained in the Rules in that the requirement for very exceptional
        circumstances reflects the nature of the  proportionality  exercise
        that needs to be undertaken. The Secretary  of  States  deportation
        regime for removing foreign criminals from the United  Kingdom  who
        have committed offences  which  attracted  sufficient  sentence  to
        justify their deportation, has not  been  shown  in  anyway  to  be
        unlawful. The Secretary of State has a margin  of  appreciation  in
        relation to how foreign criminals are  treated  within  the  United
        Kingdom and it has not been found the UK Borders Act or  provisions
        of  the  immigration  rules  are  contrary  to  the  Human   Rights
        Convention.
    87. Paragraph 399D sets a higher threshold as it recognises  that  this
        is applicable to a person who is a foreign criminal as a result  of
        the conviction of an offence in the United Kingdom which he or  she
        was sentenced to a period of more than 12 months imprisonment, that
        that person is the subject of a  valid  deportation  order  against
        which any attempt to  appeal  the  order  to  prevent  removal  has
        failed, that that person has been removed from the  United  Kingdom
        in accordance with the terms of the  deportation  order,  but  that
        that person has re-entered United Kingdom illegally without  having
        made an  application  for  the  order  to  be  revoked  during  its
        continuance from  abroad.  The  requirement  of  'very  exceptional
        circumstances'  to  establish  that  a  refusal   to   revoke   the
        deportation order is disproportionate, hence  finding  that  public
        interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's  removal,  therefore
        reflects a valid balancing exercise relating to rights relied  upon
        by the offending  person  who  has  re-entered  in  breach  of  the
        deportation order and the  strong  public  interest  in  preventing
        breach/abuse of the terms of the deportation order.
    88. This is not a case in which the appellant was  outside  the  United
        Kingdom for any considerable period following  the  making  of  the
        deportation and his removal. The appellant was removed  in  October
        1998 and re-entered United Kingdom 2 years later.  The  deportation
        order would ordinarily prevent his re-entering the  United  Kingdom
        for at least 10 years.
    89. It is open to the appellant once removed to make an application for
        revocation in the normal course of events from outside  the  United
        Kingdom which can be considered on its merits. This  is  an  option
        that the appellant had previously but  which  he  chose  to  ignore
        seeking instead to enter in breach of the order. Whether if removed
        from the United Kingdom the appellant will be required to  "restart
        the clock" and serve a ten-year deportation order  given  all  that
        has happened is not an issue that this tribunal needs to  consider.
        If the appellant makes a valid application from outside the  United
        Kingdom for revocation and that is refused and it appears  this  is
        the approach taken by the decision-maker, the appellant will have a
        right of challenge by way of  appeal  (if  available)  or  judicial
        review. It is only if this issue arises that this question may need
        to be considered.
    90. The submission that there are insurmountable obstacles based on the
        degree of  integration  of  the  appellant's  wife  in  the  United
        Kingdom,  her  health,  relationship  with  her   adult   daughter,
        dependence of her 82-year-old father on  assistance  and  care  are
        noted, but the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  insurmountable
        obstacles that could not be overcome exist. It  is  also  the  case
        that  even  if  the  appellant's  wife  refuses  to  accompany  the
        appellant  to  Pakistan  it  is  he  who  is  the  subject  of  the
        deportation order and it has not been made out  that  it  would  be
        disproportionate to  remove  the  appellant  as  a  result  of  the
        rejection of the revocation application  even  if  this  meant  the
        appellant and his wife living apart.
    91. The submission the appellant has led  a  virtuous  life  since  his
        conviction 20 years ago is noted and not  disputed.  The  fact  the
        appellant has a home in the United Kingdom is also  noted  but  all
        his time since 2000  has  been  since  his  illegal  entry.  It  is
        accepted most of the positive personal elements relied upon by  the
        appellant are matters he has only been able to achieve as a  result
        of the delay caused by the Secretary of State but, as noted  above,
        even if that reduces the weight that otherwise would be  attributed
        to the need to maintain a system of immigration control, the weight
        to be given to the protected rights is itself reduced by virtue  of
        statutory provisions and the appellants actions.
    92. Having considered this matter with the required degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny, I find the appellant has failed to discharge  the  burden
        of proof  upon  him  to  the  required  standard  to  establish  an
        entitlement to remain under either the Immigration Rules or ECHR. I
        find  the  Secretary  State,   notwithstanding   her   delay,   has
        established that the decision to refuse to revoke  the  deportation
        order is a  proportionate  decision  when  weighing  the  competing
        interests pursuant to article 8 ECHR.
    93. I find the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to allow the appeal as recognised  by  the
        Court of Appeal who found that Tribunal had applied the wrong rules
        and who failed to adequately or properly considered  the  issue  of
        delay. I substitute a decision to dismiss the  appeal  against  the
        refusal to revoke the deportation order. As noted  by  the  Supreme
        Court  in  Hesham  Ali,  while  the  rules  do   not   govern   the
        determination of appeals, the policy to which the Rules give effect
        are  "nevertheless  a  relevant  and  important  consideration  for
        tribunal determining appeals on Convention  grounds,  because  they
        reflect the assessment of  the  general  public  interest  made  by
        responsible ministers and endorsed by Parliament.   In  particular,
        tribunals  should  accord  respect  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
        assessment of the strength of the general public  interest  in  the
        deportation of foreign offenders.

Decision


    94. The Immigration Judge materially erred in law. The decision of  the
        original Immigration  Judge  has  been  set  aside.  I  remake  the
        decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed




   Anonymity.


    95. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 16 February 2018







