
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00318/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2016                 |On 30th December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MARIUSZ KLYS
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of Poland,  born  on  10  January  1988.   He
    seeks to appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State taken on
    9 July 2015 to make a deportation order against him.

2.   The claimant came to the United Kingdom in 2008  and  has  been  living
    with his partner and two children, Jacu, born in Poland on 20 September
    2004, and Marko, born in the UK on 27 July 2008.

3.   On 17 May 2010 he was sentenced for offence of driving a motor  vehicle
    with excess alcohol. He  was  disqualified  from  driving  for  sixteen
    months and received  a  conditional  discharge.   There  was  a  linked
    offence of driving whilst disqualified as he did  not  have  a  driving
    licence.

4.   On 7 October 2013 the claimant committed a further offence  of  driving
    with excess alcohol. On that occasion he was disqualified from  driving
    for fourteen months. A community order was  imposed  with  unpaid  work
    requirement and curfew.  He failed to comply with certain  requirements
    of that order.

5.   On 7 April 2014 at the  South  Derbyshire  Magistrate's  Court  he  was
    dealt with  for  using  threatening,  abusive  or  insulting  word  and
    behaviour, receiving a twelve week period of imprisonment suspended for
    twelve months.  There  was  a  curfew  requirement  and  an  order  for
    electric tagging.

6.   The respondent, in the decision, indicated that  between  17  May  2010
    and 19 December  2014  the  claimant  had  amassed  a  record  of  five
    convictions for nine offences receiving a variety of  orders  including
    community orders and suspended sentences of imprisonment.

7.   The matter which triggered the decision to  make  a  deportation  order
    was that on 20 June 2014 at the Derby Crown Court he was  convicted  of
    conspiring to supply a controlled drug of Class B (cannabis) and on  19
    December 2014 he was sentenced to fourteen  months  imprisonment.   The
    learned Judge, in passing sentence,  observed  that  the  claimant  was
    involved as a courier being seen on  more  than  one  occasion  over  a
    period operating with other street traders. The Judge  found  that  the
    role played by him in that conspiracy was  significant.  He  was  given
    credit for his guilty plea.

8.    The  claimant  sought  to  appeal  against  the  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order. Indeed the deportation order itself was signed on  9
    July 2015.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill
    at a hearing on 13 July 2016.  On that occasion the  claimant  attended
    but was not represented.

9.   It seemed not to be an issue in those  proceedings  that  the  claimant
    had not acquired a right of permanent residence in the  United  Kingdom
    and in those circumstances the issue was whether or not he presented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental  interests  of  society.   The  respondent  maintained  the
    position that he did.

10.  The Judge properly noted the factors set out  in  Regulation  21(5)  of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   Also
    Regulation 21(6) was also noted.

11.  At the time of the hearing the claimant had separated from his  partner
    and from his children; indeed it was recorded that at the time  of  the
    hearing he had not seen his children for nine  months.   Prior  to  his
    being sent to prison he had been  living  with  his  partner  in  Derby
    helping look after the two children. His mother also lived in Derby and
    he would visit her also.

12.  It is recorded at paragraph 32 of the determination that  the  claimant
    had been able to have  some  contact  with  his  children  through  his
    mother, but latterly had not been able to send letters to them  because
    of the attitude of his ex partner.   His  ex  partner  appeared  to  be
    stopping contract between the children and their grandmother as well as
    with the claimant.  The grandmother wanted to take  the  matter  before
    the appropriate family court and  the  claimant  also  wanted  to  take
    formal action to obtain contact.  Marko was now 8 and the  elder  child
    11.

13.  The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  children's
    interests  would  be  better  served  potentially   by   a   continuing
    relationship with the claimant and that in all the circumstances it was
    disproportionate for  him to be removed.

14.  In that connection it would be helpful to set out the way in which  the
    matter is expressed at paragraphs 52 and 54 of the determination:-

         "52.  Were it not for these  children  it  seems  to  me  that  the
             claimant could  sensibly and reasonably be returned to Poland,
             although  he  does  have  some  disquiet  about   the   social
             consequences of going  back  because  he  is  unlikely  to  be
             accepted by fellow Polish nationals because of his  ethnicity.
             As matters stand, though and on the basis of all the  evidence
             provided, it does seem to me  that  the  relationship  between
             father and child is one that should be promoted and that  that
             feeds into the  whole  issue  of  proportionality  and  public
             interest.  I take account, therefore, and  in  the  particular
             circumstances of the  claimant's  case,  give  weight  to  the
             family situation, by that I mean his relationship with his two
             children, one of whom is his biological child and the  brother
             has been treated as a child of the family."


         54.  It does seem to  me  that,  looking  at  the  gravity  of  the
             claimant's offending, in being involved in the supply of Class
             B drugs, that the claimant has come perilously close to  being
             deported to Poland on the grounds of public policy  or  public
             security because the state, quite  understandably,  wishes  to
             take adequate steps to stop people becoming  involved  in  the
             chain of supply of illegal drugs but, and I stress this, given
             the particular circumstances of this claimant,  with  the  two
             young children's interests being best served, potentially,  by
             a continuing relationship with the claimant, that that  matter
             should be addressed suitably by another court and for the time
             being, therefore, it would be disproportionate to  deport  the
             claimant to Poland. Public policy requires not only protection
             of the public from someone  such  as  this  claimant  who  has
             committed this offence of being  involved  in  the  supply  of
             Class B drugs, but also public policy does require, as  I  see
             it, the protection of the interests of these two children,  so
             that another court can suitably and properly determine whether
             or not contact with their father, the relationship  they  have
             had clearly for a number of years with their father,  can  and
             ought to be promoted by contact.  For these reasons I come  to
             the overall conclusion that the decision  is  a  proportionate
             one and under the 2006 Regulations and although I emphasise  I
             do give very significant weight  to  the  public  interest  in
             deportation, knowing that the more  serious  the  offence  the
             greater the public interest in  deportation,  I  can  I  think
             rightly set that aside as I accept that against the needs  and
             interests of these two young children which, in my  judgement,
             would be affected prejudicially and adversely by a decision to
             deport which, in practice, would mean that their father simply
             could not return to  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  long  time.
             Accordingly, I allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations for
             all these reasons."

15.  Challenge is made, however, to that decision by the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department. Permission was granted to raise that challenge
    in the Upper Tribunal.  It is in those circumstances  that  the  matter
    comes before me to determine whether or not the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was made in error of law. The claimant appears from
    custody in person before me, the respondent being represented.

16.  In effect Miss Isherwood makes three submissions  in  relation  to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge:- the first  being  that  the
    Judge makes no clear finding on the central issue in the matter, namely
    whether the personal conduct of  the  claimant  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society (Regulation 21(5)(c)).

17.  The second submission linked to that is that the Judge  has  failed  to
    adequately assess  the  serious  nature  of  the  threat  concentrating
    seemingly upon the drugs offence and not applying a holistic assessment
    as to conviction and conduct as is required by Regulation 21(6).

18.  Finally it is submitted that considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    children the Judge has been somewhat speculative as to the  outcome  or
    nature of any contact with the  children.   She  submits  that  overall
    there has been  a  lack  of  clarity  in  the  overall  proportionality
    assessment.

19.  I find that those matters have substance.

20.  The factors set out in Regulation 21(5) are as follows:

         "Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or
         public security  it  shall,  in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles:


         (a)    the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;
         (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;
         (c)  the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society;
         (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;
         (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in  themselves
             justify the decision."

21.  Regulation 21(6) provides as follows:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."


22.  It seems to me and I so find that the expression, "It does seem  to  me
    that, looking at the gravity  of  the  claimant's  offending  in  being
    involved in the supply of Class B drugs, that  the  claimant  has  come
    perilously close to being deported to Poland on the grounds  of  public
    policy or public security" fails  to  address  the  requirement  as  to
    personal conduct.  There is no clear finding as to whether or  not  the
    claimant does indeed meet the test presenting a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat. If so, clearly it is a weighty  matter  of
    public policy which requires his removal unless there  are  significant
    countervailing circumstances which make such disproportionate.  As  the
    Judge has indicated, the more serous the offence the greater the public
    interest in deportation.  There  has  however  been  no  indication  or
    finding as to how serious his conduct is or the risk that is presented.
     The Judge seemingly has concentrated upon the supply of Class B  drugs
    but that is but one aspect of a  much  more  concerning  picture.   The
    claimant has been offending since 2010 to 2014.  The offending has been
    repeat offending, particularly the driving with excess alcohol.   There
    has been little compliance with court orders. There has clearly been an
    escalation in the serious  nature  of  the  offending  coupled  with  a
    markedly anti-social element in all of it. None of those  matters  seem
    to have featured explicitly in the finding  that  there  is  a  present
    genuine and sufficiently serious threat.

23.  Indeed at paragraph 44, although the Judge sets out  other  aspects  of
    offending, it is clear that the Judge is  focusing  very  much  on  the
    drugs, considering that to be an isolated matter, which plainly  it  is
    not. Further, I  do  find  that  the  Judge  has  approached  the  best
    interests of the children in a balanced  way,  particularly  given  the
    paucity of information to assist one way or the other.  The reality has
    been that the claimant has been in custody and away from  his  children
    since 2014 and indeed at the time of the hearing had not seen them  for
    nine months. There was hostility on the part of his partner for him  to
    make contact. Recognising of course that the application can be made to
    the Family Court for contact, whether or not that contact is  desirable
    would then be very much a matter for the Court  to  determine.  In  the
    absence of agreement, given  the  nature  of  the  claimant's  criminal
    conduct, arguably his lack of integration in  society  and  the  family
    disunity which has flowed from his behaviour, it cannot simply be  said
    without more that public policy requires him to have contact  with  his
    children.

24.  As I have indicated, if it be that he presents a serious threat to  the
    welfare of society then  that  is  a  primary  consideration  requiring
    compelling reasons why removal should not be implemented.

25.  In all the circumstances I do find that the lack of clarity as  to  the
    findings of threat and how serious it is  has  fundamentally  flawed  a
    proper consideration as to proportionality in this case.

26.  For those reasons I find that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  law  in  the
    approach taken such that the decision should be set aside and remade.

27.  Consequent to my findings I presented to the  claimant  three  possible
    ways of proceeding. The first was that I would send the matter back  to
    the First-tier for a different Judge to hear the matter and come  to  a
    conclusion. The second was that the hearing would be  retained  the  in
    the Upper Tribunal but before a different Judge.  The third being  that
    I would reserve the matter to myself for hearing.

28.  I indicated to the claimant that as I  had,  in  effect,  set  aside  a
    decision that had been favourable to him he may feel that he would wish
    for another Judge to determine the merits of the appeal.

29.  The claimant indicated that he wished me to continue to hear  the  case
    and, subject to being allowed some time to sort through his papers,  he
    was willing for the matter to continue that afternoon and  for  him  to
    represent himself.  In the circumstances I allowed him the time that he
    sought and commenced the hearing in the afternoon.

30.  The claimant gave evidence in support of his appeal.  He was  sentenced
    in relation to the drugs on 19 December 2014 and was released from that
    custodial sentence on 20 July 2015.  Since that time  he  has  been  in
    administrative detention.  Although he did not embark upon any specific
    rehabilitative courses when in custody, he had sought  to  improve  his
    employment prospects by undertaking a  number  of  courses  by  a  work
    placement.   He worked in the  sewing  shop  and  with  a  bike  fixing
    company.  He was currently awaiting to be a painter in the prison wing.
     He produced a number of certificates which he had obtained as a result
    of his working and also having undertaken a  basic  English  course  in
    literacy. He has indicated that he had sought to improve  his  position
    to find work upon his release. He  had  learned  his  lesson  from  his
    offending, having spent so long in prison he wanted to  devote  himself
    to his family.

31.  He indicated that upon release he would stay with his mother in  Derby.
    His partner and the children were still living in the same  address  in
    Derby which was a council home. He had two  brothers  and  two  sisters
    also living in Derby.  One brother and sister lived  with  his  mother.
    The older brother was employed. His elder sister was looking for  work.
    His younger brother had a partner and a young  child  and  his  younger
    sister was at college. He indicated that he would have the  support  of
    his family to lead an honest and constructive life.

32.  He indicated that the situation of the children had slightly  improved.
     His mother had made up with his ex-partner  to  the  extent  that  the
    children now stayed with her over the weekends.   Previously  they  had
    come to see his mother for a number of hours each  week  but  now  they
    were staying over.  That enabled him to speak to them on the telephone.
     The children did not know that he was in prison but believed  that  he
    was working elsewhere.  The  claimant  indicated  that  his  ex-partner
    would have no objection to his seeing the children upon  release.   The
    claimant indicated that there were  currently  extradition  proceedings
    afoot in Poland because before he came to the  United  Kingdom  he  had
    been convicted of burglary, as a result of  which  he  had  received  a
    suspended sentence and be required to  keep  in  regular  contact  with
    probation.  Because he left for the United Kingdom he is in  breach  of
    those conditions and he believes that he will be  imprisoned  upon  his
    return.  He reaffirmed the position that when he lived in Poland he and
    his family experienced hostility because he was a gypsy and  indeed  on
    occasions violence. Thus it was that his  family  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom, such that little of his family remain  in  Poland.   He  fears
    that he will receive the same treatment were he to return.

33.  He was asked a number of questions by Miss Isherwood.  He said that  he
    left Poland in 2007 his home town being Bartoszyce. He had been treated
    differently from other people because of his ethnic origin and had  not
    completed his education. He had nobody at all to return  to.   When  he
    lived in Poland his father worked but his mother did not.   He  himself
    had not worked in Poland and he had made no attempt to find work there.
     He stopped going to school when he was 8 or 9 and did not want  to  go
    to school because of the way he was treated at school.   He  could  not
    read or write in Polish and thus it was difficult for him to  obtain  a
    job.  He said that the suspended sentence which he received  in  Poland
    was eleven months and fourteen days and he  would  have  to  serve  ten
    months of that were he to return.

34.  He did not consider the offence of drink  and  driving  as  a  criminal
    offence but he would not do it again. He had been  silly.   As  to  his
    failure to comply with the requirements attached to  his  sentence,  he
    had completed all the hours of unpaid work but he was in breach of  his
    curfew by being one hour late.  Although  he  had  not  undertaken  any
    victim awareness course he had undertaken  a  drink  drivers  awareness
    course.  As to the drug matter, he indicated that he was not  dependent
    upon drugs and that the length of imprisonment had helped  him  reflect
    upon his  behaviour.   He  did  not  accept  the  suggestion  that  his
    offending behaviour had escalated, maintaining that many of the matters
    for which he had been dealt with in the United Kingdom should  properly
    be regarded as minor offences for which he has paid the penalty.

35.  It was pointed out to him that if released he  would  be  returning  to
    Derby, a  location  where  he  had  committed  previous  offences.   He
    insisted his behaviour had improved  and  would  improved  subsequently
    with the help of his family.  He  was  surprised  at  the  sentence  he
    received for cannabis because he thought that that would be treated  as
    a minor matter.  He became involved for financial reasons  and  because
    he mingled with the wrong people.  He is now older and wiser.

36.  He said that he had an offer of a job  on  release  to  work  with  car
    valeting or street cleaning.  It was not possible for him to  work  and
    in Poland he was not treated well. He could not read or write in Polish
    and in any event his family were all in the United Kingdom.

37.   He had not told his mother about the hearing. She is in  a  wheelchair
    on medication and not very mobile.  He did not want to get  her  upset.
    There was no adverse significance to her  not  attending  the  previous
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  She had been on  her  way  but
    was delayed and thus the decision was  made  for  her  to  return  home
    rather than come. Similarly his brother did not attend on the  previous
    occasion because he was working and it was not entirely clear  that  he
    would have made any contribution to the appeal in any event.

38.   As  to  the  documents  presented,  they  included  a  certificate  of
    achievement of working of the  overlock  machine  and  in  the  textile
    workshop and a  workplace  safety  awareness  level  one,  and  a  word
    function skill in English, entry level.

39.  Miss Isherwood made her  submissions,  relying  as  she  did  upon  the
    details set out  in  the  refusal  decision.  She  submitted  that  the
    offending  behaviour  of  the  claimant  had  demonstrated  a  lack  of
    integration in society and that all the matters had been anti-social in
    their nature.  Far from learning from his mistakes she  submitted  that
    there had been an escalation of offending and the presence of family in
    Derby had not served to prevent any of that  offending  behaviour.  She
    invited me to find that there was little to indicate that, even were he
    to re-establish connection with his partner and  children,  such  would
    have any beneficial effect upon his behaviour.   She invited me to find
    that if contact was to be made with the children  such  could  be  made
    through Skype or by visits made by them to Poland.  There had  been  no
    indication of any involvement with social services and little  evidence
    as to a change of circumstances from that that existed at the  time  of
    first hearing.

40.  The claimant, speaking on his behalf, invited me  to  find  that  there
    had been a real change in his attitude as a result of being in  prison.
     His family and children were the most important thing to  him  and  he
    firmly believed that once he had re-established connection he would not
    offend. He stressed the importance to him and to his welfare to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, fearing undue discrimination against him were he
    to return to Poland. He invited me to find that he was  not  a  present
    threat to society and that in any  event  the  best  interests  of  his
    children were served by his continued presence.  He drew  my  attention
    to a number of letters and to a medical report concerning his  children
    and letters from them.

41.  The central issue in this case is whether or  not  the  claimant  meets
    the threshold for removal,  namely  whether  he  currently  presents  a
    sufficiently serious threat to the public, not only by  reason  of  his
    offences but also by his character and conduct. In  that  connection  I
    bear in mind the nature of the offences and the  length  of  time  over
    which they are said to have been occasioned.  In that connection it  is
    relevant to note, as  accepted  by  the  claimant,  that  he  had  been
    convicted and sentenced in Poland for a serious  offence  of  burglary,
    entering a dwelling house for which he received a  suspended  sentence.
    Although the terms of the order would seem to  be  that  he  work  with
    probation, he chose rather to  leave  Poland  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom. Shortly thereafter he  commits  an  offence  of  driving  with
    excess alcohol. Notwithstanding the sentence in relation to that matter
    he reoffends in precisely the same way  shortly  thereafter.   All  the
    matters for which he was convicted or pleaded  guilty  directly  impact
    upon the safety of the public. It is the repetition  of  the  offending
    and the escalation in the serious  nature  of  offending  which  causes
    concern as to the safety of the public.

42.  It is significant that, in making  reference  to  those  offences,  the
    claimant seems to minimise their seriousness  and  their  potential  to
    hurt individuals within society.  I do not  gain  the  impression  from
    hearing the claimant that he has fully  engaged  with  the  anti-social
    nature of his behaviour.  There is little indication that the  claimant
    has undertaken any  course  or  training,  such  as  to  influence  his
    thinking and behaviour.  In fairness to him it is to be recognised that
    he has been in administrative detention following his  nominal  release
    for his offending. In the normal course of events there would have been
    post-sentence supervision but that was not open to him.  To some extent
    he has not been able to demonstrate a change of approach  or  lifestyle
    by living outside prison and that limitation should be  recognised.  In
    fairness to him he has sought to gain some certificates of  achievement
    in order to help him find a job when released.

43.  That having been said, factors  giving  rise  to  some  extent  to  his
    offending behaviour are still at present. He has no skills such that he
    will find obtaining work difficult. He found obtaining  work  difficult
    before he went to prison and in commonsense  will  find  it  even  more
    difficult after leaving prison,  in  the  absence  of  any  help  being
    offered by the authorities.  He plans to  return  to  Derby  where  his
    associates with the drugs continue to live. He does not currently or in
    the foreseeable future have the support of  his  partner  and  children
    such as to give him  stability  in  his  lifestyle.  The  offending  in
    relation to drugs was a combination of needing money and  falling  into
    bad company. There is little indication that  those  factors  will  not
    arise again.  There is little stability in his  life,  particularly  in
    the absence of his partner and children.  Indeed  in  fairness  to  him
    there will be some stability were he to live with his mother  but  that
    is an arrangement which he has not experienced prior to his  detention.
    Rather he would visit his mother than live with her.

44.  The OASys assessment of 1  May  2015  at  Annex  F  of  the  bundle  is
    singularly unhelpful in terms of its analysis of the  claimant  and  of
    the claimant's behaviour.  It simply points to his conditional  release
    date of 20 July 2015 and his expiry of the licence on 18 February 2006.
     Both those matters of course have passed and for  the  most  part  the
    form seems to  be  blank  with  little  assessment  as  to  risk  being
    attempted.   There is an area of thinking and behaviour but  those  are
    not completed nor is the assessment as to attitude. There  is  a  self-
    assessment pro forma but that also seems not to  have  been  completed.
    Indeed for most of the report it is recorded as "missing data" and that
    seems to be  reflected  throughout.  There  is  a  crimino-genic  needs
    summary in section scores set out at page 28 of the report but there is
    no indication of what those scores truly mean.  There would be seem  to
    be a predictor score percentage in risk category  which  looks  at  the
    probability of proven reoffending, estimating 11% in  year  1,  20%  in
    year 2 and low category. Overall it is a very unhelpful document.   The
    sentencing remarks of  the  Judge  are  also  set  out  indicating  the
    claimant was willingly involved in serious crime.

45.  Although the claimant contends that he has  improved  in  his  thinking
    skills, there is no course undertaken by him which could assist in  any
    independent verification of that motive to  change.  The  claimant  has
    involved himself in serious crime from 2007 in Poland until  2014  when
    he was in prison.  There is no indication that his conduct had improved
    over that period or that his motivation to lead an honest life had come
    to the fore.  There was, as I so find, a significant escalation in  his
    offending and a pattern of lack of concern for members  of  the  public
    and their safety.  Supplying drugs on the  street  or  being  party  to
    their supply is a serious matter which affects  the  wellbeing  of  the
    public directly as does the driving of a motor vehicle when not insured
    and over the limit in terms of alcohol.   I can find little evidence to
    indicate that when released the claimant would not offend again.

46.  Looking at the matter overall and particularly  having  regard  to  the
    wider features as set out in Regulation 21(6) I do not  find  that  the
    claimant has integrated into society during the time that he  has  been
    here. I find that he has been anti-social in his  outlook  and  in  his
    behaviour and has taken actions which directly  place  members  of  the
    public at risk of injury or harm  or  addiction.  In  fairness  to  the
    claimant I bear in mind what he says about his behaviour,  but  I  find
    nevertheless that he does present a present, genuine and  serious  risk
    to the public were he to be released.  Such a risk is exacerbated by  a
    lack of firm family foundation. His anxieties about  his  children  and
    his future, particularly his lack  of  work,  are  significant  factors
    contributing to the risk of reoffending as is the lack of any guarantee
    that he would not associate with those with whom he associated  in  the
    past.

47.  In relation to the question of rehabilitation, there is  no  indication
    that the claimant has undertaken any rehabilitative work or  is  likely
    to do so to address  his  reoffending  in  the  future  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The time for his post-sentence supervision  has  long  passed.
    Indeed he no longer has the support of his  immediate  family  and  the
    support that he would hope to have from his mother and siblings has yet
    to be tested and tried.  He cites limited job prospects  in  Poland  as
    opposed to better prospects in the United Kingdom but  the  reality  is
    once again for much of his time in the United Kingdom he did  not  work
    or was short of money.

48.  I see no reason why the practical skills, which he has clearly  learned
    in prison cannot be put to good effect in Poland as well as the  United
    Kingdom.  He cites hostility towards him in Poland  but  that,  if  any
    sense true, was in 2007 and it cannot be overlooked  that  that  if  it
    happened might relate less to ethnicity than to his criminal behaviour.
    It is to be noted that his father did work in Poland. There is  nothing
    to indicate that Poland, as an EEA treaty signatory, will not abide  by
    the principles of human rights and respect.  Nothing  has  been  placed
    before me to indicate that the rule of law  would  not  be  applied  in
    Poland towards gypsies as towards other individuals.

49.  It is relevant to note that the claimant  has  no  permanent  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom and thus  less  weight  than  otherwise
    falls to be given to rehabilitation in the UK, particularly  when  none
    has been attempted or has been  effective.   Indeed,  it  may  be  very
    relevant that the claimant has come to the attention of the authorities
    in Poland who indeed seemingly by way of extradition wish to  have  him
    back.  He is subject to a probation regime as  part  of  the  suspended
    sentence.  Although  he  considers  that  he  will  have  to  undertake
    immediate custody it will of course be a matter for assessment from the
    court in Poland as to what  is  the  appropriate  disposal.  If  it  is
    maintained that probation or supervision is  appropriate  then  clearly
    that would provide be a much better chance of rehabilitation in  Poland
    than in the United Kingdom when that degree of supervision  or  support
    is no longer possible.  I note the lack of family in  Poland  but  note
    that the claimant is a relatively young man who has sought  to  improve
    his working skills. I  do  not  find  that  he  would  be  homeless  or
    destitute in Poland without agencies or facilities to help him.

50.  In terms of integration into the community I find little evidence  that
    that has been so.  I note the pattern of his  behaviour,  his  lack  of
    working and his lack of continuing family ties.

51.  In considering of course the proportionality of his removal I  bear  in
    mind the best interests of his children as being a relevant  factor  in
    that assessment.  In that regard I do note a paucity of evidence as  to
    the current situation that exists. The claimant relied on a  number  of
    letters from family members in support of his family life.  There is  a
    letter for example from his brother Patryk dated 15 February 2015.   He
    writes on behalf of his siblings and expresses the fact that his mother
    is severely disabled and that the two sons have been looking after her.
     Much is made that the  absence  of  the  claimant  would  put  greater
    pressure on him because he would bear more of  the  burden  of  looking
    after her. Clearly  however  the  claimant  has  been  in  custody  now
    approaching two years.

52.  The mother of the claimant has  also  written  on  the  same  date  and
    speaks of the absence of the claimant as having an effect upon the sons
    and the letter of 16 February 2015 from his partner speaks  as  to  how
    upsetting it would be that the claimant was not with the family.   That
    of course takes no  account  of  the  evidence,  as  presented  on  the
    previous occasion, that she is now separated from him and does not want
    him to see either herself or the children. There is no  social  enquiry
    report or any indication as to how the children are responding  to  his
    absence. There is a letter from Derby City Council of 13  January  2012
    relating to the educational placement of one of the children and of the
    council appeal in respect of that placement. There is little about  how
    the children are performing at school.  Rather the focus  seems  to  be
    upon the appeal in respect of which school one or both should go to.

53.  The claimant was particularly concerned that I should know  that  Jakub
    has a mixed aortic valve disease and to that extent  a  medical  report
    from Derby Hospital dated 18 September 2012 is in the  bundle.  I  note
    from that report that he is generally fit and well and very sporty  and
    active with no symptoms.  Clearly he has to be monitored but there were
    few limitations to his  activities  at  that  time.   There  is  little
    indication therefore as to the  nature  of  his  health  today  or  any
    indication that he is not being properly monitored.  The  claimant  has
    been away from the children for over two years and as far as  they  are
    aware he has been working away. There is nothing to indicate  that  his
    absence in those circumstances has caused any difficulties or that  his
    absence, either temporary or permanently, in the future would do so.

54.  On 13 July 2016 the evidence  as  presented  was  that  his  ex-partner
    wanted nothing to do with him nor was she willing for him to  have  any
    contact with the children and that he had had none with them  for  nine
    months  before.   According  to  the  claimant  o  that  situation  has
    dramatically changed.  There is nothing from his mother,  his  brothers
    or his partner or indeed his  children  to  substantiate  that  claimed
    change. I do not find adversely against the claimant simply  by  reason
    of the absence of his mother or wider family from the hearing, but  the
    fact  remains  that  there  is  little  evidence  other  than  his   to
    substantiate any realistic change. A social worker's report might  have
    assisted in that regard.

55.  Clearly if any family proceedings are instituted to gain access to  the
    children they can be instituted from Poland and it would  be  a  matter
    for the court seized of the issues to determine how and in what  manner
    evidence or contact should be made.  I view with some  scepticism,  the
    suggestion that his partner has had a thorough change of heart  towards
    the claimant within the few months since the Summer. Had that been  the
    case, no doubt it would have been open to his partner to  have  written
    accordingly.

56.  It is also to be borne in mind that the claimant's  children  and  wife
    are also Polish nationals having not obtained any citizenship status in
    the United Kingdom.  Therefore they could properly return to Poland  as
    a family unit. Although Marko may be a qualified child for the purposes
    of the Regulations and statute, it is to be noted  that  currently  the
    claimant has no parental responsibilities towards him  and  has  for  a
    significant part of his upbringing been absent from his life.

57.  The Secretary of State, in the decision,  considers  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the family to return to Poland and  there  is  nothing
    before me to indicate that that is  not  a  realistic  assessment.  One
    child had lived in Poland before coming to the  United  Kingdom.   Even
    were the claimant to be  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  the
    children are currently, and have been for a number of years, under  the
    primary responsibility of their mother and that would  continue  should
    they remain in the United Kingdom.   There is no reason to believe that
    the children could not maintain contact with the claimant, indeed in  a
    way  that  he  now  claims  they  can.   Accepted  that  the  means  of
    communication from prison are limited, facilities  for  Skype  and  for
    actual visits to Poland are a realistic factors promoting communication
    upon release.

58.  It is also relevant to note the certification that has been applied  to
    the decision In determining whether there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
    serious irreversible harm if removed pending the outcome of any appeal,
    consideration is to given The claimant has been  away from the children
    for two years and out of their lives effectively until  perhaps  a  few
    weeks ago when some communication was established by telephone.  It  is
    difficult to understand how such irreversible harm would be occasioned.
      It  is  perhaps  a  curiosity  of  this  appeal  that  the  issue  of
    certification does not  seem  to  have  been  raised  as  a  matter  of
    jurisdiction.  It does, however, provide a right of appeal from out  of
    country which would enable the claimant to raise any new  matters  that
    might arise including contact with  children  and  an  improved  family
    situation.  I do not find however currently that that can  be  said  to
    have arisen.

59.  Overall therefore I consider on the matter of proportionality  that  it
    is overwhelmingly in the public interest that the current risk that the
    claimant poses should be recognised and that the decision to deport him
    is entirely proportionate in all the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

60.  The decision of the First Tier Tribunal is set aside  and  remade.  The
    claimant's appeal against  his  deportation  is  thus  dismissed.   The
    decision of the Secretary of State of the Home Department to  implement
    the deportation under the EEA Regulations  is  upheld.  The  appeal  in
    respect of human rights and Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 30 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King
