
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    gSNG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Quality Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 24 November  2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge J McMahon which allowed  the  respondent's
    appeal against automatic deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary of State as
    the respondent and to GSNG as the appellant, reflecting their positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant's child,  a  minor,  from  the
    substance of this appeal.

 4. The undisputed facts before me were that the appellant has been in  the
    UK for seventeen and a half years.  His wife has been  in  the  UK  for
    sixteen years.  The couple have a child [E] born in the UK on 9 October
    1999 and he has lived here ever since then.  On  2  February  2005  the
    appellant, his  wife  and  his  son  were  granted  settlement  by  the
    respondent.  On 8 April 2005 E was granted British citizenship.

 5. It is also undisputed that on 7 March 2008 the appellant was  sentenced
    to seventeen months' imprisonment for assault occasioning actual bodily
    harm (ABH) and criminal damage at Croydon Crown Court.  The  respondent
    made an automatic deportation order on 27 February 2014 on the basis of
    that index offence.

 6. The respondent's first ground of appeal is that it was not open to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to find at [51] that  the  appellant's  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" for his son under the provisions  of  paragraph
    399(a)(ii)(b) of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Judge McMahon considers whether it would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    appellant to be deported and his son remain in the UK with  his  mother
    from paragraph 41 to the conclusion at paragraph 51.

 8. The respondent's written grounds at paragraphs 1.a) to 1.c) argue  that
    assessing the quality of the relationship between the appellant  and  E
    and the life that E would live were he  to  be  deported  were  matters
    relevant to establishing  their  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    rather than the assessment of undue hardship. I do not agree.  There is
    nothing limiting the assessment of whether the appellant's  deportation
    would have an unduly harsh impact on the child in this  manner  in  the
    legislation or anywhere  else.  Consideration  of  the  nature  of  the
    relationship is an essential aspect of assessing how the child would be
    affected by the deportation of the appellant  and whether the impact on
    the child would be unduly harsh.

 9. Paragraph 1.d) maintains that  the  correct  approach  to  the  "unduly
    harsh" assessment required by 399(a)(ii)(b) is  "to  consider  to  what
    extent the [appellant's] absence would impact on the  consideration  of
    family life...". That also did not appear to me to be an  assertion  in
    line with any statute or case law before me. It might be an  aspect  of
    the "unduly harsh" assessment but not the only aspect. As  conceded  by
    Mr Jarvis, the respondent's recently enacted  provisions  of  paragraph
    117A-C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  for
    example, require other considerations to be taken into account as  part
    of the "unduly harsh" assessment.

10. Paragraph 1.d) goes on to argue that  the  appellant's  wife  could  be
    expected to adapt her life in order to accommodate for the  appellant's
    absence, the implication being  that  where  this  was  reasonable  the
    appellant's deportation could not have an "unduly harsh" impact on  the
    child.

11. That submission is really only a disagreement with the clear finding at
    paragraph 42 that the appellant's wife being able to offer the level of
    parenting the child has had for  almost  all  of  his  life  with  both
    parents present being  "highly  unlikely".  Judge  McMahon  accepts  at
    paragraph 42 that it is not always going to be  "unduly  harsh"  for  a
    single mother to successfully parent children but found that  for  this
    child it would be so. That was a  conclusion  reasonably  open  to  him
    where he had evidence of a strong relationship  between  the  appellant
    and  his  son  in  the  social  work  report,  which   he   relied   on
    "particularly"; see paragraph 41. His placing particular weight on  the
    social work report  was  not  challenged  and  it  spoke  of  a  strong
    relationship  and  emotional  damage  and  mental  health  difficulties
    arising for the child in the short and long term were the appellant  to
    be deported because of the particular  nature  and  strength  of  their
    relationship.

12. Before me, Mr Jarvis put the respondent's case as regards  this  ground
    somewhat differently, maintaining that,  as  in  paragraph  2.5.2,  the
    respondent's  Immigration   directorate   instructions   "Chapter   13:
    criminality guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases" "unduly harsh" had to  be
    given its  ordinary  meaning   of  "excessively"  and  "severe,  cruel"
    treatment. It was argued that the facts of this  case  could  not  meet
    that threshold  where  it  would  merely  be  difficult  or  even  very
    difficult but not "unduly harsh" for the child in the  absence  of  the
    appellant.

13. Firstly, as above, the judge here  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  all
    children being left to the case of a single parent would be excessively
    affected thereby. He found that this child would be so given the family
    history, the appellants' strong relationship with the child and factors
    raised in the social work report. Also, as pointed out by Ms  McCarthy,
    the same guidance document required the judge to weigh the  seriousness
    of  the  offence,  whether  there  is  repeat  offending,  whether  the
    relationship with the child was formed whilst  the  appellant's  status
    was unlawful or precarious, whether he can speak English and whether he
    was a burden on the taxpayer as part of the "unduly harsh"  assessment.
    Judge McMahon did assess those factors, his assessment of them  is  not
    challenged here (other than as to the seriousness of the  offence;  see
    below) and they  were  factors  that  were  properly  weighed  for  the
    appellant and his child in the "unduly harsh" assessment.

14. The decision that there would be an "unduly harsh" impact on the  child
    such that 399(a)(ii)(b) was met was a  finding  within   the  range  of
    reasonable responses open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  the
    evidence before him and no error arises from it.

15. Turning to the second ground of appeal, the respondent objects  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge finding at paragraph 46 that  the  period  of
    time that has elapsed since the offence and conviction was  a  relevant
    factor to the assessment of the appellant's deportation.

16. It will be clear from the summary set out above that by the  time  that
    the matter came before the Tribunal  seven  years  had  elapsed  during
    which the appellant had not re-offended.  It is not my view that  Judge
    McMahon erred in any way at [46] in placing weight in  the  appellant's
    favour in that regard  and  finding  the  risk  of  reoffending  to  be
    "extremely low".  It can only be a relevant matter that he has not  re-
    offended in seven years.  That much was conceded by  Mr  Jarvis  before
    me.

17. It is also not the case that the consideration at paragraph 46  of  the
    period of inaction between 2008 and service of the deportation order in
    2014 can be read as an impermissible reduction  in  the  weight  to  be
    afforded to the public interest by the judge, as suggested by Mr Jarvis
    before me, and to the extent that it offended the ratio of  Onur  v  UK
    [2009] ECHR 289. Nothing in the wording of paragraph 46 indicates  that
    the judge was reducing (or even assessing) the weight to be afforded to
    the public interest, considered appropriately  elsewhere,  specifically
    at paragraph 43 which correctly takes  into  account  "the  very  great
    weight that is to be afforded to the public interest in deportation."

18. The third ground of appeal suggests that the  judge  took  an  improper
    approach in finding at paragraph 47 that  the  conviction  of  ABH  was
    different from the more serious  types  of  offending  such  as  drugs,
    grievous bodily harm or sexual assaults.  The judge does not  conclude,
    however, as suggested by the grounds, that an offence of ABH  does  not
    merit deportation. Rather, he correctly directed himself  at  paragraph
    45 to the need to take into account the seriousness of the offence  and
    went on to do so in that paragraph and at paragraphs 47 and 48,  having
    taken  account  of  the  sentencing  remarks  at  paragraph  33.    The
    assessment of the appellant's  offending  by  Judge  McMahon  in  these
    paragraphs does not depart the respondent's guidance, relied on  before
    me, and case law on deportation which has stated consistently that  the
    more  serious  the  offence,  the  greater  the  public   interest   in
    deportation.

19. Where I have found that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in allowing
    the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  respondent's  fourth
    challenge to the second stage Article 8 assessment cannot be material.

20. For the reasons set out above the grounds of appeal do not  disclose  a
    material error on a point of law.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed[pic]       Date: 4 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
