
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00034/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 July 2021                           |On 12 August 2021                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  CZER ION
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Secretary of State appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Bunting (the Judge) promulgated  on  12
           November 2020, in which the Judge allowed Mr Ion's appeal against
           the order for his deportation from the United Kingdom.
        2. Mr Ion is a citizen of Romania, born on 8 December 1988, who  the
           Judge found was only entitled to the lower level of protection.
        3. The Judge sets out details of Mr Ion's criminal behaviour at  [5]
           and the basis of the decision  to  deport  him  from  the  United
           Kingdom is set out in the decision to make a deportation order in
           the following terms:

           12.     You have  committed  serious  criminal  offences  in  the
               United Kingdom and, as explained above, there is a real  risk
               that you may reoffend in the future. You have  not  made  any
               representations  but  we   have   considered   the   evidence
               available. For the reasons set out above, and  in  particular
               the genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat you pose
               to  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  United  Kingdom
               society, it is considered that your deportation is  justified
               on grounds of public policy  in  accordance  with  regulation
               23(6)(b). Your personal circumstances have  been  considered.
               To the extent they are known that our view is that, given the
               threat you pose, the decision to deport you is  proportionate
               and in accordance with the principles of regulations, 27  (5)
               and (6).

        4. Mr Ion neither responded to the Secretary of  State's  notice  of
           intended deportation, which  invited  him  to  make  any  further
           representations, nor attend before the Judge who  noted  that  Mr
           Ion had in fact left the United Kingdom on  16  June  2021  on  a
           flight to Bucharest with no evidence that he had returned.
        5. Mr Ion has failed  to  attend  this  appeal  hearing.  Notice  of
           proceedings giving a clear indication of the date, time and venue
           of the hearing was sent to Mr Ion  at  the  last  known  address,
           being that provided as his address when he was  granted  bail  by
           the Secretary of State. No alternative address  for  service  has
           been provided. In light of the lawful service of  the  notice  of
           hearing, no application for an adjournment, and confirmation from
           Mr McVeety that no application had been made by  Mr  Ion  to  re-
           enter the United Kingdom which will be required in light  of  the
           abolition  of  the  free  movement  provisions,  I  find  it   is
           appropriate and in accordance with the interests of  justice  and
           the overriding objectives to  proceed  with  the  appeal  in  his
           absence.
        6. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal. The operative part  of  the  grant  being  in  the
           following terms:

           2.      The grounds assert that the Judge erred in the assessment
               of the risk that the Appellant presented against the findings
               of  his  criminal  record,  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
               offending, and his leaving the UK without informing the  Home
               Office.


           3.      In accepting that the Secretary of State has  shown  that
               there was a risk of reoffending, paragraph 75, when  combined
               with the assessment of the seriousness, paragraph 70, and the
               repeated disregard of the  sentences,  paragraph  73,  it  is
               arguable that the Judge erred in the assessment of  the  risk
               that the Appellant presented having regard to the Appellant's
               driving whilst disqualified and  his  failure  to  provide  a
               specimen for analysis.


           4.      The grounds are arguable  and  permission  to  appeal  is
               granted.


Error of law

        7. As noted above, it was  accepted  by  the  Judge  that  Mr  Ion's
           driving offences are serious, that he had showed a disregard  for
           the law, and that the Secretary of State had established that was
           a clear likelihood of Mr Ion reoffending in the future.
        8. The  key  finding  of  the  Judge  was  that  threat  was  not  a
           sufficiently serious one, with no evidence that his offending has
           created a risk of  harm  [74]  and  [76]  which  contradicts  the
           findings at [71] in which the Judge writes: "I agree with Mr  Ojo
           that there could be serious consequences if the appellant were to
           drive without insurance and get into an accident. It is no answer
           that the person who suffered as a result will be able to turn  to
           the Motor Insurance Bureau for recompense, as that is  funded  by
           the public itself."
        9. There was clear evidence before the Judge to show  Mr  Ion  is  a
           persistent offender who has shown a  blatant  disregard  for  the
           laws of the UK and who had provided no evidence, as recognised by
           the Judge, to explain his actions or to  indicate  there  was  no
           likelihood of a repetition of such conduct in the future.  Little
           evidence of remorse was found by the Judge, and nor is  it  found
           that Mr Ion is integrated into the UK.
       10. There is merit in the Secretary of State's  argument  that  given
           the other findings made, the available evidence  and  considering
           the  matter  holistically,   including   the   consequences   for
           individuals driving with no insurance and without  permission  to
           do so as a result of their having been  disqualified,  indicating
           an inability to drive to the requisite  minimum  standards  until
           they can prove otherwise, that the Judge has erred in  law  in  a
           manner material to the decision to allow the appeal when  finding
           that the offences of which there is a real risk that Mr Ion  will
           repeat will not create a real risk of harm to others.  There  was
           no authority referred to by the Judge  to  support  a  contention
           that driving offences of the nature of those committed by Mr Ion,
           which warranted a custodial sentence, did not create a real  risk
           of harm to others. The sanctions available to the criminal courts
           clearly indicate otherwise.
       11. I set the decision of the Judge aside.
       12. In light of the failure of Mr Ion to engage in the appeal process
           it is appropriate in all the circumstances for the Upper Tribunal
           to proceed to remake the decision without a further hearing.
       13. The Judge's finding in relation to there being little evidence of
           remorse and repetition of offending at [55],  that  there  is  no
           evidence of rehabilitation at [56], that Mr Ion is  a  persistent
           offender at [60], that the driving  offences  were  serious  [70]
           with possible serious consequences [71], that Mr Ion  was  likely
           to reoffend [75], and that Mr Ion is not integrated into  the  UK
           [84] shall be preserved findings.
       14. I find that it has been established that in light of  the  nature
           and frequency of the offending Mr Ion presents genuine, present a
           sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy  in
           the United Kingdom.
       15. The basic protection  regime:  Under  the  Immigration  (European
           Economic Area) Regulations  2016  ('the  2016  Regulations')  the
           provisions  relating  to  European  nationals  who  had  not  yet
           acquired permanent residence  in  the  UK  are  to  be  found  in
           Regulation 27(5). Regulation 27 as a whole reads:

           Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security  and
           public health


           27.-    (1) In this regulation, a "relevant  decision"  means  an
             EEA decision taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.


             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
             ends.


             (3)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except  on  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  and   public
             security.


             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


                (a)    has a right of permanent residence under  regulation
                   15 and who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                   continuous period of at least  ten  years  prior  to  the
                   relevant decision; or


                (b)    is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                   is in the best interests  of  the  person  concerned,  as
                   provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
                   adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations  on
                   20th November 1989.


             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-


                (a)    the decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                   proportionality;


                (b)    the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                   personal conduct of the person concerned;


                (c)    the personal conduct of the person must represent  a
                   genuine,  present   and   sufficiently   serious   threat
                   affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of  society,
                   taking into account past conduct of the person  and  that
                   the threat does not need to be imminent;


                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                   which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do
                   not justify the decision;


                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions do  not  in
                   themselves justify the decision;


                (f)    the decision may be taken on  preventative  grounds,
                   even in the absence of a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                   provided the grounds are specific to the person.


             (6)  Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
             public policy and public security  in  relation  to  a  person
             ("P") who is resident in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision
             maker must take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,
             state of health, family  and  economic  situation  of  P,  P's
             length of residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             P's links with P's country of origin.


             (7)  In the case of a relevant decision taken  on  grounds  of
             public health-


                (a)    a disease that does not have epidemic  potential  as
                   defined by the relevant instruments of the  World  Health
                   Organisation or is not a disease listed in Schedule 1  to
                   the Health Protection (Notification) Regulations 2010; or


                (b)    if the person concerned is in  the  United  Kingdom,
                   any  disease  occurring  after  the  three  month  period
                   beginning on the date on which the person arrived in  the
                   United Kingdom,


                does not constitute grounds for the decision.


             (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

       16. I have  also  had  regard  to  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
           Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, Schedule 1 which states:

           SCHEDULE 1 CONSIDERATIONS OF PUBLIC POLICY, PUBLIC  SECURITY  AND
           THE FUNDAMENTAL INTERESTS OF SOCIETY ETC.


           Considerations of public policy and public security


           1. The EU Treaties do not impose a uniform scale of public policy
             or public security values: member  States  enjoy  considerable
             discretion,  acting  within  the  parameters  set  by  the  EU
             Treaties, applied where relevant  by  the  EEA  agreement,  to
             define  their  own  standards  of  public  policy  and  public
             security, for purposes tailored to their individual  contexts,
             from time to time.


           Application of paragraph 1 to the United Kingdom


           2. An EEA national or the family member of an EEA national having
             extensive familial and societal links with persons of the same
             nationality or language does not amount to integration in  the
             United Kingdom; a significant degree  of  wider  cultural  and
             societal integration must be present before a  person  may  be
             regarded as integrated in the United Kingdom.


           3. Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
             has  received  a  custodial  sentence,  or  is  a   persistent
             offender, the longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the
             convictions, the greater the likelihood that the  individual's
             continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,
             present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
             fundamental interests of society.


           4. Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
             national or the family member of an EEA  national  within  the
             United Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at
             or around the same time as-


             (a)  the commission of a criminal offence;


             (b)  an act otherwise affecting the fundamental  interests  of
         society;


             (c)  the EEA national or family member of an EEA national  was
         in custody.


           5. The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
             family member of an  EEA  national  who  is  able  to  provide
             substantive  evidence  of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for
             example, through demonstrating that the EEA  national  or  the
             family member of an EEA national has successfully reformed  or
             rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.


           6. It is  consistent  with  public  policy  and  public  security
             requirements in the United Kingdom that EEA decisions  may  be
             taken in order to refuse,  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right
             otherwise conferred by these Regulations in the case of  abuse
             of rights or fraud, including-


             (a)  entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
                  to enter  or  to  attempt  to  enter,  a  marriage,  civil
                  partnership or durable partnership of convenience; or


             (b)   fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,  or
                  assisting another to obtain or to  attempt  to  obtain,  a
                  right to reside under these Regulations.


           The fundamental interests of society


           7.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
             interests of society in the United Kingdom include-


             (a)   preventing  unlawful  immigration  and  abuse   of   the
                  immigration  laws,  and  maintaining  the  integrity   and
                  effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
                  under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;


             (b)  maintaining public order;


             (c)  preventing social harm;


             (d)  preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;


             (e)  protecting public services;


             (f)  excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
                  an EEA national with a  conviction  (including  where  the
                  conduct of that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact
                  caused, public offence) and maintaining public  confidence
                  in the ability of the relevant authorities  to  take  such
                  action;


             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify
                  but where there is wider societal harm (such  as  offences
                  related to the misuse of drugs  or  crime  with  a  cross-
                  border dimension as mentioned  in  Article  83(1)  of  the
                  Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);


             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
                  (particularly in relation to offences, which if  taken  in
                  isolation,  may  otherwise  be  unlikely   to   meet   the
                  requirements of regulation 27);


             (i)   protecting  the   rights   and   freedoms   of   others,
                  particularly from exploitation and trafficking;


             (j)  protecting the public;


             (k)  acting in the best interests of a child (including  where
                  doing so entails refusing a child admission to the  United
                  Kingdom, or otherwise taking an  EEA  decision  against  a
                  child);


             (l)  countering terrorism and extremism and protecting  shared
         values.

       17. I find the Secretary of State has established  Mr  Ion's  conduct
           represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.
       18. If an individual's conduct is  found  to  represent  'a  genuine,
           present and sufficiently serious threat', as it has in this case,
           it necessary to consider whether the other potential  protections
           set out in the regulations should militate  against  deportation:
           MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal[2015] UKUT 520  (IAC).  This
           requires a court or tribunal  to  ask  whether  the  decision  is
           'proportionate' under 27(5)(a), which requires  consideration  of
           the factors under the new Regulation 27(6) which reads:

           Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public policy
           and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is resident
           in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must  take  account  of
           considerations such as the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
           economic situation of P, P's length of residence  in  the  United
           Kingdom, P's social and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
           Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin

       19. When considering the  prospects  of  rehabilitation  of  European
           offenders, the following matters are relevant:

           family  ties  and  responsibilities,  accommodation,   education,
           training, employment, active membership of a  community  and  the
           like...However,  lack  of  access  to  a  Probation  Officer   or
           equivalent in the other Member  State  should  not,  in  general,
           preclude deportation

       20.  There  is  nothing  from  Mr  Ion  to  show  his  prospects   of
           rehabilitation will be more successful in the UK than Romania and
           in fact may be more successful  in  preventing  further  lack  of
           insurance offences for in  Romanian  car  insurance,  "asigurarea
           auto", is obtained on a car by its owner  and  once  the  car  is
           under a policy, the policy covers all drivers,  rather  than  the
           need to insure the individual as per the UK legal requirement.
       21. Consideration has been given to what is known regarding  Mr  Ion,
           but  it  has  not  been  shown   that   his   removal   will   be
           disproportionate  to  any  interference  in  his  right  of  free
           movement. I find the Secretary of State has established  that  it
           is lawful in all the circumstances for Mr Ion to be deported from
           the United Kingdom in light of the need to maintain public order,
           prevent social harm, maintain public confidence in the ability of
           the relevant authorities  to  take  action,  to  tackle  offences
           likely to  cause  harm  to  society,  to  combat  the  effect  of
           persistent offending, and to protect the public.

Decision

       22. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the  decision  aside.  I
           substitute a decision to dismiss the appeal.

   Anonymity.

       23. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)
           of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

           I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
           Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated 14 July 2021

