
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00760/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th June 2019                    |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  Joao [B]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber of Counsel, instructed by Turpin &
Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth promulgated on 8 April 2019, in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to make a Deportation Order
    against him under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016 (the "EEA Regulations") dated 7 November 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Portugal, born on 23 October  1979,  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom in  August  2004.   On  16
    April 2018, the Appellant was convicted of robbery and possession of an
    offensive weapon in a public place, further to which he  was  sentenced
    to 3 years' imprisonment and ordered to pay a victim surcharge.

 3. The Respondent's decision was on the basis that the Appellant  had  not
    acquired a right of permanent residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  such
    that he was only entitled to the lowest level of protection  under  the
    EEA Regulations as it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  five  years
    exercising treaty rights, in particular because there was  no  evidence
    to confirm  his  claimed  employment.   The  Respondent  made  detailed
    reference to the Appellant's offence, that he posed a  medium  risk  of
    harm to the public and that although offence-related courses  had  been
    attended whilst in custody, there was  insufficient  evidence  to  show
    that the Appellant had fully  and  permanently  addressed  all  of  the
    reasons for his offending behaviour.  Further, the  Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that he would be able to financially  support  himself  on
    release from prison and he would have no fixed accommodation.   It  was
    considered  that  the  Appellant  would  likely  revert  to   offending
    behaviour to support himself in the absence of  employment  and  stable
    accommodation.

 4. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant therefore posed a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the public  to  justify  his
    deportation on grounds of public policy.  The  Appellant's  deportation
    was considered to be proportionate given that he was an adult male,  in
    good health, who had spent the majority of his life in Portugal,  where
    he faced no language barriers on return  and  from  where  he  was  not
    estranged.  There was no reason why the Appellant could not continue to
    work towards rehabilitation in Portugal.

 5. The Respondent gave separate consideration to the  Appellant's  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights through the  prism  of  paragraphs  398  and  following  of  the
    Immigration Rules, considering in particular  the  Appellant's  claimed
    family life with two children in the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant
    failed to provide any evidence in relation to his claimed children  and
    it was not therefore accepted that he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with them and nothing to suggest that it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to live in  Portugal  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant.  The Appellant did not  claim  to
    have a partner in the United Kingdom and there were no very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

 6. By the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, by way of letter  dated
    18 February 2019, the Respondent had accepted that  not  only  had  the
    Appellant acquired permanent residence in the United Kingdom, but  also
    that he had been resident here for over 10 years.  The criteria  to  be
    applied to any deportation is therefore that there must  be  imperative
    grounds of public security.

 7. Judge Hollingworth accepted the imperative grounds of  public  security
    test was applicable to this Appellant and went on to dismiss the appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 8 April  2019.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered  the  latest  available  OASys  report  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant and found that the conclusions  therein  that  the  Appellant
    posed a low risk of reoffending were not to sustainable  on  the  facts
    contained therein.  The Appellant was found  to  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society, namely the protection of  the  public
    against knife crime and overall  it  was  found  that  deportation  was
    proportionate, meeting the criteria of  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security  which  outweighed  all  of  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

 8. Separate consideration was given to the Appellant's circumstances under
    the Immigration Rules and section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002; but the Appellant did not fall within any  of  the
    exceptions to deportation and his deportation was found  not  to  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal gave insufficient reasons for departing from  the  conclusions
    in the OASys report.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    law in concluding that offences such as robbery, when committed outside
    of a significant organised enterprise, are offences which do not  "fall
    outside the scope of  the  concept  of  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security".   Thirdly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   is
    perverse in finding that  this  Appellant's  offending  is  capable  of
    engaging the imperative grounds standard at all.

10. At the oral hearing, Mr Khubber relied on the written grounds of appeal
    and submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  misdirected  itself  in
    law  in  paragraph  14  of  the  decision  and  essentially  reached  a
    conclusion which was perverse on the facts.  This  Appellant  has  been
    convicted of a single offence of robbery, to which  he  pleaded  guilty
    and received a sentence which was at the lower  range  of  those  which
    could have been imposed.  The Appellant  did  not  have  a  history  of
    similar convictions, nor was he  considered  to  be  a  high  risk  for
    reoffending and could  not  reach  the  high  threshold  of  imperative
    grounds for an isolated offence of this nature.

11. Mr Khubber accepted that there was no exhaustive list of offences  that
    could potentially be relevant for a decision on imperative grounds, but
    submitted that the  type  of  offence  and  its  seriousness  would  be
    relevant.  He referred to examples of types of offences  and  sentences
    which would be illustrative of the  types  of  offending  required  for
    deportation on imperative grounds, for example sentences  of  over  six
    years for organised drug crime,  manslaughter  and  child  trafficking.
    Such offences are of a very different  nature  to  the  single  offence
    committed by the Appellant.

12. In the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  there  was  an  impermissible
    conflation of a general concern about the  extent  and  seriousness  of
    knife crime in the United Kingdom and the need for a deterrence against
    further offences rather than a focus on this particular  Appellant  and
    the risk he may pose.

13. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Kotas submitted that it  was  wrong  to
    look for a particular offence or  category  of  offences  to  meet  the
    requirement of imperative grounds given that there  is  no  such  list.
    The First-tier Tribunal made an appropriate self-direction in paragraph
    14 to this effect that there was no category of  offending  to  satisfy
    the test but a need for an individual examination on the facts  of  the
    specific case.  The First-tier Tribunal focused on a  broad  evaluation
    of the risk to public security and the national concern of an  epidemic
    of knife crime, a matter of acute concern to both  the  government  and
    the public.  The Appellant has shown that he has the potential to carry
    out a knife attack and on the specific facts, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was entitled to find that he posed a sufficient risk to the  public  to
    meet the imperative grounds test.  In  particular,  the  factors  which
    contributed to the commission of his offence were shown to all continue
    to exist on his release from prison.  The Appellant is still  estranged
    from his family and there is uncertainty over employment  and  housing.
    In these circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was not
    perverse or irrational.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the first ground  of  appeal,  as  to  the  adequacy  of
    reasons given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  departing  from  the
    conclusions in OASys report, it is clear from the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal that the Respondent had taken significant issue with  the
    conclusions, as set out in paragraphs 8 to  11  of  the  decision.   In
    summary, the Respondent noted the triggers leading to  the  Appellant's
    previous offence, namely that he was of no  fixed  abode,  was  not  in
    employment nor did he have any available finances and he was  estranged
    from family members.

 2. The OASys report refers to the offence having  been  committed  out  of
    financial desperation and due to  the  Appellant  lacking  in  problem-
    solving skills.  It is also clear from the OASys report  and  from  the
    Appellant's own evidence that all of the circumstances leading  to  his
    previous offence would exist on release from prison, given that he  had
    no stable accommodation available, no employment and although there was
    some evidence of a prospect of re-establishing a relationship with  his
    children, this was  not  to  resume  living  with  them,  nor  for  his
    relationship with his ex-partner to resume.   In  these  circumstances,
    the Respondent's position was that the Appellant would find himself  in
    the same circumstances with a propensity to reoffend.  In essence,  the
    First-tier Tribunal agreed  with  the  Respondent  and  found  that  no
    adequate explanation had been contained in the OASys report to  explain
    the assessment of level of risk posed in the future, nor that the level
    of risk was sustainable in light of the written content of the report.

 3. I find no error of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  rejecting  the
    conclusions as to the future risk of reoffending and harm contained  in
    the OASys report for the  reasons  set  out  in  the  decision.   Those
    findings were clearly open to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  evidence
    before  it.   Having  considered  the  OASys  report  for  myself,  the
    conclusions in terms of risk  of  reoffending  and  risk  of  harm  are
    inexplicable and inconsistent with the analysis of offending  behaviour
    and circumstances leading to the offence.  It is clear that all of  the
    risks and circumstances leading to the previous offence  still  existed
    and would remain so on the Appellant's  release  from  prison  with  no
    identification  of  any  other  positive  factors  to  prevent  further
    offending.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  were,  in  the   circumstances,
    entirely justified in having regard to the substance  rather  than  the
    percentage conclusions in the OASys report when considering  what  risk
    the Appellant posed in the  future.   An  OASys  report  is  of  course
    relevant, but its conclusions are not determinative of  the  assessment
    required by the First-tier Tribunal, as confirmed by the Upper Tribunal
    in Vasconcelos (risk - rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378 (IAC).

 4. The second ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in concluding that offences such as robbery, when committed outside
    of the significant organised enterprise,  are  offences  which  do  not
    "fall outside the scope of the concept of imperative grounds of  public
    security".  Both parties accept that there is no list  or  category  of
    offences relevant to the imperative grounds test, albeit on  behalf  of
    the Appellant it was submitted that the offence of robbery of which  he
    was convicted was not  sufficiently  serious  to  engage  such  a  high
    threshold.  Given the absence of  any  list  or  category  of  offences
    relevant, I find that this ground of appeal adds nothing  of  substance
    to the third and final ground of appeal that essentially the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision finding that the imperative grounds  test  was  met
    was perverse following an individual assessment  of  all  the  relevant
    factors.

 5. The main substance of the First-tier Tribunal's findings on this  point
    are set out in paragraphs 15 and 16 as follows:

         "15. I do not find  that  an  adequate  explanation  has  been  put
         forward for the offending of the Appellant.  The  PNC  attached  to
         the papers show that the offending which  led  to  the  Appellant's
         imprisonment and to the decision of the Respondent to deport was in
         fact the first offence committed by the Appellant.  He  received  a
         sentence of imprisonment of three years in respect of robbery and a
         term of imprisonment of eight months concurrent for  possession  of
         an offensive weapon.  This was the box cutter knife.  The Appellant
         had had a long history of employment in the United Kingdom.  He has
         described what happened to him.  The Appellant has  explained  that
         he split up with his ex-partner about a year  before  he  committed
         the offence.  He went on to explain that he was  not  working  when
         they split up.  He lost his job as he did not  go  to  work  for  a
         couple of days.  His life had fallen apart.  The  difficulty  which
         confronts the Appellant  is  that  having  been  faced  with  these
         adverse circumstances he resorted to robbery  with  a  knife.   The
         expulsion decision was taken as reflected in the letter  dated  7th
         November 2018.  An epidemic of knife crime has  now  enveloped  the
         United Kingdom across the communities of the United  Kingdom.   The
         Appellant chose a box cutter knife in order to commit  the  offence
         of robbery.  He managed to obtain a very  small  amount  of  money.
         His actions illustrated the consequences involved the carrying of a
         knife.  By his actions the Appellant has become part of  the  great
         national crisis now fronting the United Kingdom  in  terms  of  the
         carrying of knives.  It is now a matter and was at the time of  the
         expulsion  decision  of  grave  national  concern.   The   internal
         security the population is therefore involved.  The seriousness  of
         the threat of knife crime is now recognised and was at the time  of
         the expulsion decision as exceptional.  The level of seriousness of
         the  threat  has  been  illustrated  by  the  continuing  level  of
         publicity given to the issue.  The actions taken by  Parliament  in
         terms of legislation in relation to sentencing in this context  has
         been highlighted.  I find that the nature of the threat  to  public
         security is exceptional based upon the level of knife crime and  in
         the level of public concern.  By his personal conduct the Appellant
         has  placed  himself  within  the  band  of  behaviour  which   has
         contributed to this threat of the security to the public.  This was
         so at the time of the expulsion decision.  The question  arises  as
         to whether the protection of the interests of the public can as  an
         objective be attained by less strict means.  The  difficulty  which
         confronts the Appellant in this context is that he has shown by his
         behaviour that he is prepared to resort to robbery with a knife  if
         his financial circumstances warrant this.

         16.  I do not find that a sufficient explanation has been  provided
         for the situation which  the  Appellant  found  himself  given  his
         history of  working  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  record  of
         jobseeker's benefits disclosed in the documentation to which I have
         referred.  I do not find that an adequate explanation has been  put
         forward in the OASys Report in this context in assessing the  level
         of risk posed by the Appellant in estimating  firstly  how  he  got
         into the situation in question in which he decided to resort to his
         offending and secondly what assurances in fact exist  against  that
         background in order to ensure that the  Appellant  would  not  find
         himself in circumstances approximating to those which  led  to  his
         offending in the first place.  I do  not  find  that  a  sufficient
         explanation has been put forward by either the Appellant or in  the
         OASys Report in this regard.  I do not find that the conclusion  in
         relation to the level of risk posed by the Appellant is sustainable
         in the circumstances.  I find that the Appellant does  represent  a
         genuine present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting  one  of
         the fundamental interests of society namely the protection  of  the
         public against knife crime.  The Appellant showed by  his  personal
         conduct that he was prepared to resort to this behaviour because of
         his financial position.  The decision may be taken on  preventative
         grounds even in the absence of a previous  criminal  conviction  if
         the grounds are specific to the Appellant.  I find that the grounds
         are specific to the Appellant in this context for the reasons which
         I have explained so that the decision may be taken on  preventative
         grounds.  The OASys assessment refers to a medium risk of  harm  to
         the public.  I do not find that  that  assessment  is  sustainable.
         The gravamen of the national concern in the context of knife  crime
         relates to the potentiality of the use of a knife.   The  Appellant
         has already demonstrated that he is prepared to take with him a box
         cutter knife when committing the  offence  of  robbery.   There  is
         already massive public concern as to the carrying  of  knives  even
         when  other  offences  are  not   being   committed   or   not   in
         contemplation.  In terms of the risk of reoffending I do not accept
         the description at the end of the OASys Report that  the  Appellant
         is a very low risk as I have referred to  this  above.   I  do  not
         accept that he poses a low risk of reoffending.  He had  been  able
         to work.  He had been able to access benefits.  He  had  shown  the
         capacity to work.  He had all this over  a  long  period  of  time.
         However these factors were not enough."

 6. Thereafter the First-tier Tribunal considered  the  proportionality  of
    the decision in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the decision,  concluding  that
    the necessary criteria have been fulfilled to uphold  the  decision  of
    the Respondent, with the finding that the gravity of the  offending  in
    applying  the  criterion  of  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    outweighs all those factors in favour of the Appellant remaining.

 7. The reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal is not as clear as it could be
    in relation to the reasons for finding that the  imperative  test  have
    been satisfied on the facts of this Appellant's case.  It appears  that
    the primary focus and weight  of  reasoning  relies  upon  the  current
    widespread problem of people carrying knives  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    described as an epidemic which  has  caused  a  high  level  of  public
    concern.  The Appellant's personal circumstances appear  to  have  been
    taken into account only to the  extent  that  he  has  "placed  himself
    within the band of behaviour which has contributed to  this  threat  to
    the security of the public".  The conclusion being that in this context
    against this background, the nature of the threat  to  public  security
    was exceptional based upon the level of knife crime and level of public
    concern.  Although there is reference to the exceptional nature of  the
    threat to public security, this seems to be by reference to the general
    background situation rather than any threat of  exceptional  nature  to
    public security posed by the Appellant himself.  He is afterall  likely
    to be one of probably thousands of individuals who  have  or  do  carry
    knives thereby contributing to the wider  problem.   Further,  although
    the conclusions of the OASys report that the  Appellant  poses  only  a
    very low risk of reoffending or  not  accepted,  there  is  no  express
    finding by the First-tier Tribunal as to what the Appellant's  risk  of
    reoffending is and certainly no findings that he poses a high  or  very
    high risk.

 8. As summarised in the head note in Land Baden-Wurttemberg v Tsakouridis,
    C-145/09  [2011]  2  C.M.L.R.  11,  the  Court  of  Justice  summarised
    imperative grounds of public security as follows:

         "The concept of "imperative grounds of public security" presupposes
         not only the existence of a threat to  public  security,  but  also
         that  such  a  threat  was  of  a  particularly  high   degree   of
         seriousness.   Public  security  covered  both  the  Member   State
         internal and external security and could be affected by  threat  to
         the functioning of the institutions and essential  public  services
         and the survival of the population, as well as the risk of  serious
         disturbance to foreign relations or  to  peaceful  co-existence  of
         nations, or a risk to military interests."

 9. In the context of a person  who  has  committed  a  single  offence  of
    robbery with possession of a knife, for which he  was  sentenced  to  3
    years' imprisonment, involving no wider organised crime aspect  and  in
    respect of whom, although triggers and  circumstances  remain  for  his
    offending, there is no finding of any high risk of reoffending or  high
    risk of harm; I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    find that the imperative grounds of public  security  test  is  met  is
    perverse.  The  apparent  rationale  by  reference  to  a  knife  crime
    epidemic does not arguably provide sufficient reason for  finding  that
    imperative grounds of public security exist on the facts of  this  case
    in relation to this Appellant.  Whilst not reducing the seriousness  of
    the Appellant's offence, the requisite high degree  of  seriousness  is
    simply not there on the facts in this  appeal.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  anything  approaching  adequate
    reasons for finding such a high threshold has been met on the facts  of
    this case, and the outcome  of  the  appeal  is  not  one  which  could
    rationally be reached on the facts as found.   I  therefore  allow  the
    appeal on this ground and set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. In these circumstances, where the Appellant's circumstances  and  facts
    as already found could not rationally  support  a  conclusion  that  he
    meets the imperative grounds test, I substitute  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows:
The appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date     8th August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

