
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00036/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Blair, Counsel, Coventry Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is A M who is Rwandan.  She was born on 4 May  1981.  She
    appeals against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  16
    December 2013 to deport her from the United Kingdom under Section 32(5)
    of UK Borders Act 2007.

2.   The history is set out in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    consisting of Judge Grimmett and Dr Okitikpi  promulgated  on  22  July
    2014.   The  appellant  came  here  as  a  visitor  in  July  2008  and
    subsequently had her leave extended  to allow her to work as a  Tier  1
    (High Skilled Migrant) until 17 December 2011.  She subsequently sought
    indefinite leave to remain and then in May 2012 claimed asylum.

3.   The application for leave to remain was subsequently withdrawn and  the
    application for asylum was refused.  An appeal was lodged against  that
    decision and was refused. She became appeal rights exhausted on 4  July
    2013.

4.   On 17 February 2013 the appellant was arrested at  Heathrow  attempting
    to board a flight to Canada using a false passport. On 26 February 2013
    she was convicted at Cambridge Crown Court of possession or control  of
    identity  documents  with  intent  and  sentenced  to  twelve   months'
    imprisonment.

5.    The  Secretary  of  State  subsequently  made  a   deportation   order
    consequent on Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  Her resistance to
    that order is based on the Exceptions in Section 33 and  in  particular
    her rights under Exception 1. She contends that it would be contrary to
    the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention to  deport  her.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   The appeal was refused.   That  decision  was  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and in a decision promulgated on 11 November 2014 Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chana refused the appeal.

7.   Subsequently by order dated 1 July 2015 Lord Justice Underhill  granted
    leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal. By agreement of the parties the
    appeal was subsequently allowed without a hearing.

8.   In the Statement of Reasons the parties  note  that  the  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that he was  satisfied
    that there was no material error of law in  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Adequate reasons were given for finding the
    appellant's account not to be credible and consistent and  her  claimed
    activities in the United Kingdom  were  not  credible.  The  panel  had
    concluded that she would not be at risk on return to Rwanda.

9.   The parties have accepted that there was an error of law in failing  to
    consider the points identified in paragraph 4 of the reasons  on  which
    leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given on  6  August  2014  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Levin.  They are set out as follows:

         "It is arguable that the panel's failure to assess  the  risk  that
         the  appellant  faces  on  return  irrespective  of  their  adverse
         credibility  findings  and  with  reference   to   the   background
         information upon Rwanda amounts to an error of law.


         It is also arguable  that  the  panel's  failure  to  consider  the
         evidence of  the  two  experts  Dr  Harry  Verhjoven  and  Profesor
         Reyntjens when assessing the credibility of the appellant  and  the
         risk she claims to face on return also amounts to an error of law.


         In such  circumstances  both  the  grounds  and  the  determination
         disclose arguable errors of law."

10.  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  was  given  on  the  basis
    that the Upper Tribunal had made a  material  misdirection  in  law  by
    concluding that the First-tier Tribunal made a material  error  by  not
    referring to expert report evidence. The  Upper  Tribunal  should  have
    found that the First-tier Tribunal had not given the case  the  anxious
    scrutiny required.

11.  For the reasons set out in the  order  of  the  Right  Honourable  Lord
    Justice Underhill and the reasons given when  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission on 6 August 2014 the parties were  agreed  that  the
    appropriate course is that the appeal be  allowed  and  the  matter  be
    remitted back to the Upper  Tribunal  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber for consideration by a differently constituted Tribunal.

12.  I find that there has been an error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal.
     In the first place it appears that there has been a failure to  assess
    the profile of the appellant's risk against the country evidence  which
    shows risk to those who are associated with anti-government persons and
    policies. That risk is not dependent on  the  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the claimed activity in this county.  In  other  words,  it
    stands independently of any adverse findings of credibility.

13.  Secondly, it is clear  to me on a reading of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision that  there  has  not  been  a  proper  consideration  of  the
    background expert evidence.  In particular there is  no  assessment  of
    the views of Dr Harold Bond and there has been, in my view,  inadequate
    consideration of the evidence from Dr Verhoven and Profesor  Reyntjens.
    The grounds of appeal make it clear that the failure  to  consider  the
    evidence of the two experts, Dr Verhoven and Professor Reyntjens, go to
    the heart of assessing the credibility of the appellant  and  the  risk
    that she claims to face on return.

14.  For these reasons I find there is an error of law  and  the  appeal  is
    allowed. Given that the credibility of the appellant may  still  be  an
    issue, it seems to me that it would be appropriate for this case to  be
    reconsidered by the First-tier Tribunal.  In making that observation  I
    also take into account the fact that some time has  passed  since  this
    was last in the First-tier Tribunal and I  am  advised  that  there  is
    indeed updated country information and that further expert reports  may
    be required.


Notice of Decision

15.  For these reasons I shall make directions that this matter be  remitted
    to back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:

                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                                       Date:
