
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00209/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 February 2016                    |On 21 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mr Angelo Puggioni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton
For the Respondent:    Ms R Moffatt


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moller allowing an appeal by Mr  Puggioni  (whom  I
    shall refer to hereafter as "the appellant") from a  decision  made  in
    April 2015.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  the  decision  on
    three grounds.  Firstly it is claimed that the  judge  failed  to  give
    reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.   In
    paragraph 49 of the decision the judge accepted what she  described  as
    the unchallenged oral evidence  of  Ms  Kabakidi  (the  mother  of  the
    appellant's two children) which was that the appellant and his  parents
    all said he stopped drinking alcohol in prison and remains abstinent in
    Italy (to where he was removed).  The judge  accepted  the  appellant's
    evidence that he has a desire to address his alcohol use and  offending
    and this is based on the appellant's  witness  statement,  pre-sentence
    report and Ms Kabakidi's evidence.  The  respondent  alleges  that  the
    judge failed to provide reasons as to why  she  preferred  the  hearsay
    evidence of  the  appellant's  sobriety  rather  than  considering  his
    historic failure to address his issues and repeated offending.

 3. The claim is made  also  that  the  judge  independently  assessed  the
    appellant as being at low risk of reoffending despite him  having  been
    assessed by the  Probation  Service  as  medium  risk.   The  appellant
    provided no independent evidence that  the  risk  was  reduced  and  no
    evidence that he had sought any outside assistance  in  addressing  the
    "binge drinking" which was, according the appellant,  the  causal  link
    with his offending.  Furthermore complaint is  made  that  the  judge's
    finding that being gainfully employed is likely to reduce the chance of
    misusing alcohol or reoffending is inadequately reasoned to the  extent
    that it is perverse when considered in the light of the judge's finding
    that he had been in employment or self-employment  for  at  least  five
    continuous years between 2007 and 2014.  That  finding  is  clearly  at
    odds with the appellant's criminal  convictions  and  his  own  reasons
    given for offending.

 4. The second ground alleges a mistake of fact by the judge.  She  records
    that the appellant did not  come  to  the  attention  of  the  criminal
    justice system between 2010 and 2014.  This is factually inaccurate  in
    that he was convicted at East London  Magistrates'  Court  on  13  July
    2012.  Whilst accepting that this is a minor mistake  it  is  submitted
    that when considered along with the first ground it demonstrates a lack
    of  consideration  of  the  appellant's   criminal   convictions,   his
    propensity to reoffend and is material to the conclusion that he  would
    behave appropriately in the future and therefore cannot pose a genuine,
    present and serious threat (affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society).  The respondent submits that there remain serious  grounds
    of public policy for the deportation of the appellant.

 5. The third ground is a submission that the judge's approach is  unlawful
    regarding Article 8 and part VA of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  It is argued by  the  respondent  that  the  approach
    taken by the judge is unlawful on the basis that it is superficial  and
    fails to take account of all  relevant  public  interest  factors.   In
    particular she has failed to have regard to Section 117 of that Act.

 6. After hearing helpful submissions from both representatives I announced
    at the hearing that I considered that any errors in the decision of the
    F-tT Judge were not material.  The decision and the reasons  given  for
    coming to that decision have been adequately reasoned.  The findings of
    the judge were open to her.

 7. Dealing with the third ground first (Article 8 and part VA of the  2002
    Act) the case of Badewa (ss 117A-D and  EEA  Regulations)  [2015]  UKUT
    00329 (IAC) shows that human rights have a part to play in an  analysis
    of an EEA decision but, as per the headnote, the correct approach to be
    applied by Tribunal judges in relation to sections 117A-D of  the  NIAA
    2002 (as amended) in the context of EEA removal decisions is:-

         "(i) first to decide if a  person  satisfies  requirements  of  the
             Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   In
             this context Sections 117A-D has no application;

         (ii) second where a person has raised Article  8  as  a  ground  of
             appeal, Sections 117A-D applies."

    It appeared to be common ground in submissions before me  that  if  the
    judge did not fall into material error in her  decision  and  reasoning
    for allowing the appeal under the EEA Regulations it was  bound  to  be
    immaterial that she had failed to deal with Article 8  and  the  public
    interest considerations as set out in Sections 117A-D of the  2002  Act
    correctly.

    I have concluded for reasons that I set out hereafter  that  the  judge
    was entitled to find as  she  did  for  the  appellant  under  the  EEA
    Regulations and therefore I do not need to consider further the Article
    8 challenge.

 8. In considering the other grounds alleging material errors of law in the
    decision to allow the appeal it is helpful to set out the judge's  main
    findings in relation to the appellant and his drinking  excess  alcohol
    which on any view has been the main triggering event for his offending.
     These findings were helpfully set out  in  the  appellant's  counsel's
    skeleton argument:-

      a) the appellant was employed and/or self-employed for at  least  five
         continuous years between 2007-2014;

      b) the appellant has  a  desire  to  address  his  alcohol  abuse  and
         offending, he has remained sober  both  in  prison  and  since  his
         release;

      c) the  appellant's  intention  to  avoid  alcohol  is  realistic  and
         reflects a change in attitude;

      d) in the light of evidence that the appellant is sober  the  risk  of
         reoffending is low;

      e) the appellant is remorseful and regrets his behaviour.

      f) the appellant gained a number of qualifications in prison;  he  has
         also undertaken vocational study in the UK;

      g)  the  entirety  of  Ms  Kabakidi's  evidence  on  the   appellant's
         relationship with his children was accepted.

 9. These findings led the Tribunal to conclude that the appellant has  had
    permanent residence in the United Kingdom for  the  appropriate  period
    and to a finding that he does  not  pose  a  genuine  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to a  fundamental  interest  of  society.   Finally  the
    decision did not comply with the principle of  proportionality  and  as
    per  Regulation  21(6)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  the  proportionality
    assessment necessarily involved some consideration  of  the  effect  of
    deportation on the appellant's children and other factors  set  out  in
    the decision.

10. In relation to  ground  1  therefore  -  being  the  challenge  to  the
    existence and/or adequacy of the Tribunal's reasons - this fails  since
    detailed reasons for the judge's findings were given that the appellant
    does  not  represent  a  sufficiently   serious   threat   to   justify
    deportation.  Ground 1 amounts to nothing more than a disagreement with
    those findings.  The Tribunal gave full  and  proper  reasons  for  the
    finding that the appellant has a realistic intention  to  refrain  from
    alcohol abuse.  The Tribunal referred to the pre-sentence  report;  the
    findings of the sentencing judge; the evidence of the appellant and  Ms
    Kabakidi (who was conceded to be  a  credible  witness).   Further  the
    Tribunal acknowledged that the evidence  from  Ms  Kabakidi  about  the
    appellant's abstinence was partly hearsay and therefore less persuasive
    but nevertheless gives proper reasons why  she  finds  the  appellant's
    abstinence credible.

11. I agree with the submission also that for the  purpose  of  a  decision
    under Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations it is the proper function of
    the F-tT - not the Probation Service - to make a decision on the  level
    of risk as at the date of hearing.  The Probation Service's views  some
    months prior to the hearing were a relevant factor  in  the  assessment
    but those views were properly taken into account as to why in the light
    of the finding of the appellant's abstinence  from  alcohol  the  judge
    disagreed with the Probation Service's conclusion.  These were findings
    and reasons properly open to the Tribunal.

12. It was not  irrational  either  for  the  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    appellant has the necessary skills to obtain work in the United Kingdom
    and that gainful employment is likely to further  reduce  the  risk  of
    reoffending particularly in the context of the  earlier  findings  that
    the appellant has had a real and sustainable change in  attitude.   The
    judge's findings did not go as far as to find that he  was  necessarily
    employed and/or in self-employment for the full seven  year  period  of
    residence in the UK.  None of this is perverse.

13. As to ground 2 - that the F-tT made a material mistake of fact - it  is
    clear that the judge was aware of the appellant's previous  convictions
    because she notes at paragraph 46 that he was convicted of  two  public
    order offences in 2007, criminal damage in 2012 and  possession  of  an
    imitation firearm with intent to cause fear of violence  on  6  October
    2014.  The respondent herself appears to  recognise  that  the  mistake
    made by the judge is  "minor".   In  any  event  the  omission  of  the
    conviction in 2012 is not material to the outcome as the judge gives  a
    series of properly reasoned arguments as to why the appellant does  not
    pose a genuine, present and serious threat.

14. For these reasons the decision of the F-tT is upheld.

15. An anonymity direction was not made in the First-tier  Tribunal;  there
    was no application for such a direction before me and I  find  no  good
    reason to make one in all the circumstances.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

