
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 June 2015                          |On 8 July 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DOVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Ayman Awad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Hasan, Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination which was promulgated  on  10
    April 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.  Permission to appeal was
    granted by Immigration Judge Andrew on 5 May 2015.

2.   The circumstances of the appeal are as follows.  The respondent  is  an
    Italian citizen born on 26 August 1992.  He came to the UK on 15  March
    2013  and  very  shortly  thereafter  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  It appears from the subsequent decision letter  dated  12
    March 2014 that he found himself in trouble  with  the  police  in  the
    following ways and on the following occasions.  On 21 July 2013 he  was
    given a police caution for theft in the form of shoplifting.  7  August
    2013 he was convicted at East London Magistrates' Court of  failing  to
    attend a follow-up assessment following a test for class  A  drugs  and
    given a conditional discharge for twelve months.  We note that this  is
    the start certainly in the formal record  of  him  finding  himself  in
    trouble with the police as a result of being associated  with  class  A
    drugs.  Subsequent to this on 14 November  2013  he  was  convicted  at
    Snaresbrook Crown Court of making false representations  to  make  gain
    for himself or another and cause loss, possession of heroin, a class  A
    drug, theft and shoplifting, possession of an  offensive  weapon  in  a
    public place, assault occasioning actual bodily  harm  and  threatening
    with an offensive weapon in a public place together with breach of  his
    twelve month conditional discharge which had been imposed on  7  August
    2013.  Several of those offences occurred whilst the respondent was  on
    bail.  He was after this conviction served with a notice  of  liability
    to deportation on 26 February 2014.

3.   As part and parcel of the process of  considering  the  suitability  or
    appropriateness of a decision for deportation a request was made to the
    National Probation Service on  20  February  2014  for  information  in
    relation to the respondent's risk in relation to future offending.   It
    was identified that he was  at  MAPPA  level  2.   There  was  also  an
    assessment within Section 5 of that document which  drew  on  the  pre-
    sentence report which was dated 3  January  2014  and  which  had  been
    prepared for the purpose of sentencing the respondent.   In  that  pre-
    sentence report it was noted that within the first year the  respondent
    had a low risk of reconviction rated at 46% and then a medium  risk  of
    reconviction after four years of 64% when his  circumstances  had  been
    scored by the offender group reconviction score tool available  to  the
    probation officer preparing that report.

4.   In particular  the  officer  preparing  the  report  went  on  to  make
    observations about the respondent's risk:

         "Having assessed the facts of this  case,  my  interview  with  the
         defendant and the fact he is not a heavily convicted young  man,  I
         have assessed the risk of serious harm he poses to  the  public  as
         being medium at this time.

         Mr Awad stated he is currently on a 5ml  methadone  script,  having
         started on 45ml when first remanded into custody  some  six  months
         ago.  If he can maintain abstinence from  illegal  drugs  his  risk
         will decrease however if he begins to  use  again  his  risk  could
         increase potentially significantly so.  There  is  little  at  this
         time to suggest however that he would carry out a  similar  act  in
         the  future.   Given  all  the  information  addressed,  it  is  my
         assessment that the dangerousness threshold has  not  been  met  at
         this time."

5.   Acting upon and informed by that  material,  the  appellant  reached  a
    decision in relation to deportation the reasons for which were provided
    in a letter dated 12 March 2014.  In paragraph 18 of that decision  the
    following is recorded:

         "18. As a result of the nature  of  your  offences  you  have  been
             assessed as a being subject to  the  medium  level  of  Multi-
             Agency Public Protection Arrangements  (MAPPA  level  2),  the
             purpose of which is the protection of the  public.   The  fact
             that you are appropriate to be monitored under risk management
             strategies is an indication that you are viewed  as  posing  a
             continuing risk to the public for a minimum of five years from
             the date of your sentencing with  the  requirement  to  report
             regularly  to  the  police  and   abide   by   certain   other
             restrictions.  It is also accepted that  the  nature  of  your
             offence may not be the only contributing factor to your rating
             it may also be influenced by factors  such  as  mental  health
             problems, ongoing issues with drugs and alcohol, accommodation
             issues or  maintained  contact  with  other  known  offenders.
             These factors are likely to  have  a  direct  impact  on  your
             propensity to reoffend  and  this  is  why  the  strategy  for
             managing you as a MAPPA 2 nominal involves agencies which  may
             be able to provide support in these areas."

6.   The decision went on to record the seriousness with  which  the  crimes
    for which he had been sentenced in the Crown Court was regarded by  the
    sentencing judge.  It also went on to note that  the  nature  of  those
    offences together with the respondent's association at the time of  his
    offending with illicit drugs rendered him a higher risk individual  and
    further that there was little evidence  noted  in  the  letter  of  him
    undertaking work to  engage  with  his  addiction.   As  a  result,  in
    paragraph 28 of the letter the following conclusion was reached:

         "It  is  noted  that  you  would  not  have  the  same  access   to
         drugs/alcohol whilst in prison as you would have in the  community.
         There is a lack of  evidence  that  you  have  overcome  your  drug
         addiction and it is believed that you are likely to revert to using
         drugs upon your release from prison which would, in turn,  increase
         the risk of you reoffending and continuing to pose a risk  of  harm
         to the public, or a section of the public."

    In the light of that conclusion the appellant reached the view that the
    necessary conditions to which we shall turn shortly have been satisfied
    so as to justify a decision that the respondent should be deported.

7.   The respondent appealed against the deportation  decision  and,  as  we
    have noted, the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio at a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 26  March  2015.   The  judge  set  out  the
    submissions and the evidence which he had  heard  and  noted  that  the
    issue which was in particular raised was the question of whether or not
    in the light of that material as assessed at the date  of  the  hearing
    the requirements of Regulations 19 and  21  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 had been satisfied.  In particular the concern of  the
    appellant was to satisfy the judge  that  the  respondent  presented  a
    "genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat" so as to justify the
    deportation  decision  and  satisfy  the  additional  requirements   of
    proportionality.

8.   The conclusions which the judge reached in his  determination  were  as
    follows.  Firstly he concluded that he was satisfied that at  the  time
    when the decision was made in view of the "appalling behaviour" of  the
    respondent the decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  was  entirely
    justified.  He, however, then went on to  consider  the  state  of  the
    evidence as it was presented to him in the hearing.   His  conclusions,
    which it is necessary to set out at some length, were as follows:

          "27.    The appellant has moved on from where he was at  the  date
             of sentencing and at the date of decision.  I have taken  into
             account the evidence from him that he has been clean  now  for
             three and  a  half  months.   There  is  a  letter  from  Drug
             Intervention Programme dated 16  March  2015.   Initially  the
             appellant's drug treatment engagement had been quite sporadic,
             however from September 2014 the  appellant  has  engaged  with
             their services and has been a lot more positive.  He had  been
             prescribed methadone of his own  will  on  a  voluntary  basis
             prior to attending the programme.  It was noted that  he  also
             disclosed his drug use to  his  parents  who  have  been  very
             supportive with an attempt to seek and engage  with  treatment
             services.  His project worker states that in  his  opinion  he
             feels that it will be detrimental to the appellant's  recovery
             if he were to be removed from the UK where he has been  living
             and  receiving  a  great  amount  of  support  from  treatment
             services and his family.

         28.  I also accept the submissions of Mr Hasan  going  through  the
             patient record.  He has been administered with methadone on  a
             regular basis  and  his  mental  condition  was  described  as
             stable.  On 23 February 2015 the patient record shows that the
             appellant wished  to  come  off  methadone  refusing  to  take
             further doses.  It was noted that he was  relaxed,  made  good
             rapport and eye contact.  The sentencing  judge  remarks  that
             the spree of criminal activity committed by the appellant  was
             when he was seriously in the thrall of a drug habit.   I  find
             on the records before me that the appellant has  now  realised
             that  the  illegal  drugs  he  has  been  taking   have   been
             detrimental  to  his  lifestyle   and   will   have   personal
             consequences on him and his family.  I have taken into account
             the letter from the appellant stating that  he  wishes  to  be
             given another chance and wants to be there for his family  and
             keep his family ties.  I have also taken into account the plea
             from his sister which states how angry she became on realising
             that her brother was addicted to drugs.

         29.  I have taken into account  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
             parents.  The OASys Report described him as having a  risk  of
             serious harm to the public to medium level but  assessed  that
             the dangerousness threshold has not  been  met  at  the  time.
             However, that situation has  changed  significantly  with  the
             appellant not taking drugs and coming  off  of  methadone.   I
             find that this to a large extent means of him  not  being  any
             danger to the public.

         31.  Taking into account all the circumstances of this case I  find
             that the appellant's present  conduct  does  not  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of  society.   My  conclusion  is
             reached largely on the significant change  the  appellant  has
             made in his life.  The  main  reason  why  the  appellant  was
             involved in the offences was due to  his  drug  addiction.   I
             find that his rehabilitation will be helped being  around  his
             parents and also seeking support from the services  that  have
             helped him come off drug-taking.  I find  that  the  appellant
             himself realises his own mistakes and wants to make amends  by
             contributing to his  family  and  making  a  good  living  for
             himself.  I therefore find on the  totality  of  the  evidence
             before me that the present decision does not comply  with  the
             principle of proportionality in view of the situation  at  the
             date of the hearing.  I find  that  the  appellant  would  not
             represent a genuine, present  and  sufficient  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.   I  am
             prepared to accept  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Hasan  and
             therefore have decided to allow the appeal."

9.   The appellant's appeal against that decision proceeds on the  basis  of
    two grounds.  Firstly that the Immigration Judge  erred  in  concluding
    that there was no longer a "genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat".  This, it is submitted, is a material misdirection of law  and
    in the able and focused submissions made to us by Mr Whitwell was  also
    developed in terms of a failure to take account of  important  material
    considerations or provide adequate reasons in relation to the  material
    which was before the  judge.   The  second  ground,  which  is  largely
    parasitic upon the first ground, is one related to proportionality.  It
    is submitted that the judge's proportionality assessment was flawed  on
    the basis that he had failed to properly appreciate that the respondent
    continued to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat.

10.  In substance in his submissions Mr  Whitwell  identifies  a  number  of
    features of the evidence that was before the judge which he submits the
    judge has failed to adequately grapple with and they were  as  follows.
    Firstly that the Immigration Judge failed to consider  anything  beyond
    the noted finding that at the time of the OASys analysis he  was  found
    to be a medium risk of reoffending.  In addition  to  that  there  were
    other matters which should have informed the  judge's  assessment.   Mr
    Whitwell submitted that he should have taken stronger  account  of  the
    fact that the respondent was still on methadone at the  time  when  the
    hearing occurred and indeed that not long prior to the hearing that use
    of methadone had increased appreciably.  He also points out that it was
    only recently that the respondent had confessed to  his  parents  about
    his addiction to drugs.  Moreover, the judge did not address  the  fact
    that the respondent had been found to be at MAPPA  level  2  which,  as
    paragraph 18 of the decision noted, could be influenced not  simply  by
    the drug addiction, which  the  judge  addressed,  but  also  by  other
    factors  such  as  mental  health  issues,  accommodation   issues   or
    association  with  known  offenders  which  could  contribute  and  had
    contributed to the MAPPA level 2 assessment.

11.  Having considered those submissions carefully we are unable  to  accept
    them.  It is clear to us that all of  these  factors  were  taken  into
    account as part and parcel of the evidence before the judge.  The issue
    upon which he relied in forming his assessment  was  the  clear  change
    which had occurred in the respondent as a result of him  engaging  with
    his drug addiction which, it is  clear  from  the  probation  officer's
    report prepared for the sentencing exercise  and  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant, was the principal causative factor in  him  finding  himself
    with criminal associates and convicted of the kind of offences which we
    have set out above.  It was therefore entirely open  to  the  judge  to
    form the conclusion that he did, namely that now that there  was  clear
    evidence both that the respondent had engaged with seeking to  overcome
    his addiction and also of support from his  immediate  family  in  that
    endeavour  that  the  principal  risk  factor  which  had  led  to  the
    justifiable conclusion at the time of the appellant's decision that the
    respondent was a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to
    justify deportation had been overcome and was no  longer  demonstrated.
    It was not necessary for the judge in forming the decision that he  did
    to address each and every detail of the medical evidence or  the  other
    evidence from professionals engaged in the assessment of the respondent
    to  adequately  explain  the  decision  which  he   reached.    It   is
    demonstrated by the extensive citation of the  determination  which  we
    have set out above that in truth the judge went into some  considerable
    detail to explain and justify why he had formed a different  conclusion
    on the evidence that was available to him at the hearing to that  which
    had been reached by the  appellant  at  the  time  of  the  immigration
    decision to deport him.

12.  It follows that we are unable to  find  substance  in  the  submissions
    made under ground 1 and,  as  we  have  set  out  above,  ground  2  is
    parasitic upon ground 1, that ground must fail also.  For these reasons
    we dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal brought by the Secretary of State is dismissed on all grounds.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Dove

