
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: da008382014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 25 April 2016                     |On 14th June 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                     XX
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding, counsel instructed by Migrant Law
                    Partnership on 16 March 2016 and
      Mr Richard Bartram, solicitor of the Migrant Law Partnership on 25
                    April 2016

For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified  as  XX.  This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



1.    This case came before us to decide whether there had been an error  of
law by the First-tier Tribunal on 24 June 2015. For  the  reasons  given  in
our decision of 30 July 2015 we  found  an  error  of  law,  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and adjourned the appeal for  a  resumed
hearing [Appendix A]. The resumed hearing of this appeal  subsequently  came
before us for hearing  on  21  January  2016  when  it  was  adjourned  with
directions [Appendix B] to 16 March  2016,  due  to  technical  difficulties
with the evidence. On 16  March  2016,  Mr  Harding  again  applied  for  an
adjournment on the basis that 3  dvds  provided  by  the  Appellant  to  his
solicitors had been overdubbed in English,  albeit  not  by  a  professional
translator and the Lingala under the English was drowned  out.  All  3  dvds
were now available in undubbed form but his solicitors had  been  unable  to
comply with directions as the dvd's had not translated and served  in  time.
Mr Clarke accepted that the Appellant had done all he needed to do  and  the
fault fell upon his solicitor, for failing to comply  with  the  directions.
We agreed to an adjournment on the  basis  that  the  Appellant's  solicitor
provided an affidavit as to his actions in relation to when he obtained  the
DVDs; the dubbing;  the  removal  of  the  dubbing  and  their  translation.
Directions were issued to this  effect  [Appendix  C]  and  the  appeal  was
adjourned until 25 April 2016. The further evidence was directed to be  sent
in the form of a USB stick by 4pm on Monday 11 April 2016.

2.    A USB stick was received by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  13  April  2016,
along with a letter offering an explanation for the delay in adducing it.  A
bundle of 72 pages and a short skeleton argument were received  on  Thursday
21 April 2016 by fax in accordance with the directions. Prior  to  that,  an
affidavit from the Appellant's solicitor dated 25 March 2016,  in  which  he
set out the actions he had taken in respect of  translating  the  DVDs,  was
received by the Upper Tribunal on 29 March 2016.

Hearing

3.     At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  the  Appellant's  solicitor
attended on the Appellant's behalf, as his representative,  as  counsel  had
not been booked for the hearing. He did not seek an adjournment.

4.    The Appellant gave evidence and adopted  his  statement  of  12  April
2016. He was briefly cross-examined by Mr Clarke, when he confirmed that  he
had given the DVDs of his political activities taken from the  internet  and
cable TV to his solicitor himself. He was asked about a YouTube video  on  8
March 2016 and was asked to recall the subject matter. The Appellant  stated
that he believed it is a video programme  called  Congo  Bololo,  which  had
also gone out on Sky channel 590, Faith TV which is a live channel.  He  was
asked whether there was anything to demonstrate that  it  was  broadcast  on
Sky, such as a schedule from the  channel  showing  the  programmes  and  he
stated that everything is organized and is there;  the  programme  goes  out
every Thursday at 5pm live until 5.30 pm. Mr Clarke  put  to  the  Appellant
that page 19 of the bundle does not refer to either him  or  the  programme,
to which the Appellant responded that the programme was live, but if you  go
on the internet, to the Faith World TV website it  is  there.  He  confirmed
that it was also on Youtube and this was  at  page  18  of  the  bundle.  In
response to Mr Clarke, the Appellant confirmed that he was also  relying  on
a B1 TV show and also Africa Vision and that he had obtained this  from  the
internet and given it to his solicitor. This was the Africa  Vision  website
at page 55 of the bundle. The Appellant  confirmed  that  all  the  internet
sites were available in the DRC.  The  Appellant  was  not  re-examined.  In
response to questions from us, the Appellant confirmed that  the  transcript
for Congo Bololo is a transcript of the live TV interview  and  this  is  on
the memory stick.

5.    In his  submissions,  Mr  Bartram  sought  to  rely  on  his  skeleton
argument of 21 April 2016. He also relied upon the CG decision of the  Upper
Tribunal in BM (returnees- criminal and non-criminal)  DRC  CG  [2015]  UKUT
293 (IAC) at [87] to the effect that the Embassy in the UK  and  DRC  agents
monitor the diaspora for anti government elements.  He  submitted  that  the
evidence in this case is crucial; that the  interviews  with  the  Appellant
are lengthy: the 1 hour show begins at 1.30 and concludes at  4  minutes  40
seconds. The Appellant is in panel  discussions  with  the  interviewer  and
this is not a one off programme but has  many  episodes.  There  are  weekly
discussions and the interviewer is well known within the community  and  was
likely to be monitored by the DRC authorities. In response to  the  skeleton
argument drafted by Ms  Isherwood  for  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  19
January 2016, Mr Bartram submitted that matters had moved  on  in  that  the
Upper Tribunal and the Secretary of State have been presented  with  further
evidence and the Appellant's  case  is  that  he  now  has  a  high  profile
compared to even a year ago and that it was a refugee sur place claim.

6.    In response, Mr Clarke relied upon Ms  Isherwood's  skeleton  argument
and submitted that she advances an argument whereby their position  is  that
the Appellant has contrived a sur place claim. He submitted  that  whilst  a
considerable amount of evidence had now been served, it is  clear  from  the
witness statement that the Appellant only joined Apareco in April  2015.  He
accepted that the DRC government are looking at Apareco UK and  someone  who
is a spokesperson will be at risk, if they are aware  of  internet  channels
and broadcasts. Whilst this may be at fever pitch now it does  not  indicate
a long term political activity. Mr Clarke stated that  he  appreciated  that
someone may not be politically active but may become so.

Our findings

7.    We reserved our decision which we  now  give  with  our  reasons.  The
starting point is set out at [17] of Appendix A and  is  a  narrow  one  viz
whether the level of the Appellant's sur place  political  activity  against
the DRC regime is likely to have come to the attention of that regime.

8.    The evidence in this respect is, as Mr Clarke accepted,  considerable.
The evidence before the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  set  out  at  [8]
Appendix A

9.    The evidence before us at the resumed hearing comprised:

    (i)    the Appellant's additional statement of 12 April  2016  and  his
    oral evidence at the hearing;

    (ii)   a transcript of his appearance, amongst other panelists, on  the
    Congo Bololo show on 7 January 2016;

    (iii)  a transcript of his appearance, amongst other panelists, on  the
    "Une heure avec JGK" (Jean Guy Kikamba) show in January 2016;

    (iv)   a transcript of his appearance on the Congolese B-one  TV  show,
    where he is the only interviewee in December 2015;

    (v)    his appearance on Africa Vision, BEN TV in July  2015,  when  he
    was filmed at home;

    (vi)   photographs of the Appellant sitting next to the  leadership  at
    Apareco meetings; holding the microphone at a  CSG  march  and  as  one
    member of a small delegation attending 10 Downing St with a petition;

    (vii)  two letters from Apareco UK dated 4 April 2015,  confirming  his
    membership and a further letter dated 24 June 2015 confirming that  the
    appellant attends all events and meetings of Apareco and is  in  charge
    of mobilization;

    (viii) a letter from the Congo Support Group  (CSG)  dated  19  January
    2016, confirming that he is an active member.

10.   In BM and Others  (returnees  -  criminal  and  non-criminal)  DRC  CG
[2015] 00293 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal made findings in  respect  of  Apareco
at [86] [87] and concluded at [88]:

    "88. (iii) Persons who have a significant and  visible  profile  within
    APARECO (UK) are at real risk of persecution for a Convention reason or
    serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR  by  virtue  of
    falling within one of the  risk  categories  identified  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return) Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023. Those belonging to this  category  include
    persons who are, or are perceived to be, leaders,  office  bearers  and
    spokespersons. As a general  rule,  mere  rank  and  file  members  are
    unlikely to fall within this category. However, each case will be  fact
    sensitive, with particular attention directed to the  likely  knowledge
    and perceptions of DRC state agents.

11.   Bearing fully in mind  the  findings  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Ferguson that the Appellant "is an unreliable witness whose evidence  cannot
be accepted on the basis of his word alone", we do not accept  the  evidence
submitted on the basis of his word alone, but  considered  his  evidence  in
the context of visual and documentary evidence before us. Having  considered
the totality of the evidence before us and the CG decision in  BM  (op  cit)
we are satisfied that the Appellant is an active member of the  CSG  and  of
Apareco, for whom he has acted as a spokesperson at  events  and  interviews
with the media. We find that  the  transcripts  at  (ii)  -  (v)  above  are
genuine and are available to be viewed on the internet, both on YouTube  and
on Congolese websites. We further find, based on the photographic  evidence,
that the Appellant has been photographed at Apareco public events.

12.   We find that this Appellant has a profile within Apareco and this  can
properly be termed significant and  visible  in  light  of  his  role  as  a
spokesperson to the media on behalf of the  organization  since  July  2015,
having  joined  the  organization  in  April  2015.  There  have  been  four
appearances on TV shows between July 2015 and January  2016,  broadcasts  of
which are accessible on the internet via YouTube and the websites of the  TV
shows in question. We have also taken account  of  the  photographs  in  the
Appellant's bundle showing the Appellant engaging in activity  with  Apareco
at demonstrations and meetings, some of which are from 2016  and  post  date
the TV appearances. Whilst the Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  long  term
political activity on behalf of  Apareco,  we  find  that  one  year  is  of
sufficient length and extent to have brought him to  the  attention  of  the
DRC authorities, given that some of that activity has been high profile  and
is published on the internet.

13.   In light of the evidence and the country guidance  decision,  we  find
that there is a real risk or a serious possibility that the Appellant  would
be persecuted on account of his perceived  political  opinion  and  that  he
would similarly risk being subjected to treatment in breach of Article 3  of
ECHR if he were to be returned to the DRC. For these reasons  we  allow  the
appeal on refugee and human rights grounds (article 3).

Conclusion

There is an error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
decision and we set aside the decision to be remade.

We remake the decision and allow the appeal on protection and  human  rights
grounds (Article 3).


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     24 May 2016


                                 APPENDIX A

                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: da/00838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 24 June 2015                       |                                   |
|                                      |...................................|
|                                      |....                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                     XX
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding, counsel instructed by Migrant Law
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS


1.    The Appellant is a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
(DRC), born on [ ] 1972. He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  22  January
1999 and claimed asylum. This application was refused in November  2000  and
his appeal against this decision was dismissed in April 2001. On [  ]  2003,
the Appellant married JB, a national of the DRC who was an asylum seeker  in
the United Kingdom. Their eldest son was born on [ ] 2002.  The  Appellant's
wife subsequently gave birth to  their  daughter  on  [  ]  2003  and  their
youngest son on [ ] 2007. On 20 February 2004, the Appellant  was  convicted
of possessing a false instrument with intent  to  use  and  sentenced  to  9
months imprisonment. On 7 April 2008, he was convicted  of  four  counts  of
converting criminal property contrary to s 327 of the Proceeds of Crime  Act
2002. He was  sentenced  to  18  months  imprisonment  and  recommended  for
deportation. On 28 May 2008, the Appellant was served with  a  liability  to
deportation notice and a notice of decision to make a deportation order  was
made on 3 July 2008. A Deportation Order was signed on 14  August  2008  and
he appealed against this on 1 May 2009 but this appeal was dismissed  on  28
July 2009 and the Appellant became appeal rights exhausted  on  3  September
2009.

2.    On 25 March 2011, the Appellant's wife and children were  all  granted
Indefinite Leave to Remain. On 18 November 2011,  the  Appellant's  previous
representatives applied for  the  deportation  order  to  be  revoked.  This
application was considered and refused on 29 May 2013 without an  in-country
right of appeal but following a  judicial  review  the  Secretary  of  State
agreed to reconsider the application and on 23 April 2014  made  a  decision
refusing to revoke the deportation order with an in-country appeal.

3.    The appeal came before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ferguson  on  19
December 2014 and in a determination  promulgated  on  21  January  2015  he
dismissed the appeal. He found the Appellant  to  be  "a  wholly  unreliable
witness [41]." He accepted that the Appellant  is  a  member  of  the  Congo
Support Group (CSG) but found that the evidence did not  establish  that  he
had an active political role or a political profile that would cause him  to
be at risk of persecution on return to the DRC [43]. The  Appellant  claimed
to have been interviewed on a cable TV programme but it was  not  clear  why
any  organisation  would  choose  to  interview  him  and  because  of   his
consistently poor credibility his evidence that the broadcast  is  available
in the DRC cannot be accepted as true and  there  is  nothing  to  establish
that the cable television programme was available in  the  DRC  or  that  it
would bring him to the attention of the authorities there [44].  In  respect
of the risk to the Appellant on return as a foreign national  offender,  the
new evidence set out in the Respondent's Country Policy  Bulletin  does  not
establish that he would be at risk on return to the DRC simply on the  basis
that it may become known that he is  a  convicted  criminal  in  the  United
Kingdom [50].

4.    The Appellant's representatives applied for permission  to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal on the basis that: (i) the Judge's  credibility  findings
were unreasonable/perverse; (ii) the objective  material  clearly  indicates
that mere association with APARECO and other overseas groups are  reasonably
likely to lead to a violation of Article 3 upon return  to  the  DRC;  (iii)
the most recent Country Guidance report indicates that it must  be  read  in
conjunction with the fact finding  mission  report,  a  copy  of  which  was
before the Judge and which clearly indicates a credible risk on  return  for
known members of APARECO and for the Judge to suggest the recent  background
evidence has greater probative value  misunderstands  the  Respondent's  own
report; (iv) the appropriate standard of proof was not applied  to  risk  on
return in light of the third party evidence from a party member,  confirming
the Appellant's activities and the evidence of his wife, a British  national
of good character; (v) the Judge  failed  to  follow  the  country  guidance
decision in BK (DRC) [2007] UKAIT 00098; (vi) in respect  of  Article  8  of
ECHR the Judge failed to consider the best interests of the family  unit  or
the impact of removal on the Appellant's children.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen
on 11 February 2011 in inter alia the following terms:

    "3.    I note in passing that the Judge  applied  the  version  of  the
    Immigration Rules in force prior to 28th July 2014.  Arguably,  in  the
    light of paragraph A362, the version to  be  applied  was  the  current
    version. I also note the absence of any reference to  S.117A-D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. If these  provisions  are
    applicable they may affect how the  balance  between  the  private  and
    public interests is to be struck but they do not detract from the  need
    to consider the best interests of the children.

    4.     The grounds also assert that the Judge's findings on  the  issue
    of risk on return  to  the  DRC  are  unreasonable  or  perverse.  This
    assertion appears to  relate  to  risk  arising  from  the  Appellant's
    claimed sur place political activities, as opposed to risk arising from
    being returned as a  "foreign  national  offender."  The  threshold  of
    perversity is high and demanding. The Judge found  that  the  Appellant
    had not established, even to the low standard of  proof,  that  he  had
    been engaged in any political activities in the UK that would  put  him
    at risk on return. He gave clear and cogent reasons  for  this  finding
    and I see no merit in this part of the grounds  or  in  the  submission
    that the wrong standard of proof was applied.  Nevertheless  permission
    to argue this part of the grounds is not refused."

6.    In a rule 24 response dated 20 February 2015,  the  Respondent  stated
at 3. that in respect of the Judge's failure to apply  the  new  version  of
the Rules and s.117 of the 2002 Act these set a  higher  threshold  for  the
Appellant and there can be no material error of law in his findings in  this
respect. At 4, the Respondent asserts that the best  interests  of  children
are not a trump card and paragraph 399 clearly codifies how decision  makers
should approach their consideration when there is a child  involved  and  at
5, that there was insufficient evidence that the Appellant had engaged  with
sur place activities and the Judge gave clear and  cogent  reasons  for  his
findings.

The hearing

7.    Mr Harding requested and was provided by Ms Isherwood with a  copy  of
the handwritten witness statement of the third  party  witness,  Mr  N,  the
Director of the Immigration Commission for the Congolese Support  Group.  Mr
Harding submitted that this was a key document  and  no  findings  had  been
made in respect of it. He was reminded by the panel that this point had  not
been pleaded in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  he  submitted  that  it  was
encompassed by grounds 2, 3 and 5 of the grounds of appeal and  if  not,  it
was Robinson obvious. He submitted  that  the  witness  statement  of  Mr  N
suggests that the Appellant has a wider political role and  he  pointed  out
evidence in the bundle viz the handwritten statement from Mr N;  photographs
of the Appellant at a demonstration and the evidence  from  the  Appellant's
wife that the Judge does not appear to have considered.  Ms  Isherwood  made
reference to the current country guidance BM (returnees - criminal and  non-
criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC) and Appellant AA at  paragraph  112  and
headnote 3 to the effect that it is not  membership  alone  but  a  person's
political profile and the Appellant does not have  a  significant  role.  In
respect of Article 8 of ECHR,  Mr  Harding  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
failed to engage with the best interests of  the  Appellant's  children.  Ms
Isherwood responded by referring to SS Nigeria  (2013)  EWCA  Civ  550  that
there  are  circumstances  where  the  children's  best  interests  will  be
outweighed following  the  actions  of  a  person,  especially  in  criminal
matters.

The evidence it is asserted the Judge failed to consider

8.    We have had regard to the evidence concerning risk  on  return  before
the First Tier Tribunal Judge which comprised:

    (i)    the handwritten statement from Mr N in which he states  that  he
    met the Appellant in 2008 through Congolese political activities in the
    United Kingdom and he can confirm  that  the  Appellant  is  an  active
    member of the  group,  giving  advice  and  raising  awareness  of  the
    political situation particularly regarding the ongoing  abuses  by  the
    regime and that the Appellant spoke against the Kabila regime on TV and
    this has been uploaded on to the organisation's website;

    (ii)   a letter from the Congolese Support Group dated 8.1.14;

    (iii)  a photograph of the Appellant at a demonstration;

    (iv)   a photograph of the Appellant with an APARECO banner;

    (v)    the evidence of the Appellant's wife.





The findings of the First Tier Tribunal Judge

9.    The Judge noted at 40 that the Appellant's evidence was  that  he  had
been a member of the CSG since 2008, which was before his appeal hearing  in
May 2009, but failed to mention that fact at that hearing either because  he
was not in fact a member, in which case the  credibility  of  his  political
activism is damaged or he was part of the group but did  not  consider  that
fact to be relevant in establishing a fear of return.

10.   At 41, the Judge held that that the Appellant  "still  has  very  poor
credibility such that nothing which he says can be accepted on the basis  of
his word alone" and that the Appellant "is a wholly unreliable witness."

11.   At 43 the Judge expressly accepted that the evidence available  before
him established that at the date of the hearing the Appellant  is  a  member
of the Congolese Support Group and that: "Although  he  tried  to  highlight
the significance of his  role  within  that  group,  the  evidence  did  not
establish that he had an actual political role." The Judge referred  to  the
letter of support from the CSG dated 8.1.14 which states that the  Appellant
is an active member but essentially disregarded the corroborative effect  of
the letter on the basis that it did not provide  details  of  his  role.  He
also referred to the previous  CSG  letter  of  support  of  17.12.14  which
concerned the Appellant's role with the  CSG's  immigration  commission.  He
found that the Appellant's account of  his  activities:  "do  not  establish
that he has participated in any political activity which will cause  him  to
have a profile which might place him at any  real  risk  of  persecution  on
return to the DRC."

12.   At 44, the Judge stated that it was not  clear  why  any  organization
would choose to interview the Appellant on a cable TV programme and went  on
to  find  that:  "because  of  his  consistently   poor   credibility   [the
Appellant's] evidence that the broadcast is available in the DRC  cannot  be
accepted as true and there is nothing to establish to the  low  standard  of
proof that this cable channel programme was available in the DRC or that  it
would bring him to the attention of the authorities."

Error of law decision

Risk on return

13.   The grounds of appeal could have been  more  clearly  drafted  but  we
find that paragraph 5, read with paragraphs 2 and 3  are  sufficiently  wide
to encompass a challenge to the Judge's findings based on a failure to  have
regard to material evidence in assessing credibility and risk on return.  We
find that First Tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson materially erred in law in  his
assessment of the risk on return to the  Appellant  in  that  he  failed  to
fully engage with and make findings in respect of the evidence  before  him.
Whilst at 40 the Judge noted the Appellant's evidence that  he  had  been  a
member of the CSG since 2008 he appears to place little, if  any  weight  on
this fact due to the failure  by  the  Appellant  to  refer  to  it  at  his
previous appeal hearing in 2009  "either  because  he  was  not  in  fact  a
member, in which case the credibility of his political activism  is  damaged
or he was part of the group but did not consider that fact  to  be  relevant
in establishing a fear of return."  We  do  not  find  that  this  either/or
method is at all clear in establishing what  the  Judge  actually  found  on
this issue.

14.   In finding at 41 that nothing the Appellant says "can be  accepted  on
the basis of his word alone" we find that the Judge failed to  take  account
of  the  evidence  before  him  which  was  capable  of  corroborating   the
Appellant's evidence, including the witness statement and evidence of Mr  N,
from the Congolese Support  Group,  the  photographs  of  the  Appellant  at
demonstrations and the evidence of his wife. We  find  this  is  a  material
error as he was not being asked to accept the Appellant's  evidence  on  the
basis of his word alone but in  light  of  other  potentially  corroborative
evidence.

15.   We also find that the failure by the Judge to refer to  this  evidence
at 43 and 44 as part of his consideration of the Appellant's political  role
and activities is also a material error of law. Whilst Mr N does  not  state
in terms that the  cable  channel  programme  in  which  the  Appellant  was
interviewed was available in the DRC, his evidence was that it  was  on  the
CSG's website and this evidence should have been addressed by the  Judge  as
part of his overall consideration of the risk factors.

16.   Since the First Tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  was  promulgated
on 21 January 2015, the Upper Tribunal have on 2 June 2015  promulgated  the
new Country Guidance decision in BM and Others  (returnees  -  criminal  and
non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC).  Headnote 3 provides:

    "3.    A national of the DRC who has a significant and visible  profile
    within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of returning  to  his  country  of
    origin, at real risk of persecution for a Convention reason or  serious
    harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR  by  virtue  of  falling
    within one of the risk categories identified by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return)  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  CG
    [2007] UKAIT 00023. Those belonging to this  category  include  persons
    who  are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  leaders,  office   bearers   or
    spokespersons. As a general  rule,  mere  rank  and  file  members  are
    unlikely to fall within this category. However, each case will be  fact
    sensitive, with particular attention directed to the  likely  knowledge
    and perceptions of DRC state agents."

It is clear that the reference  to  APARECO  is  in  addition  to  the  risk
categories previously found by the Upper Tribunal  in  MM  (UDPS  Members  -
Risk on Return) Democratic Republic of Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023:

    "110.  The issue of 'profile' was a matter that the Tribunal in AB  and
    DM referred to at paragraph 34 of their determination. There  continued
    to be a real risk for those with a political or military profile.  Each
    case was to be judged on its own facts, but  it  was  possible  now  to
    provide a little more detail at least about those who fell  within  the
    'political profile' sub-category. The Tribunal continued  at  paragraph
    45 as follows:

           "We would emphasise first of  all  that  the  use  of  the  word
           'profile' highlights the fact that this category is intended  to
           mark out those whose  actual  perceived  military  or  political
           activities or involvements are likely to have  brought  them  to
           the adverse attention of the Kabila regime. The mere  membership
           of an opposition political party will  not  demonstrate  that  a
           person has such a profile". (Our emphasis).

    111.   We would emphasise in that regard, the Tribunal's  reference  to
    those whose  actual  perceived  military  or  political  activities  or
    involvements were 'likely to have brought them' or to bring them in the
    future to the adverse attention of the Kabila regime."

17.   Consequently, the key issue remains whether the  level  of  sur  place
political activity against the DRC regime is likely  to  have  come  to  the
attention of that regime. We do not consider that the findings of the  First
Tier Tribunal Judge are safe or sustainable in this respect.

Article 8 of ECHR

18.   Paragraphs 13 and 14 of the grounds of appeal assert  that  the  Judge
failed to consider the best interests of the Appellant's family. At 32,  the
Judge noted that there was no attempt in the skeleton argument, evidence  or
submissions to address paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Rules.  He  concludes
at 33, based on the former Rules, that the Appellant  cannot  succeed  under
the Rules. Whilst the Judge applied the incorrect Rules, as  the  Respondent
pointed out in her Rule 24 response, the threshold is now higher and if  the
Appellant was unable to qualify under the old Rules then he would be  unable
to qualify under the new Rules. In the absence of any material  argument  or
evidence put forward on his behalf by  the  Appellant's  representatives  we
cannot find that the Judge erred  materially  in  law  in  respect  of  this
finding.

19.   The Judge went on at 34 to consider  whether  there  were  exceptional
circumstances that the public interest in deportation will be outweighed  by
other factors. At 36 he took into  account  what  was  put  forward  by  the
Appellant's representatives which was the Appellant's family  life  and  his
children's absence of ties with the DRC and he concluded at  37  that  these
issues did not amount to sufficiently compelling circumstances  to  outweigh
the  strong  public  interest  in  deporting  the  Appellant  as  a  foreign
criminal, as a deterrent.

20.   Consequently, we find that whilst the Judge did fail to  consider  the
best interests of the children this was not a material error  as  there  was
no evidence before him as to  the  children's  best  interests  and  in  the
absence of evidence, submissions and arguments on this issue  he  could  not
have reached any conclusion other than the one he did.

Conclusion

21.   We are satisfied that the First Tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  his
assessment of the risk to the Appellant on return to the DRC such  that  the
decision is set aside  to  be  re-made  on  this  issue  only.  We  are  not
satisfied that there is a material error of law in respect  of  the  Judge's
failure to consider the best interests of the Appellant's children  and  the
determination is not set aside on this basis.

Directions

22.   We make the following directions:

    22.1.  The resumed hearing will take place on the first available  date
    with a 3 hour listing. Any oral evidence and witnesses will be confined
    to the issue of the  Appellant's  political  role  and  profile  as  an
    opponent of the DRC regime;

    22.2.  The question of  whether  or  not  the  anonymity  order  should
    continue should be addressed by both parties.

    22.3.  The following findings of fact are preserved:

           (i)   the Appellant is a member of the Congolese  Support  Group
           (CSG);

           (ii)  the Appellant has been interviewed by a cable  channel  TV
           station and the broadcast of this interview is available on  the
           CSG website;

           (iii) the Appellant is  an  unreliable  witness  whose  evidence
           cannot be accepted on the basis of his word alone;

           (iv)  the Secretary of State's decision was in  accordance  with
           paragraphs 399  and  399A  of  the  Rules  and  no  sufficiently
           compelling circumstances have been put forward to  outweigh  the
           strong public interest in deporting the Appellant as  a  foreign
           criminal, as a deterrent.

    22.4.  Any further evidence is subject  to  the  requirement  to  apply
    under the provisions of paragraph  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended. Any witness statements  relied
    upon are to stand as evidence in chief.

    22.5   Skeleton arguments, which should focus on the issue of  risk  on
    return to the DRC, are to  be  submitted  5  working  days  before  the
    hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

30 July 2015


                                 APPENDIX B

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: da/00838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 21 January 2016                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                     XX
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding, counsel instructed by Migrant Law
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

                             __________________

                                 DIRECTIONS
                             __________________

1.    Following the adjournment of the hearing of today's date we  made  the
following oral directions, effective from today's date:

    (i)    the hearing of the Appellant's appeal is adjourned to  16  March
    2016 at 10 am. To be listed for 2 hours  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman;

    (ii)   permission to admit further specified evidence is  granted.  The
    Appellant is to serve a clean and uninfected copy (in  the  form  of  a
    memory stick) of two TV programmes and a march;

    (iii)  a certified translation of this evidence (whether it supports or
    adversely affects the Appellant's claim) is to be served 14 days before
    the resumed hearing viz by 4pm on 2 March 2016.

    (iv)   the Appellant is to file and serve a witness statement to  stand
    as evidence in chief 14 days before the resumed hearing viz by 4pm on 2
    March 2016. The Upper Tribunal will entertain oral evidence only if the
    Respondent wishes to cross-examine the Appellant;

    (v)    skeleton arguments to be served 2 days before the hearing viz by
    midday on 14 March 2016;

    (vi)   any failure to comply with these directions will result  in  the
    hearing proceeding on the basis of the evidence  currently  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

    (vii) a Lingala interpreter to be  booked,  unless  there  has  been  a
    failure to comply with these directions.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Chapman

21 January 2016



                                 APPENDIX C

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: da/00838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 March 2016                     |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                     XX
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simon Harding, counsel instructed by Migrant Law
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                             __________________

                                 DIRECTIONS
                             __________________

1.    Following the adjournment of the hearing of today's date by reason  of
the failure by  the  Appellant's  solicitor  to  comply  with  the  previous
directions made on 21  January  2016,  we  make  the  following  directions,
effective from today's date:

    (i)    the hearing of the Appellant's appeal is adjourned to Monday  25
    April 2016 at 10 am. To be listed for 2  hours  before  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman;

    (ii)   the Appellant's solicitor is to  file  and  serve  an  affidavit
    setting out a detailed chronology of the actions he took to comply with
    the directions of 21 January 2016 and further to provide an explanation
    as to what steps he took to remove the dubbing on the DVDs provided  to
    him by the Appellant  and  (ii)  how  and  when  he  obtained  undubbed
    versions of the DVDs. This is to be provided by 4pm on Friday 25  March
    2016;

    (iii)  on the basis that (ii) above is  complied  with,  permission  to
    admit further specified evidence is granted. The Appellant is  to  file
    and serve a clean and uninfected copy (in the form of a  memory  stick)
    of extracts from two TV programmes and a march by Monday 11 April 2016;

    (iv)   a certified translation of this evidence (whether it supports or
    adversely affects the Appellant's claim) is to be served 14 days before
    the resumed hearing viz by 4pm on Monday 11 April 2016.

    (v)    the Appellant has leave to file and serve a witness statement if
    so advised to stand as evidence in chief 14  days  before  the  resumed
    hearing viz by 4pm on Monday 11 April 2016.  The  Upper  Tribunal  will
    entertain oral evidence only if the Respondent wishes to  cross-examine
    the Appellant;

    (vi)   skeleton arguments by both parties to be served  2  days  before
    the hearing viz by midday on Thursday 21 April 2016;

    (vii)  any failure to comply with these directions will result  in  the
    hearing proceeding on the basis of the evidence  currently  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

    (viii) a Lingala interpreter to be booked,  unless  there  has  been  a
    failure to comply with these directions.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Chapman

16 March 2016

