
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice in       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Belfast                                       |                              |
|On 1 August 2016                              |On 22 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ROLANDAS [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Jones, instructed by McCallion Keown


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ("SSHD").  I shall refer to Mr [S] as the  claimant
    herein.

 2. The claimant, born February 1987, is  a  national  of  Lithuania.   The
    claimant was convicted at Newry Crown Court on  19  November  2014  for
    grievous bodily harm,  and  sentenced  to  a  term  of  twelve  months'
    imprisonment and twelve months on licence.   As  a  consequence,  on  4
    August 2015 the SSHD decided to make a deportation order against him.

 3. The claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal and that
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimes on 19 January 2016
    and allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 EEA
    Regulations") and on Human Rights (Article 8) grounds,  in  a  decision
    issued of 1 February 2016.

 4. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal with  the  permission  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted on 25 March 2016.

Grounds of Challenge

 5. The SSHD's pleaded grounds are lengthy and unfocused but were helpfully
    recast by Mr Matthews at the hearing in the following terms:

          i)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  undertook  its  consideration  for
             Regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations unlawfully by  first
             determining whether deportation  was  proportionate  and  only
             then determining whether the claimant represented  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
             interests of society.  This is the reverse of the  order  that
             the Tribunal should have considered the issues;

         (ii)     The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  take  into
             account a significant discrepancy between the  evidence  given
             by the claimant and that of his partner, regarding the  length
             of the claimant's abstinence from alcohol.

         (iii)    Alternatively, the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
             adequate   reasons   for    resolving    the    aforementioned
             inconsistency in the claimant's favour.

         (iv)      When  considering  whether  the  claimant  represents   a
             genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
             fundamental  interests  of  society,  the  Tribunal  erred  in
             falling to take into account, or make findings in relation to,
             the likely harm caused if the claimant does reoffend;

         (v)      The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its  consideration  of
             Article 8 ECHR in failing to direct itself to, and/or lawfully
             apply, section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
             Act 2002.

 6. I observe at this stage that Mr Matthews  withdrew  reliance  upon  the
    specific paragraphs in  the  pleaded  grounds,  dated  10  March  2016,
    relating to the relevance of the  percentage  chance  of  the  claimant
    reoffending.

Discussion and Conclusions

 7. As to the first ground,  whilst  Regulation  21  dictates  that  it  is
    appropriate to first to consider whether  an  individual  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of society prior to engaging with whether  deportation  would
    be proportionality, to undertake such tasks  in  reverse  order  cannot
    amount to an error capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal  in
    circumstances  where,  as  in  the  instant  case,  the  decision-maker
    concludes that there is no genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to the fundamental interests of society.

 8. The only circumstances in which this would not be the case is where the
    decision maker impermissibly takes into account an irrelevant matter in
    its consideration of the question of whether the applicant represents a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat etc.  Mr Matthews  was
    unable to identify any such feature of the Tribunal's assessment in the
    instant case. In the absence of the SSHD establishing  that  there  was
    such a feature  present  in  the  decision  making  process  which  had
    infiltrated  the  First-tier   Tribunal's   mind   from   its   earlier
    consideration of the proportionality assessment, this ground cannot be,
    and is not, made out.

 9. As to the second ground, which Mr Matthews termed "the alcohol  issue",
    the following facts are not contentious:

          i) The consumption of alcohol by the claimant played a large part
             in the offence which triggered the decision  of  the  SSHD  to
             make a deportation order.

         ii) In evidence to the Tribunal the claimant stated  that  he  had
             abstained from alcohol for almost two years. His  EEA  partner
             asserted that she  believed  the  claimant  had  not  had  any
             alcohol since the night of the assault, which had occurred  in
             May 2012

        iii) The claimant was in detention between October 2014 and  the  1
             October 2015.

10. On this issue the First-tier Tribunal said as follows:

         "18. The appellant also said that he has not had alcohol for almost
             two years and his partner said she believes that  he  has  not
             had alcohol since the night of the assault. Given that alcohol
             was a significant factor in the commission of the  assault,  I
             accept that the intention of the  appellant  to  refrain  from
             consuming  alcohol,  coupled  with   the   licence   condition
             prohibiting its consumption, is  a  strong  factor  supporting
             PBNI's assessment that the  appellant  poses  a  low  risk  of
             reoffending."

11. The issue as to when the claimant last consumed alcohol, whilst  highly
    relevant, was clearly not determinative  of  whether  he  represents  a
    present threat to the fundamental interests of society.   One  question
    of significance for the Tribunal when assessing for itself the risk  of
    re-offending was, however, whether the claimant had a current intention
    to refrain from consuming  alcohol,  and  whether  such  intention  was
    likely to be borne out in his actions.  In coming to its conclusion  on
    this issue the First-tier Tribunal clearly did not leave out of account
    the aforementioned inconsistency in the evidence. Rather, having  taken
    into account this inconsistency the Tribunal,  nevertheless,  concluded
    that there was not a present  and  sufficiently  serious  risk  of  the
    claimant committing further criminal offences. The First-tier  Tribunal
    were required to give no further reasons that it did on this issue.

12. In reality the above contention formed part of a wider  ranging  attack
    by the SSHD on the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that  the  claimant
    did not represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to
    the fundamental interests of society.

13. The second limb of this attack is founded in the submission made in the
    fourth for the grounds identified above. In this regard  I  invited  Mr
    Matthews to draw attention to any evidence, other than  that  discussed
    above, which it was said should have informed the First-tier Tribunal's
    conclusion on the issue of risk of harm caused as a consequence of  any
    potential re-offending.

14. I was taken to a number of documents, the first being the  report  from
    the Probation Board of Northern Ireland, compiled on 5  November  2014.
    The following is said in  that  report,  under  the  heading  "Risk  of
    Serious Harm":

         "Mr Strelciuna's behaviour ... fell  short  of  the  threshold  for
         posing a significant risk of serious harm to others in  the  future
         ... The defendant has been assessed as posing a  medium  likelihood
         of reoffending and not as posing a significant risk of serious harm
         in the future."

15. A further document, authored on 18 January 2016 by a Probation  Officer
    at the PBNI states:

         "Mr [S] has been  assessed  as  not  meeting  the  criteria  for  a
         significant risk of serious harm  and  he  is  assessed  at  a  low
         likelihood of reoffending at this juncture."

16. The First-tier Tribunal conclusions on the aforementioned issue read:

         "21. I have considered the personal conduct of  the  appellant.   I
             take into account the judge's sentencing remarks and I  accept
             that the appellant has been convicted  of  a  serious  assault
             which resulted in serious injuries to the victim.   However  I
             attach significant weight to the evidence from PBNI and I note
             that the appellant is engaged with PBNI  in  offence  focussed
             work and is being supervised at present.  I  accept  that  the
             appellant is currently assessed by PBNI as  presenting  a  low
             likelihood of reoffending and as not posing  significant  risk
             of serious harm to the public.  Accordingly I  find  that  the
             appellant's personal conduct does  not  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
             fundamental interests of society."

17. Mr Matthews was not able to draw anything to the  Tribunal's  attention
    which the First-tier Tribunal had left  out  of  account,  and  nothing
    which could  lead  to  a  conclusion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings  on  this  issue  were  irrational.  Indeed,  the   Tribunal's
    conclusion was, it seems to me, inevitable; reflecting as it  does  the
    evidence before it. It is difficult to see  what  else  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could have said on this issue,  in  the  absence  of  evidence
    pointing to a different conclusion.

18. For this reason, I reject the fourth of the SSHD's grounds.

19. Taken as a whole, the decision under  the  EEA  Regulations  is  in  my
    conclusion unimpeachable. The First-tier Tribunal took into account all
    the relevant evidence and Mr Matthews has not drawn my attention to any
    evidence which it left out of account.  Its conclusion is certainly not
    irrational.

20. For all  these  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision regarding the 2006 EEA Regulations does not contain  an  error
    of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and its  decision
    is to remain standing.

21. As a consequence, as Mr Matthews accepted, the SSHD's challenge to  the
    decision made on the Article 8 ECHR ground is academic and I  need  not
    deal with it.

Notice of Decision

The SSHD's appeal is dismissed. The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not
contain an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 22nd August 2016

