
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00386/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 29 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   MR C O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton - Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For ease of reference purposes the parties are hereafter referred to as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr CO is the appellant
    and the Secretary of State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The respondent made a decision on 29 January 2013 to make a deportation
    order against the appellant by  virtue  of  Section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The appellant appealed that decision. The appeal was
    heard by a First-tier Tribunal panel and in a determination promulgated
    on 25 July 2013 the panel allowed the appeal.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal submitting  that  the  panel
    failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights would be breached given the severity of  the  offences
    committed by him.  It was said that the appellant has been assessed  to
    be  at  medium  risk  of  re-offending  and  that  his  likelihood   of
    reconviction within one year is calculated at 17% and within two  years
    at 30%.  The appellant's motive for committing crimes  is  said  to  be
    financial.  The panel misdirected themselves at  paragraph  53  of  the
    determination that the appellant is at low risk of re-offending.  It is
    further  submitted  that  this  finding  has   infected   the   panel's
    proportionality findings  which  are  therefore  flawed.   Despite  the
    appellant's positive character references his criminal activity in  the
    past does not  reflect  the  appellant's  wilfulness  when  faced  with
    financial difficulties and his willingness to become involved  in  drug
    dealing to alleviate  financial  strain.   This  is  reflected  in  the
    increased percentage in the assessment of his risk of  re-offending  as
    noted from the report referred to at paragraph 46 of the determination.



 4. Further grounds were given, namely that deportation in pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of preventing crime and disorder is not to  be  seen  as
    one dimensional in its effect.  It has the effect not only of  removing
    the risk of re-offending by the deportee himself, but also of deterring
    other  foreign  criminals  in   a   similar   position.    Furthermore,
    deportation of foreign  criminals  preserves  public  confidence  in  a
    system of control whose  loss  would  itself  tend  towards  crime  and
    disorder.  Although the panel makes reference to the best interests  of
    the children, whose  behaviour  has  been  adversely  affected  by  the
    appellant's imprisonment, the panel failed to weigh the severity of the
    appellant's crime  against  this.   The  Secretary  of  State's  public
    policies may outweigh the appellant's Article 8 rights and those of his
    children in circumstances where he poses an increased risk  to  society
    through drug dealing.  While the  best  interests  of  children  are  a
    primary consideration there was no evidence establishing a right  under
    Article 8 sufficiently strong to prevail over  the  extremely  pressing
    public interest in the appellant's deportation.

 5. The judge granting permission to appeal wrote that it is arguable  that
    the panel did not give adequate reasons for their conclusion  that  the
    public  interest  in  the  appellant's  deportation   was   outweighed.
    Although at paragraph 42 of the  determination  they  referred  to  the
    presumption being that the public interest required deportation of  the
    appellant throughout the remainder of the  determination  they  do  not
    specifically consider the public interest in deportation  as  deterring
    other foreign nationals and preserving public confidence in the system.
     Where they reach their conclusions they  refer  only  to  the  serious
    nature of the offences and it is not therefore apparent that they  took
    the full nature of the public interest as set out in the cases referred
    to in the grounds into account in the proportionality balance.

 6. The judge granting permission wrote further that although  it  is  said
    that the panel misdirected themselves as to the risk of  the  appellant
    re-offending and that there is an ever increasing risk of the appellant
    re-offending in the future, the submission in the  grounds  appears  to
    misunderstand the nature of percentage of risk of reconviction which is
    almost inevitably greater over a two year period than it is over a  one
    year period.  However, it is not clear  why  the  panel  say  that  the
    appellant is considered  to  be  at  low  risk  of  re-offending.   30%
    likelihood of reconviction within two years would appear to be a medium
    risk of reconviction and it was considered just arguable that the panel
    may not have given adequate reasons for their conclusion that there was
    a low risk that the appellant would re-offend.

Rule 24 response

 7. The appellant filed a Rule 24 response to the effect that the appellant
    has not been assessed as being at medium  risk  of  re-offending.   His
    scores for risk are 17% within one year and 30% within two years.   The
    MOJ's guidance on OGP and OVP predictors in OASys sets out that for OGP
    the two year score translates into four bands and the low risk band  is
    0-33%.  Furthermore the two year score will  always  be  higher  as  it
    incorporates the one year score.  The panel  not  only  considered  the
    statistical  assessment  of  re-offending  but  also  made  an  overall
    assessment of the  evidence  when  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant is  at  low  risk  of  re-offending.   The  panel  considered
    progress made by the appellant in prison including testimonials  as  to
    his conduct there.  The panel also considered his conduct since release
    from custody on 17 May 2012 including  the  probation  progress  report
    that he has attended all his fifteen appointments, shown commitment  to
    the licence and its conditions, and a desire to support his  family  by
    legitimate means.

 8. The Rule 24 response went on  to  say  that  the  panel  gave  adequate
    reasons for their conclusion that the public  interest  is  outweighed.
    At  paragraph  42  they  set  out  the  appellant's  offences  and  the
    presumption  that  the  public  interest  required  deportation.   They
    started their deliberations with consideration of the  offences,  using
    the sentencing remarks as their starting point whilst acknowledging  at
    paragraph 48 the seriousness of the offences.

 9. The panel correctly appreciated that the best interests of the children
    must be a primary consideration but "can, of course, be  outweighed  by
    the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations".   The  panel  makes
    reference not only to the seriousness of the offences but also  to  the
    wider public interest in deportation and the fact that this needs to be
    "given sufficient weight" (at paragraph 53).

10. In oral submissions before me Mr  Norton  maintained  that  the  public
    interest  in  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  was  not   properly
    considered.  The panel did not give proper consideration  to  the  fact
    that the appellant was convicted in  January  2009  on  two  counts  of
    supplying a class A drug  (crack  cocaine)  for  which  he  received  a
    suspended prison sentence of 51 weeks.  In October 2010  he  was  again
    convicted on two counts of supplying a class A drug (crack cocaine) for
    which he received 41 months' imprisonment which included activating the
    previous suspended prison sentence.

11. Ms Allen relied on the Rule 24 response.   The  determination  referred
    (at paragraph 42) to the presumption that the public interest  requires
    deportation of the appellant and that under the  Immigration  Rules  it
    will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public  interest  is
    outweighed by  the  obligations  under  the  Human  Rights  Convention.
    Having reminded themselves of the legal position the panel then went on
    to consider the facts in the case.  They clearly had in mind throughout
    the determination the balance that had to be struck  and  paragraph  53
    demonstrated  that  they  had  not  erred  in  law  in  coming  to  the
    conclusions that they did for the reasons given.

My decision

12. I announced at the hearing that the panel did not err  in  such  a  way
    that the decision should be disturbed.  I stated to the effect that  it
    would have been open to the panel to come to a different conclusion and
    many might consider that the appellant is fortunate that the panel  did
    not do so.  However, any  argument  that  they  should  have  concluded
    differently is simply that, an argument.

13. The panel was well aware of the task that it was  set.   It  recognised
    that the offences of supplying class A drugs are very serious even when
    taking account of the appellant's explanation for both sets of offences
    (paragraph 47).  At paragraph 48 they  reached  the  view  on  all  the
    evidence that the appellant's offences are seemingly out of character:

         "whilst this is not to imply that the offences were anything  other
         than very serious, there is some basis for saying  that  they  were
         committed by a person who was well respected both as  a  member  in
         the local community  and  for  his  support  for  his  partner  and
         children.  In that sense they were uncharacteristic".

14. At paragraph 51 the panel reminds itself that the question  that  needs
    to be considered and answered  is  whether  deportation  is  necessary,
    proportionate and a fair balance between the rights to respect for  the
    family life of the appellant and any children and the particular public
    interest in question.  The best interests of the children are a primary
    consideration (paragraph 52) which means that they must  be  considered
    first but can of course be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other
    considerations.  At paragraph 53 the panel again refers to the  serious
    nature of the offences for which there is a statutory presumption  that
    the appellant should be deported in the wider public interest and  this
    needs to be given significant weight.

15. The panel was entitled to conclude on the evidence  that  there  was  a
    basis for saying that the offences were out of character and there is a
    low risk that he will  re-offend  which  is  a  vital  ingredient  when
    assessing whether deportation is necessary in the public interest.

16. This is a careful assessment by the panel.  It is almost  certain  that
    each deportation appeal will differ in its facts and on the  particular
    facts found in this appeal the panel did what was required  of  it  and
    concluded ultimately in favour of the appellant.  This  the  panel  was
    entitled to do.

Decision

17. For the above given reasons the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel is upheld.

18. I was not addressed  on  the  matter  of  anonymity  but  an  anonymity
    direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and for the reasons given
    there I see no reason to disturb that direction.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

