
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00673/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties     |
|                                              |On 02 August 2016            |
|On 12 April 2016                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 JS (ANGOLA)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:         Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:        Miss R Moffat of Counsel, instructed by Lambeth
Law Centre


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Vulnerability order
Pursuant to rule 13(3) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 (as amended), this decision is not to be served upon the appellant.   I
direct that this decision be  served  on  the  appellant's  representatives,
Lambeth Law Centre. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant,
his partner or her children. This direction applies to, amongst others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Angola.   He  appeals  with  permission
   against the decision of the Upper Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against
   the respondent's decision in September 2011 to deport him to Angola after
   refusing him international protection under  the  Refugee  Convention  or
   humanitarian protection grounds, or  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
   grounds.  It was accepted that he was  a  former  child  soldier  in  the
   Angolan civil war who came to the United Kingdom in  2003.   His  account
   was believed but  he  was  refused  asylum  by  reason  of  a  change  in
   circumstances in Angola.

2. The appellant developed serious  mental  health  problems  while  in  the
   United Kingdom, but also committed a serious offence  in  December  2009,
   after which on 6 July 2010, he pleaded guilty to  offences  of  trespass,
   sexual assault, burglary and theft, all  on  that  single  occasion,  and
   served a custodial sentence of 3 years.

3. The appellant challenges his deportation to  Angola  principally  on  the
   basis of the likely effects of detention and deportation  on  his  mental
   health, including a  risk  of  suicide.   He  had  made  several  suicide
   attempts.

Issues

4. At a case management review in January  2016,  the  following  directions
   were made with the agreement of the parties:

   a) This appeal was brought under Article 3 ECHR only.  Evidence  relating
      to Article 8 ECHR, and in particular, the public interest in  removal,
      will not be relied upon by the parties.

   b) No findings of law or fact are to be preserved from  the  decision  of
      Upper Tribunal Judge Allen of 19 December 2013, which was set aside by
      the Court of Appeal.

   c)  The  anonymity  order  already  made  is  maintained.   In  addition,
      references to the appellant's partner and her children shall  also  be
      anonymised.

   I also gave directions regarding evidence and witness statements.

5. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me on 12 April 2016.

Procedural history

6.  The  appellant  appealed  against  the   respondent's   September   2011
   deportation decision.  On 8 May 2012, the First-tier Tribunal allowed his
   appeal on Article 8 grounds.  On 13 September 2012 the Upper Tribunal set
   aside the First-tier Tribunal decision for error of law and it was remade
   on 19 December 2013 and the appellant's appeal dismissed.  The  appellant
   appealed to the Court of Appeal.

7. On 2 April 2014, the respondent re-detained the appellant,  whose  mental
   health then deteriorated precipitously, putting him at high suicide risk.
   He was transferred to a psychiatric hospital following  an  order  of  Mr
   Justice Ouseley, but released into the community following an  order,  in
   robust terms, by Mr Justice Collins.

8. On 28 October 2014, the Court of Appeal remitted the appeal to the  Upper
   Tribunal, 'for a full rehearing, with the parties at liberty  to  advance
   up-to-date evidence at that hearing'.  For the Upper Tribunal hearing,  I
   was provided with a bundle, consolidated and agreed between the  parties,
   containing the 7 witness statements by the appellant dated 7  July  2003,
   30 July 2003, 15 May 2007, June 2011, September 2013 (signed  at  Court),
   30 March 2016, and one undated statement; a witness  statement  from  his
   partner dated 27 February 2013; and a statement  from  Neena  Acharya  of
   Lambeth Law Centre,  dated  15  April  2014.  The  bundle  also  includes
   screening forms Level 1 (25 April 2003) and Level 2 (9 May 2003),  and  7
   April 2011, and the accompanying Statement of  Evidence  forms;  and  the
   decisions and orders so far.

9. Medical evidence is set out at pages 152-317 of the  bundle.   There  was
   an expert witness report of 22 December 2011 from Fred Bridgland, and  an
   email of 27 August 2013 from the same witness; an extract  from  the  WHO
   Atlas for 2011 concerning Angola; and a 2013 report on  psychiatric  care
   in Angola by Alexandra Geiser, a social anthropologist working  with  the
   Swiss Refugee Council, the Schweizerische  Fluchtlingshilfe  (SFH).   The
   SFH is a member of the European Council on Refugees  and  Exiles  (ECRE).
   There was no evidence on conditions in Angola after 2013,  in  particular
   mental health provision, despite the Court of Appeal's direction in 2014.



Background

10. Applying the Devaseelan principles, the 2003 decision  is  the  starting
   point for consideration of the appellant's  history  and  factual  matrix
   underlying any Article  3  risk  to  him  today.  The  appellant  was  in
   reasonable mental health when he arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  2003
   and claimed asylum.  He was able to give evidence.

11. His account, which the Judge accepted, was that his mother had  died  in
   Angola when the appellant was young and his father had been  taken  away:
   the appellant missed his mother and worried about  his  father.   He  was
   Catholic, attending church three times a week.  The  appellant  told  the
   Secretary of State that both his parents, and all 7 of his siblings, were
   dead and that he no longer had any family in  Angola.  The  family  home,
   with his family in it, was destroyed during a UNITA offensive  while  the
   appellant was between 16 and 18 years old.  The appellant was  at  school
   and escaped the damage to the family home.

12. The appellant was captured by UNITA and conscripted as a child  soldier;
   forced to fight against the MPLA; and detained in a  demobilisation  camp
   from 1994-1998 during the ceasefire, without access to his family.   When
   the ceasefire broke down in 1998, he returned  to  the  bush  and  fought
   again against the MPLA, living as a rebel in the  bush  until  2002  when
   Jonas Savimbi, the UNITA leader, died.  He had a partner in the bush  and
   had a daughter, still in Angola, who would now be about 16 years old.

13. During his time  with  UNITA,  the  appellant  was  beaten  on  6  or  7
   occasions, kicked and hit with a gun butt and a belt.   On  one  occasion
   they tied a metallic noose around his neck and drew it very  tight,  then
   dragged him around: he thought they were trying to kill him.

14. In June 2002, the appellant again went to a demobilisation  camp,  where
   he protested against the poor,  overcrowded,  dirty  conditions  and  was
   arrested and detained.  He was beaten and tortured on about 7  occasions,
   being kicked and hit with a rope and on one occasion, cut in  two  places
   on his body with a bayonet. The appellant  was  eventually  released  and
   returned to the camp.

15. The appellant escaped from the demobilisation camp and contacted  family
   members, who helped him come to the United Kingdom in 2003, travelling on
   a Portuguese passport to which he was not entitled.  He claimed asylum on
   arrival, but was refused and his appeal dismissed.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  the  core  of  the  appellant's
   account but considered that there was  no  risk  to  him  from  the  MPLA
   because peace had been successfully negotiated and there was a change  in
   circumstances.  His previous commander in UNITA was now rehabilitated and
   working for the Angolan government in its police force.

17. Medical evidence from  Dr  Steadman  which  was  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal stated that the  appellant  had  scarring  consistent  with  his
   account of mistreatment, and the appellant's account of his ill-treatment
   was accepted by the Judge.  The appellant had an UNITA tattoo on his  arm
   (the letters CL and an arrow); a scar on his lower left ring finger  from
   a burn when he was in an UNITA military vehicle which was set on fire;  a
   scar on his upper right cheek; a long vertical scar on  the  upper  right
   side of his back; a scar on his right thigh; 11 scars on the front of his
   right leg; 10 scars on the front of his left leg; thin scars on the soles
   of both feet and an additional scar on his right foot; a  birth  mark,  a
   vaccination mark, and various other childhood scars.

18. The appellant told Dr Steadman that both while he was with UNITA and  in
   the demobilisation camps, he was told that if he did not comply, he would
   be killed.  He followed orders to kill MPLA people: he thinks  he  killed
   about 100 people, under orders from UNITA, as otherwise he would  himself
   have been killed.  He saw thousands of people killed.

19. The appellant considered that his life would be in  danger  if  he  were
   returned to Angola and told Dr Steadman that he would kill himself rather
   than return.

20. Dr Steadman considered the  appellant  to  be  cognitively  intact,  but
   anxious, as a result of his experiences,  and  the  people  he  had  been
   obliged to kill.  He appellant was coping well, sharing a room  with  one
   other person, and studying English 14 hours a day.  He was not considered
   to be mentally unwell: since  arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  had
   improved significantly psychologically.

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that  the  Article  3  standard
   was not met and that the appellant could lawfully be returned to  Angola.



Upper Tribunal hearing

22. The appellant was not called  to  give  evidence  at  the  hearing.  The
   opinion  of  his  consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr  Calogero  Longhitano  MD
   MRCPsych, was that  the  appellant  'would  find  it  difficult  to  give
   evidence in Tribunal setting given  his  degree  of  traumatisation'.   I
   treat him as a vulnerable person in approaching this appeal and  draw  no
   adverse  conclusions  from  his  failure  to  testify,   or   from   some
   contradictions in his evidence about his history in Angola, in particular
   whether and when certain members of his family died.

Medical evidence

23. The appellant's medical history after the 2003 asylum  decision  can  be
   found at paragraph 31 in the skeleton argument prepared by Ms Moffatt for
   the hearing.   In August 2003, the appellant became homeless and remained
   so until 2005. In 2004, he was seen by the North Lambeth Community Mental
   Health Team, who diagnosed  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  (PTSD)  and
   started him on antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs.  The appellant did
   not attend his subsequent appointments.

24. In 2004 or 2005, the appellant took an overdose of medication  and  some
   form of cleaning fluid.  In 2005, he tried to jump off London Bridge.  In
   July 2005, he  was  said  to  be  'depressed  and  anxious...occasionally
   lapsing into dissociative states whereby he was acting as if he was  back
   in a war situation'.

25. On 28 July 2005 the appellant was detained in the Maudsley Hospital  for
   a psychiatric assessment and treatment under  section  2  of  the  Mental
   Health Act 1993.  On 31 July 2005, the appellant signed a declaration  of
   voluntary return to Angola, which was approved in September 2005  but  he
   withdrew his consent in January 2006.

26. The appellant's mental health continued to  deteriorate  and  between  1
   October 2005 and 31 December  2005,  he  was  an  in-patient  at  Lambeth
   Hospital in the Early Onset Psychosis Ward, first under section 2 of  the
   Mental Health Act for assessment and treatment, then under section  3  of
   that Act, for treatment. He was hearing  voices,  having  hallucinations,
   and feeling dizzy, and he also had severe headaches.

27. There was some disagreement as to  the  diagnosis  of  his  illness;  on
   discharge, it was recorded  as  schizophrenic  psychosis,  but  later,  a
   psychiatrist from the START Team (a  community  mental  health  team  for
   homeless people) changed the diagnosis back to PTSD. After his discharge,
   pursuant to the local authority's psychiatric aftercare obligations under
   section  117  of  the  Act,  the  appellant  was  provided  with   secure
   accommodation in the  community,  including  24-hour  care  and  a  basic
   subsistence allowance.

28. In 2006, the appellant began a relationship with a woman,  which  lasted
   about 8 months, but broke up when she was  unfaithful  to  him.   He  had
   another brief relationship that year with 'a crazy girl'.   In  2008,  he
   began a course on painting and decorating at Hackney  Community  College,
   hoping to restart his life and  achieve  employment.  He  was  unable  to
   continue because of his immigration difficulties.  In  2009  he  began  a
   charity-run creative writing course.

29. On 6 July 2010, the appellant was convicted at Snaresbrook  Crown  Court
   of trespass with intent to commit a relevant sexual offence, burglary and
   theft from a dwelling.  He was later sentenced to 3 years'  imprisonment.
   On 8 November 2010, the appellant was served with notice of liability  to
   deport, and a deportation order was made on 5 September 2011,  after  the
   appellant's representations had been considered.

30. In 2012, while serving his  sentence,  the  appellant  was  admitted  to
   Highdown Prison Healthcare following an attempt to hang himself with  his
   prison jumper.  He told the staff that they should have left him to  die.
   At the end  of  his  prison  sentence,  the  appellant  was  detained  in
   immigration detention. In 2014,  he  began  to  refuse  food  and  water,
   collapsed, and was again admitted to hospital.

31. The appellant had repeatedly expressed  an  intention  to  kill  himself
   rather than be returned to Angola. The  consistent  opinion  of  all  his
   medical advisors was that he meant it, and that attempting to deport  him
   would give rise to a real risk of a sharp  deterioration  in  his  mental
   health, with a real risk of suicide, in the United Kingdom,  in  transit,
   or in Angola after arrival.

32. The appellant was considered to suffer  from  complex  PTSD  "which  can
   potentially arise from any prolonged period in which the following occur:
    captivity, lack of means of escape, entrapment,  repeated  violation  of
   boundaries,  betrayal,  rejection,  bewilderment,  confusion,   lack   of
   control,  loss  of  control  and  disempowerment"  (see  report  of   his
   Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Philip Timms, FRCPsych).

Dr Longhitano's report (11 April 2016)

33. The  appellant  produced  a  very  recent  report  from  Dr  Longhitano,
   prepared the day before the Upper Tribunal hearing.   Dr  Longhitano  was
   the appellant's consultant forensic psychiatrist and had interviewed  him
   several times in that capacity, most recently on 23  February  2016.   He
   set out the appellant's known history in Angola and  his  coming  to  the
   United Kingdom.

34. The doctor then set out the  forensic  history,  that  is  to  say,  the
   history of the appellant's sexual offending.  The appellant  was  on  the
   Sex Offenders Register and known to Croydon Jigsaw  Team,  which  manages
   registered sex offenders in Croydon. The index offence in  2009  involved
   his breaking in to a female stranger's house and sexually assaulting  her
   in her bed. The appellant admitted breaking into the property but  denied
   intending to commit sexual assault.  He was sentenced  to  3  years.   In
   addition, in October 2005, the appellant was arrested for threats to kill
   and criminal damage towards his ex-partner.  He admitted the offences but
   the woman did not press charges.   The  appellant  was  admitted  to  the
   Lambeth Early Intervention for Psychosis Unit (LEO).    He  was  morbidly
   jealous, considering that his partner was 'sleeping with  lots  of  other
   Angolans'.

35. On 7 April 2006, a rape case was dropped  by  CPS.   The  appellant  was
   going to college every day but wanted more activities to fill  his  time.
   On 1 November 2007, he was  again  arrested  on  suspicion  of  rape.  He
   admitted consensual sex with a sex worker but denied raping her at  knife
   point or supplying her with cocaine.  He claimed later that  she  accused
   him of rape because he had  not  paid  her.   On  22  January  2007,  the
   Appropriate Adult Service noted that the appellant had been arrested over
   the weekend for an assault on his former partner.  He  smeared  his  cell
   with faeces and was charged with criminal damage. On 6  April  2009,  the
   appellant again paid a sex worker and took her back to the  shared  house
   where he was living.  He became aggressive, dragging her around the house
   by her hair when she tried to leave.  The police were called.  It was not
   known whether the woman pressed charges.

36. On 1 December 2010, the appellant became threatening and  abusive  while
   in HMP Verne and was the subject of an adjudication, with 14  days'  loss
   of privileges. In April 2014, the appellant was remanded into immigration
   custody after a member of the public in Croydon called the police.  A man
   fitting his description had been seen harassing women in the local  area.
   No charges were brought.  On 30 April 2014, he was transferred to Langley
   Green Hospital after expressing suicidal ideas,  but  the  doctors  found
   that there were  neither  psychotic  ideas  present  nor  evidence  of  a
   prolonged period of low mood and he was discharged  back  to  his  secure
   accommodation. The  discharge  summary  noted  his  over-familiarity  and
   inappropriate behaviour  to  female  nursing  staff  (asking  for  mobile
   telephone numbers and touching them).

37. After setting  out  the  appellant's  sexual  and  medical  history,  Dr
   Longhitano's opinion was that he continued to meet the criteria for PTSD,
   but that his mental  health  was  much  improved  as  a  result  of  good
   compliance with treatment and support from the  psychiatric  service  and
   his supported accommodation.  In terms of risk to others, there had  been
   no concerns since 'at least 2014' and his relationship with  his  current
   partner had 'an important protective effect against the risk  of  further
   sexual offending'.  If his immigration status were  cleared,  the  doctor
   agreed with the appellant's own view that 'he would be able to  establish
   this relationship fully and this would reduce his long-term sexual risk'.



38. The appellant continued to experience 'fleeting suicidal ideation'.   Dr
   Longhitano agreed with Professor Katona's conclusions and in  particular,
   that if the appellant were forcibly repatriated to Angola, he would be at
   greatly increased risk of committing suicide.  In the light of  Professor
   Katona's statement, he found '[Professor Katona's] opinion that access to
   mental healthcare in Angola would be difficult, entirely  plausible'.  Dr
   Longhitano did not attend the hearing and so there was no opportunity  to
   cross-examine him on this evidence.





Appellant's evidence

39. The appellant did not give oral evidence and his  previous  evidence  is
   summarised above.  In addition, I note the following matters:

    a) The appellant tried to contact any surviving members of his extended
       family through the Red Cross, but was informed  that  there  was  no
       trace of any member of his family.  He had long  ago  lost  the  Red
       Cross papers to support this statement.

    b) The appellant lives in Lambeth Social  Services  accommodation,  was
       visited about 3 times a month by his social  worker,  and  sees  his
       psychiatrist every 2 weeks.  Nurses in his accommodation  make  sure
       he takes his  medication  (olanzapine  and  mirtazapine)  regularly,
       waking him up if necessary.  The medication helped the appellant  to
       relax and sleep.

    c) The appellant began writing a book about his  experiences  while  in
       prison.  He still experienced flashbacks, but hoped to  continue  to
       improve and return to studying.   He had published  some  poems  and
       wanted to study English and Film Studies.  He did not consider  that
       he could survive in Angola without the level of support he currently
       received.

    d) In 2012, the appellant  formed  a  relationship  with  a  Portuguese
       citizen and her children.  She had two sons, who in 2013 were aged 4
       and 15: his bond with the elder boy was particularly  strong.   When
       he was recalled to prison, after spending several  nights  with  his
       partner and not at his registered address, the  appellant  tried  to
       hang himself in his cell.  He was taken  to  the  prison  healthcare
       wing and placed on suicide watch.   Letters from the partner and her
       elder son helped him begin to recover again. His partner visited the
       appellant in prison every week, usually twice a week, including  for
       his birthday.  He felt that his mental health was better because  of
       this relationship.

    e) In latest statement signed on 30 March 2016,  the  appellant  stated
       that he avoided other  Angolans  in  London,  because  he  found  it
       upsetting when they talked about Angola, and it reminded him of  his
       lost family there.  He accepted that, when homeless and hopeless, he
       had made an application for voluntary departure: he expected  to  be
       killed in Angola on return, and it was easier than killing himself.

    f) Since the last hearing, the appellant had remained under the care of
       the Queens Resource Centre  SLAM  team  in  Croydon.   He  had  been
       detained for a time for a breach of his curfew, and  tried  to  kill
       himself with a liquid which he thought was bleach.  He was  released
       back to the secure accommodation in which he had lived previously.

    g) His relationship with his partner had not been  without  difficulty:
       she had  moved  to  Thetford  in  December  2015.   The  appellant's
       evidence was that he saw or spoke to her every  day,  but  that  the
       partner needed better housing and accommodation, away  from  London.
       His partner had been back to visit, but they were no  longer  really
       making plans for a life together,  just  living  from  day  to  day,
       because  the  appellant  could  not  support  her   emotionally   or
       financially.  However, when his partner was around, he was motivated
       to get out of bed and eat: he was less lonely and had hope  for  the
       future.  He still contemplated hoarding pills for a suicide  attempt
       or taking bleach, but seems to have taken no active  suicidal  steps
       since 2012.

40. The statement concludes:

         "Recently I have been thinking about overdosing on  my  medication.
         It would be difficult as the staff supervise  me  and  Veronica,  a
         manager at my residence, has told me that I could  harm  myself  by
         not taking my medication as prescribed, but when I lose hope I just
         want to go to sleep and not wake  up.   If  I  could  get  hold  of
         sufficient medication I would take it.  I am afraid I  cannot  hold
         this situation much longer and now when I wake,  I  cry  because  I
         feel I have failed again.  If I lose all hope, it would be the  end
         of me.  I would prefer to be dead than to be sent to Angola."

Partner's evidence

41. The appellant's partner, who in  2013  was  48  years  old,  provided  a
   statement dated 27 February 2013, stating  that  they  had  met  about  6
   months earlier, which accords with his statement. She  was  a  Portuguese
   citizen who had been in the United Kingdom for 7 years, having come as  a
   worker and worked until her youngest son was born in 2009.  She hoped  to
   return to work in the future.  She had never visited or lived  in  Angola
   and had no connections with that country.

42. The appellant's partner had  4  children,  all  sons,  the  younger  two
   living with her.  In February 2013 they were aged  4  and  15.   Her  two
   older sons lived in London, but not at the partner's home.   The  partner
   stated that the appellant got on well with the three of her four children
   whom he had met, and that he made her happy.   She  described  his  being
   recalled to prison and her distress.  She said that the appellant  had  a
   positive influence on her life and that she trusted  him.   Her  children
   loved him.

43. The partner was supported  by  a  social  worker  because  her  previous
   partner was abusive and violent.  When the  present  relationship  began,
   there were concerns about the partner's involvement with the appellant, a
   man with a known history of violence towards  women.   In  2005,  he  was
   violent to his then partner, and there were other  incidents,  which  the
   appellant in his statements acknowledged, but because of his  ill  health
   at the time he could not remember very well.

44. A policeman visited the  partner  to  warn  her  about  the  appellant's
   previous adverse history with women. Subsequently, she  received  several
   visits from her social worker, who did not approve of  this  relationship
   and initially threatened to take her children away if the partner did not
   stop seeing him and stop visiting him in prison.  More recently, she  had
   told the appellant's partner that he was not a risk to the  children;  it
   was the woman, the appellant's partner, whom she was trying  to  protect.



45. The social worker had now agreed to allow the relationship to  continue,
   as long as the appellant did  not  sleep  at  the  partner's  home.   The
   partner hoped that in the future she might  be  able  to  live  with  the
   appellant: her social worker had said that the  longer  the  relationship
   lasted, the fewer her concerns about it would be.   There was no evidence
   directly from the partner's social worker.

46. There was no later statement from the partner and the  relationship  was
   not relied upon at the hearing.

Country evidence

47. The country evidence included in the  bundle  as  to  the  provision  of
   psychiatric care in Angola  was  not  recent.   Fred  Bridgland's  expert
   report was dated 22 December 2011.  On 27 August 2013, when asked for  an
   update on his 2011 report, Mr Bridgland told the  appellant's  solicitors
   that he had reread it and 'can find no  reasons  to  change  my  original
   conclusions'.

48. The 2011 WHO Mental Health  Atlas  (the  WHO  Atlas)  remains  the  most
   recent international report before me. There was also a  report  for  the
   SFH dated 27 March 2013 by Alexandra Geiser, translated into English.

49. The respondent had no up-to-date Country of  Origin  report  on  Angola.
   The US State Department Reports in 2014 and 2015 do not deal at all  with
   the availability of mental health provision in Angola.

World Health Organisation Atlas 2011

50. I have been provided with an extract from the WHO Atlas for 2011,  which
   stated that primary health care doctors and  nurses  were  authorised  to
   prescribe or continue prescription of  psychotherapeutic  medicines,  but
   nurses were not permitted  independently  to  diagnose  or  treat  mental
   health disorders.  A mental health plan existed and was approved, or most
   recently revised, in 2010, to include timelines  for  implementation  and
   funding allocation.  There was no dedicated  mental  health  legislation.
   Statutory provision for mental health was included in welfare, disability
   and general legislation.

51. Mental health and mental hospital  expenditure  by  the  government  was
   unknown.  Most  primary  health  care  clinics  had  officially  approved
   manuals on the management and treatment  of  mental  disorders.  Official
   procedures existed for referring individuals from primary to secondary or
   tertiary care, and also for referral from secondary or tertiary  care  to
   primary facilities.  There were 2 mental hospitals  with  a  total  of  5
   beds: no  other  information  regarding  availability  of  mental  health
   facilities was available. Admission to mental hospitals was at  the  rate
   of 2.11 persons per 100,000 population.   No other information on  access
   to care was  available;  there  was  no  information  on  expenditure  on
   medication  for  mental  and  behavioural  disorders;   and   levels   of
   psychiatrists,  doctors,  nurses,  psychologists,  social  workers,   and
   occupational therapists was less than 0.1 per 100,000.

52. There was a more recent WHO Mental Health Atlas (2014) but  it  contains
   no  country  profile  on  Angola,  so  the  2011  Atlas  was  the  latest
   information available.

Fred Bridgland's report

53. Mr Bridgland was a foreign correspondent who until 2010 worked  for  The
   Scotsman, an Edinburgh-based newspaper, and lived in  South  Africa.   He
   had 35 years' experience of reporting on Central  Africa,  and  travelled
   widely with the Angolan guerrilla armies in  the  1980s  and  1990s.   Mr
   Bridgland broke the news of the  South  African  invasion  of  Angola  in
   August-November 1975 and had retained a professional interest in  Angola,
   often being asked to write reports on the country.   He had won a medical
   prize for his investigation into Scottish mental health  care.   Many  of
   the questions he was asked to answer in 2011 have no relevance to Article
   3 ECHR on mental health grounds.  I will summarise only those  which  are
   relevant to these proceedings.

54. At paragraphs 42-65 of his 2011 report, Mr Bridgland dealt  with  mental
   health facilities and the attitude to mental health issues in Angola.  He
   relied on the WHO Atlas assessment and on a report from USAID.  He  noted
   that  only  20%  of  the  Angolan  population  had  access  to  essential
   medicines; there was one doctor  for  every  33000  people;  salaries  of
   medical staff were regularly not paid and bribes were required to  access
   treatment; Angola's health indicators were some  of  the  worst  in  sub-
   Saharan Africa and family support was essential. The WHO Atlas said there
   was no mental health policy, no budget allocations for mental health,  no
   psychiatrist, psychiatric nurses  or  psychologists.   Mr  Bridgland  was
   aware of one public sector psychiatrist who had  begun  work  after  that
   report came out, and also of a psychologist in the private sector.

55. Mr Bridgland relied on the respondent's 2011 Country  of  Origin  Report
   which stated that there were no  community  care  facilities  for  mental
   health patients, that psychiatric  cases  were  often  badly  treated  in
   Angolan society, and that the  stress  and  frustration  of  coping  with
   poverty and its effects could contribute to psychiatric illness.   Family
   support could help to some degree.

56. The core findings in Mr Bridgland's 2011 report are at [58]-[63]:

         "58. While [the appellant] would  have  no  recourse  to  either  a
         mental health service or family support, it should perhaps be noted
         also that there is widespread belief in Angola that  mental  health
         problems are sicknesses caused by evil spirits. ...

         59.  In the light of the fact that at least  four  physicians  have
         identified [the appellant] as suffering from extreme post-traumatic
         stress disorder (PTSD), for which lengthy therapy and medication is
         required for treatment,  it  should  be  noted  that  there  is  no
         counselling  therapy  available  in  public  clinics   in   Angola.
         Ambassador Ballard-Tremeer...told the author of  this  report  that
         the specialised  drugs  recommended  as  necessary  to  treat  [the
         appellant's]  condition  -  in  parallel  with  counselling  -  are
         unlikely to be available through  the  public  health  system,  and
         would be very expensive through private routes.  Someone would need
         to pay on [the appellant's] behalf if he was to  get  any  sort  of
         treatment through the limited private sector, access  to  which  is
         limited to the heavily moneyed elite.

         60.  A national suicide policy does not exist. ...

         63.  Countless  people  and  organisations  point  out  that  poor,
         unconnected Angolans need a network of  family  and  friends  in  a
         hugely corrupt society - a social  order  in  which  the  non-elite
         majority of the people are, according to Rafael  Marques,  Angola's
         leading human rights campaigner, 'just part of the landscape' in  a
         country with one of the world's lowest life expectancy at birth for
         males - just 44 years, compared with 78 years for a British male."

Swiss Refugee Aid Report [27 March 2013]

57. The report by Alexandra Geiser from the SFH  Country  Analysis  entitled
   "Angola: Psychiatric Care"  was  dated  27  March  2013.  It  notes  that
   following the destruction caused by the Angolan  independence  and  civil
   wars, the infrastructure in Angola had to  be  'entirely  rebuilt'.   The
   national health care system dated back to independence  in  1975:   since
   1992, private and paid healthcare providers were also  permitted.   There
   remained an acute shortage of doctors and other healthcare professionals,
   who were unevenly distributed across the country.

58. Healthcare was very expensive in the capital, Luanda: informal  payments
   are demanded in almost 25% of state facilities, and  many  patients  were
   turning to the private health care sector.  Patients usually had  to  buy
   the medication even if treatment was free. The report summarised the 2011
   WHO Atlas evidence, noting that the earlier 2005 WHO  Atlas  stated  that
   carbamazepine,   phenobarbital,    phenytoin    sodium,    amitriptyline,
   chlorpromazine, diazepam,  fluphenazine,  haloperidol,  and  lithium  are
   available.

59. The report relies on a press report dated 10 October 2012  in  which  an
   Angolan psychiatrist complained of the lack of doctors, as follows:

         "Luanda - The Angolan psychiatrist Landu Mieze Geraldo on Wednesday
         said that one of the difficulties of Luanda psychiatric hospital is
         the shortage of physicians to meet the demand, ANGOP [Angola Press]
         has learnt.  He said the hospital has only 15 physicians, 10 out of
         them experts trained in the faculty of medicine, with the Agostinho
         Neto University."

60.  At  paragraph  3.3,   Ms   Gieser's   report   notes   that   Risperdal
   (risperidone),  Coveram   (active   ingredient   amlodipine/perindopril),
   Torasem (torsemide) and  Aldactone  (spironolactone)  were  available  in
   2013.  Availability was variable  for  all  these  medications  and  very
   expensive: Aldactone cost US $4 for 10 tablets in  2  sample  pharmacies,
   and in 2 others, US $8 for an unspecified number of tablets.

61. The core evidence in this report is at paragraph  3,  where  the  expert
   responds to specific questions as follows:

         "3.1 Is inpatient psychiatric treatment (in Luanda) available? What
         are the costs of this (insurance?) and what access is there?

         There is a public psychiatric clinic in Luanda, the Psiqui�trico de
         Luanda Hospital.  According to information from  a  local  contact,
         this is the only public psychiatric clinic in Angola.  Treatment is
         free of charge.  The patients also receive food  in  the  hospital,
         although the quality of the food is very  bad  and  family  members
         often provide food to their relatives.   According  to  information
         from the contact, 80 patients are treated on a daily  basis.   Some
         420  patients  are  taken  as  inpatients.   One  employee  of  the
         psychiatric clinic in Luanda says 90 to 100 patients are seen  each
         day.  There is no national health insurance.

         As already mentioned under  point  2  above,  psychiatric  care  in
         Angola is limited.  There is a  shortage  of  trained  health  care
         professionals,  which  also  impairs  the  access  and  quality  of
         healthcare.  An Angolan specialist also confirms  that  psychiatric
         care is neglected.  The infrastructure is inadequate and there  are
         too few health care professionals who are sufficiently  trained  to
         be able to treat the large  number of patients who need help.

         The local contact  refers  to  the  Clinica  Sagrada  Esperanca,  a
         private clinic in Luanda.  Mental health illnesses are also treated
         in this clinic.  Two days of inpatient treatment costs USD $1200.

         3.2   Are  there  NGOs  that  support  people  with  mental  health
         problems?

         The Angolan specialist that was contacted was not aware of any NGOs
         that support people with  mental  health  problems.   Patients  are
         primarily referred to the support of their families.  The family is
         the best safety net in Angola.  However, it depends how the  family
         handles mental health problems.  If the family offers  no  support,
         recovery is very difficult.  Without support from the  family,  not
         only is access to medicine difficult, but ensuring  daily  survival
         is also very hard. ...

         3.4  Are there any psychiatric care options?  If so,  what  is  the
         cost of these?

         The Angolan  specialist  assumes  that  psychiatric  care  is  also
         available from private doctors but is extremely expensive.  In most
         cases, the family seek help from traditional healers because  these
         treatments can be more easily paid and the healers do not have  any
         waiting lists."

   There is no explanation as to who was the 'Angolan specialist' said to be
   the source of much of the information in this report. There was  no  more
   recent country information on mental health provision in Angola from  the
   appellant.

Respondent's submissions

62.  For  the  respondent,  Mr  Kandola  argued  that  deportation  of  this
   appellant to Angola would not breach the United  Kingdom's  international
   protection obligations under Article 3  ECHR.   In  relation  to  suicide
   risk, this was a 'foreign' case;  the  medical  evidence  indicated  that
   there would be some risk in transit but J  at  [62]  had  held  that  the
   respondent should be treated as having an  effective  mechanism  for  the
   prevention of such risk.  A 'foreign' Article 3 ECHR risk had to be  very
   high, indeed exceptional, applying Ullah and Do v Secretary of State  for
   the Home Department [2004] UKHL 26, N v. Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department [2005] UKHL 31 and D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423,  and
   the appellant's circumstances did not meet that standard.

63. Mr Kandola argued that the appellant's medical history showed no  active
   suicidal ideation since  2012  and  that  there  was  public  psychiatric
   treatment available in Luanda, as well  as  medication,  albeit  not  the
   medication the appellant was now using.  The absence  of  any  family  in
   Angola was, unfortunately, not exceptional and applying KH  (Afghanistan)
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1354,  in
   which the facts were not dissimilar, the appeal must be  dismissed.   The
   appellant's health was not at the critical 'likely to die' level required
   by N and D, on the evidence which had been produced. It was not the case,
   as in Haroon Aswat, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary  of  State  for
   Home Department [2014]  EWHC  1216  (Admin),  that  the  appellant  faced
   detention on return to Angola and that decision should be  distinguished.
   The appellant had been only briefly sectioned  under  the  Mental  Health
   Act, was not in hospital when sentenced, and had been mainly  managed  in
   the community, albeit with support.

Appellant's submissions

64. For the appellant below, Ms Moffatt relied  on  her  skeleton  argument,
   settled and served the day before the hearing. She argued that this was a
   very unusual case in which the high thresholds for protection  identified
   in J v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629
   were met, as well as the additional principle in Y & Anor (Sri  Lanka)  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362.    Ms
   Moffatt sought to distinguish the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  KH
   (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA
   Civ 1354, arguing that it was  not  every  asylum  seeker  who  had  been
   detained and had a prolonged  period  of  mental  illness,  as  had  this
   appellant.

65. After setting out the procedural and personal history of  the  appellant
   in this appeal, and noting the opinions of  Dr  Chao  in  2010  that  his
   illness tends to become worse under stress and that he  requires  ongoing
   support from the mental health services, in prison or in  the  community;
   and of Professor Katona in 2015 that he was then only as stable as he was
   due to the support he was receiving, together with the  evidence  of  his
   dependency on his United Kingdom partner.

66. The appellant had no family members left  in  Angola.   There  was  very
   little other support for him in Angola:  the evidence indicated that some
   psychiatric care was available, but in the light of the severity  of  his
   ill health, it was not at all adequate. The likelihood was that he  would
   be unable to access any mental health treatments, both because of limited
   availability and because he would be too timid to seek it.   He  had  not
   been in Angola for 13 years and had no contact with anyone there; in  the
   United Kingdom, after 2004 he avoided the Angolan diaspora.

67. Ms Moffatt noted that the appellant had  been  sectioned  for  almost  6
   months in all, and his episodes of  mental  illness  had  recurred  since
   2005. His condition was being managed with a support system in the United
   Kingdom, which included 24-hour care and supervision, a psychiatrist, and
   a mental health worker.  Even with all that support,  his  condition  was
   not stable: his flashbacks continued to occur.   The  illness  ebbed  and
   flowed, and more than medication was required: the appellant's  stability
   depended  on  secure  accommodation  and  sophisticated   mental   health
   intervention.  In the United Kingdom, the appellant also had the  support
   of his partner, and Ms Moffatt relied on  the  medical  evidence  of  the
   likely effect of separation from that relationship.

68. Ms Moffatt argued that all four of the factors identified by  the  Court
   of Appeal in J and the subjective factor  in  Y  were  met.   Mr  Justice
   Collins  had  ordered  the  appellant  to  be  removed  from  immigration
   detention  to  a  mental  hospital,  which  she  contended  made  this  a
   'domestic' case in Ullah and Do terms. The appellant's mental health  was
   likely to deteriorate before, during and after return to  Angola.   There
   was a risk of self-harm which clearly met the relevant level of severity;
   there  was  a  causal  link  between   the   proposed   deportation   and
   deterioration in the appellant's mental health; at  times,  he  presented
   with a very high risk of suicide, particularly when homeless or receiving
   bad news about his immigration status.  He had shown a subjective ongoing
   fear of return to Angola based on the traumatic experiences he had before
   coming to the United Kingdom, caused directly by the Angolan state.

The law

69. Applying  the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Ullah  and  Do,  a
   distinction must be drawn between 'domestic cases' where the human rights
   breach is likely to occur in the  member  country,  and  'foreign  cases'
   where the harm will occur in the country of origin after removal.  In  J,
   Lord Justice Dyson, giving the  judgment  of  the  Court  on  facts  very
   similar to those in this appeal, identified three stages in  the  process
   of removal:  (1) notification that a final  decision  has  been  made  to
   remove the appellant to his country of origin; (ii) when he is physically
   removed by airplane; and (iii) after  he  has  arrived.   The  first  two
   situations are 'domestic' in the Ullah and Do sense, and the  third,  the
   post-arrival risk, is a 'foreign case'.   The Court  of  Appeal  approved
   the IAT's finding that there was no Article 3 ECHR  risk  in  the  United
   Kingdom in relation to the service of  the  decision  to  remove  or  the
   process of removal, because

         "...Merely increasing the risk of suicide  through  those  actions,
         against which suitable protection is then  available,  involves  no
         breach of Article 3. ... there has not been  shown  to  be  a  real
         increased risk of suicide in those circumstances  compared  to  the
         risk he would face on release in the United Kingdom."

70. The Court in J went on to identify  six  factors  to  be  considered  in
   relation to the risk in the country of origin, to which Y added one more.
    The combined tests may be summarised thus:

   a) The treatment in the country of origin must attain a minimum level  of
      severity,  serious  such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to   fundamental
      humanitarian principles" to remove the appellant to that country;

   b) The appellant  must  establish  a  causal  link  between  the  act  or
      threatened act of removal  or  expulsion  and  the  inhuman  treatment
      relied on as violating his article 3  rights.  Applying  Soering,  the
      Court considered that liability under the Convention was only incurred
      when the United Kingdom took action "which has as a direct consequence
      the  exposure  of  an  individual   to   proscribed   ill-treatment.".
      Vilvarajah stated that Article 3  consideration  "must  focus  on  the
      foreseeable consequences of the  removal  of  the  [appellant  to  his
      country of origin] ..."

   c) In a foreign case, the Court in J said that 'the article  3  threshold
      is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case.  And  it  is
      even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not the  direct  or
      indirect responsibility of the public  authorities  of  the  receiving
      state, but results from  some  naturally  occurring  illness,  whether
      physical or mental".

   d) Nevertheless, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a suicide
      risk case.

   e) It is an important to assess whether  the  applicant's  fear  of  ill-
      treatment in the receiving state upon which the  risk  of  suicide  is
      said to be based is objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-
      founded, that will tend to weigh against there being a real risk  that
      the removal will be in breach of article 3.

   f) In Y and another, the Court  of  Appeal  qualified  that  question  by
      stating that we must also consider whether any genuine fear which  the
      appellant may establish, albeit without an  objective  foundation,  is
      such as to create a risk of suicide if there is an enforced return.

   g) The Court must consider whether  the  receiving  state  has  effective
      mechanisms to reduce the risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are  effective
      mechanisms, that would weigh heavily against an applicant's claim that
      removal will violate his or her article 3 rights.

71. The decision in KH (Afghanistan) helpfully draws together all the  other
   leading authorities.   Paragraphs  [29]-[33]  in  the  judgment  of  Lord
   Justice Longmore, with whom both Lord Justices Sedley and Aikens  agreed,
   notes that the appellant KH would  be  deprived  of  the  medication  and
   support available to him in the United Kingdom, and without any family or
   other support in his country of  origin,  would  be  destitute.   It  was
   contended that such destitution would breach Article 3 ECHR.   The  Court
   was not satisfied that destitution  came  within  the  N  exceptions  for
   extreme facts which was as compelling as imminent death:

         "32. In the present case it is said that neither the treatment  the
         appellant has been having in this country nor  any  support  system
         similar to that which he has been receiving in  Newcastle  will  be
         available in Afghanistan. It is further said that he has no  family
         there who can support him  if  subsequent  medical  facilities  are
         inaccessible and that he is therefore liable to die  unassisted  as
         he would have done here while he  was  subsisting  in  the  English
         graveyard, if Social Services had not intervened. But even  if  all
         those  matters  were  to  be  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  an
         immigration judge is it really possible that  he  might  hold  that
         this  case  was  indeed  one  of  those  "very  exceptional  cases"
         envisaged by Baroness Hale in para. 70 of her speech in N, where it
         would be a breach of Article 3  to  return  the  appellant  now  to
         Afghanistan?

         33.  The truth is that the presence of mental illness among  failed
         asylum-seekers cannot really be  regarded  as  exceptional.  Sadly,
         even asylum-seekers with mental illness who have  no  families  can
         hardly be regarded as "very exceptional". If this  case  is  to  be
         regarded as a very exceptional one, there will inevitably be  cases
         which will be indistinguishable. A person with no family would have
         to be equated with a person who has a family but whose members  are
         unwilling or unable to look after him or her. I cannot  think  that
         Baroness Hale had such a wide category in mind. In order for a case
         to be "very exceptional" it would have to be exceptional inside the
         class of person with mental illness without family support. Perhaps
         a very old or  very  young  person  would  qualify  but  hardly  an
         ordinary adult. "

Discussion

72. Article 3 of the  ECHR,  if  applicable,  is  an  unqualified  right  to
   protection.  No question of proportionality arises if the  high  standard
   of proof for an Article 3 risk is met.

73. I do not consider that  there  is  any  'domestic  case'  risk  in  this
   appeal. The appellant's representatives have taken steps  to  manage  the
   notification risk by asking for this decision to be served on  them,  not
   on him, pursuant to paragraph 13(3)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended).  The  respondent  has  procedures  for
   support during the removal process.

74. The real question is  whether,  after  return  to  Angola,  there  is  a
   'foreign case' risk of the appellant committing suicide due to his mental
   health problems and his subjective fear  of  return.  The  appellant  has
   serious mental health problems which are being  managed  with  medication
   and with a supported  environment  in  which  he  is  monitored  and  his
   medication given to him by others.  The most recent evidence is that even
   in the United Kingdom, the appellant's mental health is hard  to  manage,
   but that his suicidal ideation is not continuous: Dr Longhitano describes
   it as 'fleeting'  suicidal  ideation  which  may  be  aggravated  if  the
   appellant is returned to Angola.  The causal link and severity tests  are
   met, on the evidence, and I accept that it is possible for a suicide risk
   on return to meet the Article 3 ECHR standard, although that standard  is
   very high.

75. Overall, I am not satisfied that the facts of  this  appellant's  appeal
   meet the very high Article 3 threshold in 'foreign cases'.  The  evidence
   comes to this: that the appellant has frequently expressed  a  subjective
   fear of return to Angola; that he will not get the support and medication
   which he receives in the United Kingdom from Social Services; and that he
   will lose the support of his  partner  and  have  no  family  support  to
   replace it, once returned to Angola.  His relationship with  his  partner
   continues but they do not live together at present.

76. In reality, there is no objective  risk  to  him  in  Angola  now.   His
   medical circumstances, and the loss of social support and lack of  family
   in  Angola  are  not  distinguishable  from  the  circumstances  of   the
   appellants in J, Y and another or  KH.   The  appellant  does  have  some
   continuing links since he is aware that his former commander in UNITA  is
   now rehabilitated and working in the Angolan police force: that  man  may
   even be in a position to assist the appellant on return.

77. The limited country evidence before me, now at  least  3  years  out  of
   date, shows Angola as a country emerging from a long period of  conflict,
   and rebuilding its health and other infrastructure.  In 2013  there  were
   mental health facilities in  Luanda,  with  doctors,  nurses  and  drugs,
   albeit not to the standard or as easily available as here in  the  United
   Kingdom.  There is no evidence after 2013 of any increased  international
   concern in the form of further negative  NGO  mental  health  reports  or
   assessments.

78. No other international conventions were relied upon and I am not  seised
   of any Article 8 ECHR arguments. I find that the similarity  between  the
   facts in KH and those in this appeal,  despite  Ms  Moffatt's  persuasive
   efforts to the contrary, are too  strong  to  ignore.   This  appellant's
   circumstances are not exceptional and the risk to him does  not  rise  to
   the Article 3 ECHR standard.

DECISION

79. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.

   I set aside the previous decision.

   I remake the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Date:         1 August 2016                  Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


