
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00181/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 22nd November 2019               |On: 28th November 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Stepas Brazinskas
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Lithuania born in 1985.    On  the  5th
    September 2019 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Farrelly)  allowed  his
    appeal against deportation under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016. The Secretary of State now  has  permission  to
    appeal against that decision.

 2. The facts of this case are  that  the  Respondent  has  lived  in  this
    country on and off since March 2013. His last  date  of  entry  was  in
    March 2015.  He lives with his  partner  and  two  children.   All  are
    nationals of Lithuania. Since their arrival in the United Kingdom  both
    the Respondent and  his  partner  have  exercised  treaty  rights.  The
    Secretary of State wants to deport the Respondent because between  2016
    and 2018 he has committed the following criminal offences:

          i) Driving with excess alcohol

         ii) Obstructing a police constable

        iii) Driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence x 3

         iv) Using a vehicle whilst uninsured x 3

          v) Failing to surrender to custody at the appointed time

         vi) Being drunk and disorderly

        vii) Breaching conditions

 3. The First-tier Tribunal had regard to the matters set out in Regulation
    27.  It noted the criminal convictions set  out  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her decision to  deport  and  the  evidence  advanced  by  the
    Respondent in respect of his family life in  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    heard, and accepted, the Appellant's evidence that at the time  of  the
    offences he was abusing alcohol following the deaths of his parents. It
    further accepted that  it  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Respondent's children to remain in this country, since they experienced
    discrimination in Lithuania as a result of their  "gypsy"  heritage[1].
    It found that the Respondent has a family life in  the  United  Kingdom
    not just with his partner and  their  children  but  with  other  close
    family members such as his partner's parents and siblings.   The  Judge
    found that the Respondent would face difficulties in re-integrating  in
    Lithuania in light of his ethnicity and lack of family  support  there.
    It concluded that whilst the  offences  were  contrary  to  the  public
    interest they were not  "of  the  gravest"  and  balanced  against  the
    Respondent's circumstances and the best interests of his children,  the
    Tribunal held that the appeal should be allowed.

 4. The Secretary of State now appeals on the  grounds  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to have "adequate regard to the fact that the [Respondent] is  a
    persistent  offender",  a  matter  identified  in  Schedule  1  of  the
    Regulations as a  matter  contrary  to  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society. It is submitted that the Tribunal should have  considered  the
    "combined effect and risk posed by the compounded behaviour".

 5.  The  Respondent  did  not  attend  the  hearing.  Nor  did  his  legal
    representatives, although I was informed by a member of  staff  at  Rea
    Law that they had sent a letter to the Tribunal  last  week  explaining
    that they would not  be  attending,  and  inviting  me  to  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Mrs Aboni  had  been  instructed
    that the Respondent had failed to report as required to an  immigration
    officer on the 17th September 2019, but she had  no  information  other
    than that.  In light of the indication from the  solicitors  on  record
    that they were content for me to proceed in the Respondent's absence, I
    heard Mrs Aboni's submissions and reserved my decision.




    Discussion and Findings

 6. The Secretary of State's case is that the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    have classified the Respondent as a 'persistent offender' and  that  if
    it had done so, this would have led it to place greater weight  on  the
    Respondent's offending than it apparently did in the course of reaching
    its decision.

 7. The Secretary of State's  grounds  rely  on  the  matters  set  out  at
    paragraph 7 of Schedule 1  to  the  Regulations,  which  set  out  what
    matters may reflect  the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  and  in
    particular sub-paragraph (h) thereof:

         7.    For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,  the  fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             ...

             (h)    combating   the   effects   of   persistent   offending
             (particularly in relation  to  offences,  which  if  taken  in
             isolation, may otherwise be unlikely to meet the  requirements
             of regulation 27);

 8. The Secretary of State further asks me to consider the guidance on  who
    might be deemed to be a 'persistent offender' in Chege v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 00187  (IAC)  and  Binbuga  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 551.

 9. I begin by noting that the authorities to which I  have  been  referred
    are concerned with the term 'persistent offender' within the meaning of
    the Immigration  Rules.  In  the  absence  of  any  suggestion  to  the
    contrary, I proceed on the basis that the phrase  must  have  the  same
    meaning in the Regulations.

10. The ratio in Chege,  approved  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  both  SC
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ
    929 and Binbuga, is found at paragraph 53:

         "Put simply, a  "persistent  offender"  is  someone  who  keeps  on
         breaking the law. That does not mean, however, that he has to  keep
         on offending until the date of the relevant decision  or  up  to  a
         certain time before it, or that the  continuity  of  the  offending
         cannot be broken. Whilst  we  do  not  accept  Mr  Malik's  primary
         submission that a "persistent offender" is a permanent status  that
         can never be lost once it is acquired, we do accept his  submission
         that an individual can be regarded as a "persistent  offender"  for
         the purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though  he  may  not
         have offended for some time. Someone can be fairly described  as  a
         person who keeps breaking the law  even  if  he  is  not  currently
         offending. The question  whether  he  fits  that  description  will
         depend on the overall picture and pattern of his offending over his
         entire offending history up to that date. Each case  will  turn  on
         its own facts.

11. Applying that definition to the Respondent's case it can be  seen  that
    for a period between August 2016 and December 2018 the Respondent  kept
    committing crimes.  At the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  he
    was therefore a 34-year man  who  had  spent  16  months  of  his  life
    persistently committing crime, the last conviction having been some  10
    months before the hearing.  Having satisfied itself as to those  facts,
    it is true that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  go  on  to  formally
    designate the Respondent as a 'persistent offender'.

12. If, in light of paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 of the Regulations, that  can
    be said to be an error, I am not satisfied that in this case it can  be
    said to be such that the decision should be set aside.

13. Let us suppose that the Tribunal had directed itself to recognise  that
    the Appellant was a 'persistent offender'.  It would have to recognise,
    in line with the Schedule, that it is in the fundamental  interests  of
    society that people don't keep committing crimes.  It would  then  have
    had to go on to  consider  all  of  the  remaining  matters  raised  by
    Regulation 27, including whether the Respondent presents, at  the  date
    of hearing, a genuine present and sufficiently serious threat to  those
    interests to justify deportation.  It is evident from the rest  of  the
    findings made that this test was not made out.   That  is  because  the
    Judge heard  and  accepted  the  evidence  that  a  particular  set  of
    circumstances arose in the 16 months in which the  Respondent  went  on
    his spree of driving and drinking to excess, namely that he  lost  both
    his parents and he was abusing alcohol as a means to try and  alleviate
    the symptoms of bereavement.  Those were findings open to the Judge  to
    make, in accordance with Chege: each case will turn on its  own  facts.
    Add to this the further findings on proportionality and the  impact  on
    the family and it becomes clear that even if the formal designation  of
    'persistent offender' had been made, this decision would have been  the
    same. It cannot be said that the Tribunal overlooked the many  offences
    that the Respondent committed, since it takes the trouble to  set  them
    all out. What it does is look at the "overall picture" before  reaching
    a decision open to it applying the facts to the framework in Regulation
    27.




    Decisions

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law.

15. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          22nd November 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] I assume from the papers that it was the Respondent, and not Judge
Farrelly, who had used that term. See the guidance in the Equal Treatment
Bench Book: "Ask individuals how they would like to describe themselves.
Some people from the Gypsy, Traveller and Roma communities find the term
'gypsy' offensive, whereas others are proud to use that term".

