

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00516/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th September 2013                        |On 19th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                HOWARD MUZIRA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G O'Ceallaigh, counsel, instructed by The First
Law Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals a  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Colyer who dismissed his  appeal  against  a  decision  dated  28th
        February  2013  that  the  appellant  is   subject   to   automatic
        deportation pursuant to s32(5) UK Borders Act  2007.  Judge  Colyer
        concluded that none of the  exceptions  provided  for  in  the  Act
        apply. On 1st August 2013 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  granted
        permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal determination  on  the
        grounds it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  adequately
        assess risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe  or  internal  relocation  by
        reference  to  relevant  country  guidance.  He  had  also  granted
        permission on the ground that the judge had failed to  take  proper
        account of the assessment of risk of re-offending in  reaching  his
        conclusions.


     2. Although the respondent submitted in her Rule 24 response that  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge had directed  himself  appropriately  and
        that the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement  with  the
        findings made, before me Mr Bramble conceded that there did  appear
        to be a lack of  proper  approach  and  treatment  of  the  issues.
        Although the judge had quoted extensively from relevant caselaw and
        Immigration Rules there was a lack of engagement with the  concepts
        and law applicable.

     3. I am satisfied that this concession by Mr  Bramble  was  reasonable
        and justifiable and I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge erred in law in his assessment of risk on return to  Zimbabwe
        and his engagement with the evidence as to risk of re-offending.  I
        set aside the decision to be remade.

     4. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
        assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


     5. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, s.12(2) of
        the TCEA 2007 requires me to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  with directions or remake  it  myself.  After  discussion
        with both parties I am satisfied that the extent and nature of  the
        findings to be made as to potential risk of persecution  on  return
        to Zimbabwe and  the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
        decision overall requires a substantive hearing with full  findings
        of fact in so far as any and all of the exceptions to the 2007  Act
        are concerned. With the  agreement  of  both  parties  I  therefore
        conclude that the decision should be remitted  to  the  First  tier
        judge to determine the appeal.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

     Consequential Directions


    The appeal shall be heard by a First-tier Tribunal judge or  judges  as
    determined by that Tribunal save that it  shall  not  be  before  Judge
    Colyer.
    The hearing date to be fixed, if possible,  in  consultation  with  the
    appellant's solicitors.



                                    Date 17th September 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
