
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00489/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2020                   |On 15 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                MARCIN JASION
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Bahja of counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national  of  Poland.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with this mother in 2004 and he was enrolled in school here  in
    November 2004.

2.   Between 22 January 2007 and 29 March 2018, the Appellant was  cautioned
    or convicted on numerous occasions. On 5 April 2018 he had been  served
    with a notice informing him that he was liable to deportation under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016. On 20 June  2018
    he was served with a decision to  make  a  deportation  order  and  his
    appeal was certified under regulation 33 of the 2016 Regulations.   The
    Appellant was deported from the United Kingdom on 31 August 2018.

3.   Meanwhile, the Appellant had lodged an appeal against the  decision  to
    deport him on 26 July 2018. Time to appeal was subsequently extended on
    16 August 2018. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan allowed  his  appeal
    in a decision promulgated 21  August  2019.   The  Respondent  appealed
    against her decision on 4 September 2019 and First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer granted her permission to appeal on 13 September 2019.

4.   In a decision, promulgated on 6 December 2019, His  Honour  Judge  Bird
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer found that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sullivan had made errors of law in her decision.   They  also  retained
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  deport  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. When doing so, they preserved a number of  findings  of  fact
    made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan,  which  are  referred  to
    below.



RESUMED HEARING

5.   In  compliance  with  the  directions  made  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer, the Appellant's solicitors filed  and  served  a  consolidated
    appeal bundle on 24  December  2019.  They  then  filed  and  served  a
    skeleton argument and a witness statement by the Appellant's mother  on
    20 January 2020. The Respondent filed and served her skeleton  argument
    on 29 January 2020. I extend time for the latter skeleton argument,  as
    the Appellant's Bundle and skeleton argument had not been sent directly
    to the appropriate Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit.

6.   Counsel for  the  Appellant  called  the  Appellant's  mother  and  she
    adopted her witness statement, but she  was  not  asked  any  questions
    arising from it. Both counsel for the Appellant  and  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer made oral submissions and I have  taken  these  into
    account then reaching my decision below.

7.   On 4 February 2020, the Appellant's legal representatives submitted  an
    addendum  skeleton  argument.  As  the  Respondent  had  not  had   the
    opportunity to consider the contents of this addendum skeleton argument
    at the hearing, I indicated that I would  only  consider  the  skeleton
    argument if it were possible to reconvene the hearing.  The Appellant's
    solicitors replied by email on 18  February  2020,  stating  that  they
    would instruct counsel to attend any resumed hearing and that they were
    liaising with the Home Office Presenting Officer.

8.   The Appellant's solicitors did not inform the  Upper  Tribunal  of  the
    outcome of any discussion with the Home Office Presenting Office and in
    addition, it became obvious that the  current  pandemic  was  going  to
    prevent the listing of any  resumed  hearing  at  Field  House  in  the
    foreseeable future. Therefore, I made further directions  on  20  March
    2020. As the Appellant's legal representatives had not informed  me  of
    the result of any discussions with the Home Office Presenting  Officer,
    I directed that the matter would proceed on the  papers  and  gave  the
    Respondent the opportunity  to  respond  to  the  Appellant's  addendum
    skeleton argument.

9.   I have not had a response from the  Respondent,  but  I  did  have  the
    benefit of the skeleton argument on which she previously relied,  which
    was filed on 29  January  2020.  In  addition,  having  considered  the
    content of the addendum skeleton argument, I did not  consider  that  I
    needed the assistance of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    before completing my decision.



DECISION

10.  The Appellant is appealing against the decision by  the  Respondent  to
    deport  him  to  Poland  under  Regulation  23(6)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"),  on
    the basis that his removal  is  justified  on  the  grounds  of  public
    policy, public security or public health in accordance with  regulation
    27of the 2016 Regulations.

11.  Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations states:

         "(1) In  this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respective of  an  EEA  national
             who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision ...

         (5)  The public policy and  public  security  requirements  of  the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise  conferred
             by these Regulations  in  order  to  protect  the  fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision  is  taken
             on grounds of public policy or public security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)  the personal conduct  of  the  person  must  represent  a
                  genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
                  one of the fundamental interests of society,  taking  into
                  account past conduct of the person  and  that  the  threat
                  does not need to be imminent;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision;

             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative  grounds,  even
                  in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided
                  the grounds are specific to the person.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy and public security in relation to a person  ("P")  who
             is resident in the United Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must
             take account of considerations  such  as  the  age,  state  of
             health, family and economic situation  of  P,  P's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  P's  social  and  cultural
             integration into the United Kingdom  and  the  extent  of  P's
             links with P's country of origin.

         ...

         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether  the  requirements  of
             this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations  of
             public policy, public security and the  fundamental  interests
             of society etc.).

12.  Schedule 1 states that:

         "28.  Paragraph  7  of  Schedule  1  states  that  the  fundamental
             interests of society include:

             ...

             (b)  maintaining public order

             (c)  preventing social harm;

             ...

             (f)  excluding or  removing  an  EEA...family  member  with  a
                  conviction (including where the conduct of that person  is
                  likely to cause, or has in fact  caused,  public  offence)
                  and maintaining public confidence in the  ability  of  the
                  relevant authorities to take such action;

             (g)  tackling offences likely to cause harm to  society  where
                  an immediate or  direction  victim  may  be  difficult  to
                  identify but where there is wider societal harm  (such  as
                  offences related to the misuse of drugs...

             ...

             (j)  protecting the public;

             ..."

13.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Appellant had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence and that, therefore, his deportation could
    only be justified if the Respondent could show that there were  serious
    grounds of public policy and/or  public  security  to  support  such  a
    decision.

14.  Both  parties  agreed  that  Regulation  15  of  the  2016  Regulations
    indicates that:

         "(1) The following persons acquire  the  right  to  reside  in  the
             United Kingdom permanently-

             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;"

15.  One of the findings preserved by the Upper Tribunal  in  its  error  of
    law decision, dated 28 November 2019, was that the Appellant's mother's
    P60s confirmed that she was employed as a worker in the United  Kingdom
    between 1 April 2005 and 31 March 2010 and  that  she  had,  therefore,
    acquired permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

16.  On 31 March 2010, the Appellant was 19 years old, but he  continued  to
    be a member  of  his  mother's  family  as  Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 states that:

         "(1) ... for  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations  the  following
             persons shall be treated  as  the  family  member  of  another
             person-

             (b)  direct descendants of his ... who are under 21".

17.  Therefore, the parties agreed that on  31  March  2010  he  would  have
    potentially acquired permanent residence as her direct descendant. As a
    consequence, it was not necessary for the  Appellant  to  rely  on  any
    period for which he may have been in education in the United Kingdom.

18.  However, Regulation 3 of the 2016 Regulations also states that:

         "(1) This regulation applies for the purpose of calculating periods
             of continuous residence in the United Kingdom under regulation
             5(1) and regulation 15"

         ...

         (3)  Continuity of residence is broken when-

             (a)  a person serves a sentence of imprisonment".

19.  Paragraph 7.13 of the Explanatory Memorandum to  the  2016  Regulations
    explains that Regulation  3  gives  effect  to  the  CJEU  judgment  in
    Onuekwere v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  Case  C-378/12
    where it was held that:

         "Article 16(2) and (3) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted  as
         meaning that the continuity of residence is interrupted by  periods
         of imprisonment  in  the  host  Member  State  of  a  third-country
         national who is the family  member  of  a  Union  citizen  who  has
         acquired the right of permanent  residence  in  that  Member  State
         during those periods".

20.  The Appellant was sentenced to one day's detention  in  the  courthouse
    on 30 December 2009, after being convicted for shoplifting, and also on
    13 January 2010, after being convicted of theft.

21.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that a period  of  detention  in  a
    courthouse  does  not  amount  to  imprisonment  for  the  purposes  of
    Regulation 3(3) of the 2016 Regulations. He relied on Section 97(2)  of
    the Powers of Criminal Courts  (Sentencing)  Act  2000.  However,  this
    section specifically refers to a court's powers to  sentence  a  person
    under 21 to a period of time in a young offender institution and states
    that "a court shall not pass a sentence for an offender's detention  in
    a young offender institution for less than 21 days". The  section  does
    not prohibit a court from  sentence  a  young  offender  to  one  day's
    detention in a courthouse.

22.  Counsel also relied on the case of Regina v  Faith  Jones  Alli  [2017]
    EWCA Crim 589 but this case went no further than to confirm that it was
    unlawful to sentence an offender to a period of imprisonment in a young
    offender institution of less than 21 days. It did not address detention
    in any other location.

23.  Counsel for the Appellant also relied on Section 76(2) of the same  Act
    which is entitled the "Meaning of  a  custodial  sentence".  It  states
    that:

         "(1) In this Act a "custodial sentence" means

             (a)  a sentence of imprisonment

             ...

             (d)  a sentence of detention in a Young Offenders Institution

         (2)  In subsection (1) above "sentence of  imprisonment"  does  not
             include a committal for contempt or any kindred offence".

24.  The wording of this section indicates that the  Act  treated  sentences
    of  imprisonment  and  sentences  of  detention  in  a  Young  Offender
    Institution as separate forms of "custodial sentence" and therefore any
    requirement to limit detention in a young offender  institution  to  at
    least 21 days could not be read over to any other  form  of  "custodial
    sentence".

25.  Counsel for the Appellant also submitted that one day's detention in  a
    courthouse was a kindred offence to that of contempt of court  for  the
    purposes of Section 76(2).  However, he was not  able  to  provide  any
    case or statutory law to show that this was the correct  interpretation
    of this sub-section. In his addendum skeleton argument, the Appellant's
    representative sought to rely on the wording  of  section  135  of  the
    Magistrates Court Act 1980. However, the fact that the  section  refers
    to such a court having the power to "commit" to prison convicted of  an
    offence, does not attract from the fact that such  a  person  would  be
    being imprisoned for a criminal  offence  not  being  committed  for  a
    contempt of court.

26.  In any event, I have taken into account that  the  plain  and  ordinary
    meaning of a "contempt of court"  it  that  is  occurs  when  a  person
    deliberately fails to obey or respect the authority of a court of  law.
    The PNC shows quite clearly that the Appellant was not detained for any
    similar act such as breaching a court order but had been sentenced  for
    shoplifting and then theft.

27.  As the Home Office Presenting Officer noted it was also the  case  that
    the Appellant had not sought to challenge either of  these  convictions
    on the basis that they had been unlawfully made and I am not able to go
    behind the decision of another court.

28.  In addition, although the  facts  leading  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Viscu v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (AIRE
    Centre intervening) [2019] EWCA Civ  concerned  someone  who  had  been
    sentenced to a period detention in a  Young  Offender  Institution,  it
    confirmed a wider principle of law. In particular, at paragraph  45  of
    the judgment of Lord Justice Flaux, as confirmed in the  headnote,  the
    Court found that "in general, a "custodial sentence" was indicative  of
    a rejection of societal values and a severing of integrative  links  so
    as to interrupt the  required  continuity  of  residence...it  was  the
    seriousness of the offending, rather than the  sentence  itself,  which
    indicated a rejection of societal values".

29.  In the current case the Appellant may have only been sentenced  to  one
    day's detention on the two occasions relied upon, but his detention was
    a recognition of that his criminal behaviour indicated that he did  not
    respect the laws accepted by the wider society around him.

30.  As a consequence, of all of the above findings, I  find  that  the  two
    periods of detention  did  break  the  continuity  of  the  Appellant's
    residence in the United Kingdom.

31.  Counsel for the Appellant also relied on the fact  that  the  Appellant
    he had lived in the United Kingdom for more  than  10  years,  starting
    school here in 2004 and being deported on 31 August 2018.  However,  in
    paragraph 12 of Terzaghi v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 2017, Lord Justice Dingemans held that:

         "The following propositions were common ground before us:  (1)  the
         10 year period referred to in regulation 21(4) is counted back from
         the date of the decision to deport, see MG (Portugal) at  paragraph
         24, Warsame at paragraph 10 and FV(Italy) at paragraph 65; (2)  the
         10 year period has to be a continuous of residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom, ...  (3)  periods  of  imprisonment  will,  in  principle,
         interrupt the continuity of  residence  ...  This  is  because  the
         imposition of a prison  sentence  showed  non-compliance  with  the
         values expressed by the society of the host  member  state  in  its
         criminal law ..."

32.  The decision to deport the Appellant from the United Kingdom  was  made
    on 20 June 2018 and, therefore, the relevant period of time was between
    20 June 2008 and 20 June 2018. The Appellant was sentenced to one day's
    detention on 30 December 2009, one day's detention on 13 January  2014,
    one day's on 27 May 2011, one days detention on  21  January  2014,  14
    days concurrent and 7 days consecutive imprisonment on 21 June 2016, 21
    days imprisonment on 8 November 2016 and 21  days  imprisonment  on  29
    March 2018. Therefore, there were clearly periods of imprisonment which
    interrupted the continuity of his residence.

33.  Regulation 3(4) of the 2016 Regulations does also state that:

         "Paragraph (3)(a) applies, in principle, to an EEA national who has
         resided in the United Kingdom for at least ten years, but  it  does
         not apply where the Secretary of State considers that-

         (a)  prior to serving a sentence of imprisonment, the EEA  national
             had forged integrating links with the United Kingdom;

         (b)  the effect of the sentence was not  such  as  to  break  those
             integrative links, and

         (c)   taking  into  account  an  overall  assessment  of  the   EEA
             national's situation, it would not  be  appropriate  to  apply
             paragraph (3)(a) to the  assessment  of  that  EEA  national's
             continuity of residence"

34.  Counsel for the Appellant relied on FV (Italy)  v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department, B v Land Baden-  Wurttemberg  [2019]  QB  126.
    But, in paragraph 70 of that judgement, the Court found that,  even  if
    there were relevant  periods  of  imprisonment,  it  was  necessary  to
    determine  whether  those  periods  of  imprisonment  had  broken   the
    integrative links previously forged with the host member state. It  was
    also held that "this assessment should be carried out  at  the  precise
    time when the question of expulsion arises".

35.  The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom, as  a  child  and  had
    studied here at school and then college.  His  parents  had  also  been
    living here at that time.  However, when  considering  the  integrative
    links which he had forged by the time of the  decision  to  deport  him
    from the United Kingdom, I am bound by the fact that in  the  error  of
    law hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  preserved  a  significant  number  of
    findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan, which were that:

    (1)  The Appellant was a persistent offended who committed all  of  the
         offences listed in the PNC printout prepared on 13  July  2019  and
         his offences  have  involved  drugs,  dishonesty,  destruction  and
         violence.

    (2)  In addition, he has  repeatedly  failed  to  abide  by  conditions
         imposed on him during sentencing  and  also  repeatedly  failed  to
         attend when required to do so. He also continued offending  despite
         the imposition of drug rehabilitation requirements and continued to
         offend despite the experience of custodial sentences.

    (3)  The period during which he was at liberty after serving the 21-day
         prison sentence imposed on him on 29 March 2018 does not of  itself
         show that he will not re-offend in the future.

    (4)  The Appellant has a long history  of  drug  dependence,  including
         reliance on cannabis, amphetamines, cocaine and ecstasy.

    (5)  The fact that he followed a methadone programme in detention  does
         not indicate that he is no longer drug  dependent  because  he  had
         previously relapsed  after  long  periods  of  abstinence  and  has
         returned to a chaotic style of living in Poland.

    (6)  The Appellant will continue to require professional support  as  a
         drug addict and also medical treatment for mental ill-health.

    (7)  Even when undergoing treatment, as in 2015, his risk of  substance
         abuse remained medium to high.

    (8)  The Appellant has suffered from paranoid schizophrenia, mental and
         physical disorders attributable to multiple  drug  use  and  has  a
         history of non-compliance with medication and other treatment.

    (9)  The criminal justice and mental health services have made multiple
         interventions in  an  attempt  to  assist  him,  but  he  has  been
         uncooperative and unresponsive.

    (10) There was no evidence to show that he had been let down by  social
         services or his school.

36.  I have also reminded myself that  in  paragraph  48  of  MG  (prison  -
    Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014]  UKUT  393  the
    Upper Tribunal held that:

         "... the fact that the Court specifies that "in principle"  periods
         of imprisonment interrupt  the  continuity  of  residence  for  the
         purpose of meeting the 10 year requirement can only  mean  that  as
         far as establishing integrative links  is  concerned  such  periods
         must have a negative impact".

37.  In the light of the periods of imprisonment  served  by  the  Appellant
    and the preserved findings of fact, referred to above, and  applying  a
    balance of probabilities the  Appellant  has  not  shown  that  he  has
    integrated into the community in the United Kingdom or that  he  shares
    the values identified by  its  laws  and  its  public  services.  As  a
    consequence, I find that he has not accrued a continuous period of  ten
    years residence in the United Kingdom for the purposes of Regulation 27
    of the EEA Regulations 2016.  Therefore, when reaching  a  decision  to
    deport the Appellant the Respondent did not have  to  show  that  there
    were imperative grounds of public security to justify his  deportation.



38.  As a consequence, the test which  the  Respondent  had  to  apply  when
    deciding to deport  the  Appellant  was  the  lower  one  reflected  in
    Regulation 27 of simply whether there were grounds  of  public  policy,
    public security or public health.  It is not contended by the Appellant
    that the decision to deport him was taken unlawfully in order to  serve
    economic ends, in breach of Regulation 27(2) of the  2016  Regulations.
    The Respondent reminded herself of this test  in  Regulation  27(5)  in
    paragraph 33 of her decision and it  is  clear  that  the  decision  to
    deport was taken in the light of the Appellant's criminality. The  fact
    that many of the offences  that  he  committed  were  drug  related  or
    involved violence or dishonesty confirmed that he represented a genuine
    and present and sufficiently serious threat to  public  order  and  the
    maintenance of the laws of the country in which he was living.

39.  The fact that the  Appellant  suffered  from  mental  illness  and  was
    dependent on drugs were factors which had to be  balanced  against  his
    criminality in  the  overall  proportionality  exercise.  However,  the
    evidence indicates that a significant number of agencies including  the
    courts, social services and the  NHS  had  tried  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant  to  tackle  the  difficulties  he  faced  but  that  he  had
    consistently failed to engage with them or had  initially  engaged  and
    then relapsed.

40.  I have taken into account the age at which  the  Appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom and the length of time during  which  the  Appellant
    was previously resident in the United Kingdom but there was no evidence
    that, once he left college, the Appellant had entered employment in the
    United Kingdom or sought help in order to do  so.  There  was  also  no
    evidence of any other links with  the  community  he  may  have  formed
    whilst living here.

41.  Counsel for the Appellant relied  on  the  strong  bond  which  existed
    between the Appellant and his mother who was still living in the United
    Kingdom. However, apart from her witness statement and her presence  at
    the resumed hearing,  there  was  little  detail  about  this  bond.  I
    remained unclear whether the Appellant had lived with her or his father
    during his childhood or what contact they had had since the date of her
    witness statement, which was 28 July 2018.

42.  I have also taken into account  the  fact,  whilst  the  Appellant  was
    living and offending in the  United  Kingdom,  he  was  suffering  from
    paranoid schizophrenia, which was exacerbated by substance  abuse.  The
    evidence indicates that he was offered treatment  in  relation  to  his
    drug dependence and his mental ill health on a number of occasions  but
    that these interventions were largely unsuccessful.

43.  I have also reminded myself of the fundamental  interests  of  society,
    listed in Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations.  The offences of violence
    committed by the Appellant compromised the UK authorities'  ability  to
    maintain public order. His drug dependence  and  associated  crimes  of
    dishonesty also threatened to cause social harm  to  other  members  of
    society.

44.  The nature of each of his individual offences may not  have  been  very
    serious but the consistency of his offending, which  involved  violence
    and the misuse of drugs, and his refusal to engage with  programmes  to
    assist him were relevant features.

45   I accept that, as found in Arranz  (EEA  Regulations  -  deportation  -
    test) Spain [2017] UKUT 294 (IAC), "the burden of proving that a person
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society under Regulation 21(5)(c  )
    of the EEA Regulations rests on the Secretary of State. However, on the
    basis of my findings above, I am of the opinion that she has done so. I
    also find, for the same reasons,  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    integrate into the community here.

46.  In his addendum skeleton argument, the Appellant also  sought  to  rely
    on his presence here for five years  between  8  November  2004  and  7
    November 2009. However, the evidence  indicated  that  the  Appellant's
    mother only started to exercise a treaty right as a worker on  6  April
    2005 and there was insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant was
    exercising his own Treaty rights between 8 November 2004  and  6  April
    2005. In addition, there was no evidence to confirm that his mother was
    a job-seeker between 8 November 2004 and  6  April  2005  or  that  the
    Appellant could rely on Baumbast v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] ICR 1347 at that time.

47.  For all of these reasons, I find that there were no errors  of  law  in
    the Respondent's decision to  deport  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 3 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
