
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th November 2015                |On 4th December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Patryk Kotarba
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of Poland born  on  the  11th  October
         1991. On the 10th June 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Colyer)
         allowed his appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
         deport him.  The Secretary of State now has permission[1] to appeal
         against that decision.

      2. The matter was certified under  Regulation  24AA  of  the  European
         (Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006   ("the   Regulations").   The
         Respondent was deported from the United Kingdom on the  20th  April
         2015 and was present at neither the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,
         nor the hearing before me. Service of the Notice of Hearing had not
         been effective, since the Tribunal has no current address  for  the
         Respondent.  The last known address was his place of  detention  in
         the United Kingdom prior to his removal. I therefore  gave  careful
         consideration as to whether I should proceed to hear the appeal  in
         his absence. I note that the  appeal  forms  which  the  Respondent
         completed when  lodging  his  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         clearly advised him that  he  should  inform  the  Tribunal  if  he
         changed his address. The letter served upon him by the Secretary of
         State (dated 19th February 2015) advised the Respondent that it  is
         his responsibility to stay in touch with the Tribunal if he  wishes
         to pursue his appeal; that letter further advises the Respondent of
         the procedure for applying to re-enter the United Kingdom in  order
         to attend any hearing.   In  light  of  the  information  in  these
         documents, which have both been served  on  the  Respondent,  I  am
         satisfied that it would not be contrary to the interests of justice
         to proceed in his absence. There is nothing before me  to  indicate
         that an adjournment to a later date would result in his  attendance
         or representation.

         The Decision to Deport

      3. The  refusal  letter  dated  19th  February  2015  notes  that  the
         Respondent arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2013  and  has  not
         therefore accrued a sufficient period of  residence  in  accordance
         with the Regulations to attract enhanced protection. The action  to
         deport is therefore taken with reference  to  Regulation  21(5)(a).
         The Secretary of State must show that the Respondent's  removal  is
         justified on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or
         public health.  In making that assessment the  Secretary  of  State
         must have regard to the principles of proportionality. She must  be
         satisfied that  the  Respondent's  conduct  represents  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental  interests  of  society.  The   Respondent's   previous
         criminal convictions cannot in themselves justify deportation.

      4. The Secretary of State believes that the  Respondent's  deportation
         is justified because of the following convictions/sentences against
         him in Poland

           . 4 months imprisonment for 'illegal destruction, concealment or
             damage of a document' (19th July 2010)

           . 6 months for illicit consumption of drugs (25th October 2010)

           . 10 months for theft (8th September 2011)

           .  2  years  imprisonment  for  the  illicit   acquisition   and
             consumption of drugs and robbery (18th December 2013)

           . 10 months for theft (3rd January 2014)

         In addition the Secretary of State weighed in the balance the  fact
         that the Respondent had twice been arrested in the United  Kingdom,
         for suspected breach of the peace and on  suspicion  of  assaulting
         his  brother;  no  charges  were  brought.   These  facts  led  the
         Secretary of State to conclude [at 22] :

             "All of the available  evidence  indicates  that  you  have  a
             propensity to re-offend and  that  you  represent  a  genuine,
             present and sufficiently threat to the public to justify  your
             deportation on grounds of public security"

      5. The letter goes on to consider the Immigration Rules in the context
         of deportation. It is found that the Respondent's circumstances  do
         not engage Article 8 ECHR.

      6. The matter is certified under regulation 24AA on the  grounds  that
         the Respondent would not face serious irreversible harm if removed.

         The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

      7. The first matter in issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  the
         Respondent's nationality. The Secretary of State contends that  the
         Respondent is a Polish national.  In  his  grounds  of  appeal  the
         Respondent has asserted that he was an American, born in New  York.
         Another document suggested  that  he  was  a  dual  Polish-Canadian
         national.   The First-tier Tribunal resolved this matter by finding
         on the balance of probability that the Respondent is American. This
         finding was based on his production of a "poor quality" faxed  copy
         of his American passport, a  birth  certificate  showing  a  Patryk
         Krystal born in Brooklyn, New York on the 11th October 1991 and the
         Respondent's own assertion. There was no  documentary  evidence  to
         establish that he was Polish. The only documents relating to Poland
         were those relating to his criminal convictions.  If the Respondent
         is American as  claimed  then  the  decision  to  deport  him  with
         reference to the EEA Regulations is not in accordance with the  law
         and the appeal must be allowed.

      8. In the alternative the Tribunal  considered  the  position  if  the
         Respondent is Polish, or a dual national of  Poland  and  the  USA.
         The Tribunal examines the details  of  the  offences  committed  in
         Poland. It is noted that no evidence has been provided  as  to  the
         risk  of  re-offending,  either  in  the  UK  or  in  Poland.   The
         determination observes that the Secretary of  State  has  described
         the Respondent's convictions in Poland as relating to  "low  level"
         offences.  The determination then considers the details of the  two
         arrests in the UK,  as  well  as  his  arrest  by  the  immigration
         service.  In respect of the breach of the peace the Tribunal  finds
         this to be a "relatively minor matter". As to the  alleged  assault
         on his brother, there is little  evidence.  The  Tribunal  was  not
         shown a charge sheet, summons or evidence of conviction.

      9. Applying these facts to the  Regulations  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         finds that this  action  is  taken  purely  on  the  basis  of  the
         Respondent's  previous  convictions  in   Poland.    The   Tribunal
         emphasises that the Respondent has no  convictions  in  the  United
         Kingdom and deprecates the Secretary of State's repeated  reference
         to the incidents which led to the  Respondent's  arrests  as  being
         "offences". The determination points out that it  is  not  for  the
         Secretary of State to usurp the  function  of  the  police  or  the
         criminal courts and to treat these matters  as  offences  where  no
         conviction was secured, nor indeed pursued. The Tribunal  sets  out
         relevant legal authorities  and  directs  itself  that  deportation
         under regulation 21(5) can only be justified where it can be  shown
         that there is a genuine and sufficiently serious threat; crucial to
         that assessment would be establishing  a  propensity  to  reoffend.
         Even if this were to be established, the  decision  must  still  be
         proportionate.  Having considered all of these matters the Tribunal
         concludes, at 65, that the Secretary of State has  not  shown  this
         deportation to be justified under the Regulations.

     10. The determination goes  on,  under  a  separate  heading,  to  make
         findings on human rights under the ECHR. The Tribunal  finds  there
         to have been a breach of  Article  6  because  the  Respondent  was
         deprived of a fair hearing when he was deported, and  the  decision
         to be a disproportionate interference with his  Article  8  private
         life.

     11. The appeal is allowed on all grounds.

         The Grounds of Appeal

     12. The Secretary of State  submits  that  the  determination  contains
         material errors of law for the following reasons:

         i) Article 6.

         The Tribunal was wrong as  a  matter  of  fact  to  find  that  the
         Respondent was prevented from returning to take part in his appeal.
         There was a mechanism whereby he could apply to return to the UK in
         order to attend his hearing, and there was therefore no  breach  of
         Article 6. The Directive itself provides for member  states  to  be
         able to exclude individuals pending any redress procedure.

         ii)      The Regulations

         The Tribunal erred in law in referring  to  the  offences  as  "low
         level" but not giving any consideration to whether they might still
         be "serious".

         The arrests in the UK were relevant to a holistic assessment of all
         of the evidence.

         iii)     Nationality

         There was insufficient evidence before the Tribunal  to  warrant  a
         finding that the Respondent is an American national.

         iv)      Article 8

         The Article 8 assessment is flawed for failure to  have  regard  to
         the public interest, in particular those considerations set out  at
         s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         My Findings

     13. I address the grounds in the order of arguable merit.

     14. The Article 8 assessment  contains  no  reference  at  all  to  the
         mandatory public interest considerations set out at s117B.  Nor  is
         it clear to what extent the Respondent  might  have  established  a
         private life in the short time he has spent in  the  UK  such  that
         Article 8 might be engaged.  I am  satisfied,  for  those  reasons,
         that the Tribunal erred in its approach to Article 8.

     15. The  Tribunal  has  nowhere  addressed  the  Secretary  of  State's
         contention that it was always open to the Respondent  to  apply  to
         return to the country in order to attend his appeal.  The  findings
         on Article 6 appear to  have  been  made  without  regard  to  that
         process and as such are flawed.

     16. The finding that the  Respondent  is  an  American  national  would
         appear to have been made on the basis of a poorly copied page of an
         American passport and a birth certificate concerning an  individual
         with a name different to that of the Respondent. I would agree that
         such evidence would, in isolation,  be  insufficient  to  establish
         nationality  to  the   relevant   standard   of   a   'balance   of
         probabilities'.

     17. Those three grounds have identified errors  in  approach.  None  of
         that matters. That is because this appeal  was  also  allowed  with
         reference to the EEA Regulations on the basis that  the  Respondent
         is a Polish national. I am not satisfied that in this  matter,  the
         Secretary of State has identified any error of law  such  that  the
         decision should be set aside. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled,
         indeed obliged, to take into account the fact that  the  Respondent
         had not been convicted of any offence in the United Kingdom. It was
         wrong for the Secretary of State to treat the incidents leading  to
         the Respondent's arrest as convictions capable of illustrating  his
         propensity to  reoffend.   It  would  appear  that  the  Presenting
         Officer on the  day  recognised  as  much  since  it  is  expressly
         recorded at paragraph 12 that she accepted the decision to be based
         on the convictions in Poland. The Tribunal examined the evidence in
         respect of those convictions. It was entitled to take into  account
         the Secretary of State's description of those matters as  amounting
         to a "series of low level offences" and to contrast this conclusion
         with the suggestion that the offending was  so  serious  so  as  to
         justify deportation.  I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  properly
         directed itself to the relevant law and tests and applied these  to
         the facts. It was not satisfied that it had been shown  that  there
         was a propensity  to  reoffend  or  that  the  Respondent  posed  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  justify  his
         deportation.   It was entitled to reach those conclusions  for  the
         reasons that it gives.

     18. There was no error of law in this part of the determination and  it
         must be upheld.

         Decisions

     19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains  no  material
         error of law and it is upheld.

     20. I make no direction for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          28th November 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 2nd July 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Parkes

