
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00348/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 February 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR JAMAC NOOR MAHAMED
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Mascord a legal representative from Lawrence
                    Lupin Solicitors




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the
    Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of  Somalia  who  was
    born on 21 October 1972 ("the claimant"). The Secretary  of  State  was
    given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cockrill ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's  decision  of  18  February  2014  to  make  a
    deportation order against him by virtue of section 32  (5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 2. The Secretary of State's appeal came before me on 4  November  2014.  I
    found that the determination of the FTTJ contained errors  of  law  and
    set aside his decision. My Decision and Directions is set  out  in  the
    Appendix to this determination. I preserved the findings of credibility
    and fact made by the FTTJ and directed  that  the  decision  should  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal  on  submissions  only.  It  is  in  these
    circumstances that the appeal comes back before me.

 3. In addition to the material before the  FTTJ  Ms  Mascord  submitted  a
    skeleton argument, the Immigration Directorate Instructions version 5.0
    dated 28 July 2014 and a small bundle of reports from the International
    Policy Digest, Christian Science Monitor, and  the  Sudan  Tribune.  Mr
    Tufan submitted the Home Office Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
    Somalia dated December 2014 and the country guidance  determination  in
    MOJ and others (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442
    (IAC).

 4. Ms Mascord relied on her skeleton argument and  reminded  me  that  the
    findings of credibility and fact had been preserved.  Past  persecution
    was indicative of current risk. The claimant had been persecuted for  a
    Convention reason; his perceived political opinions. Since the  hearing
    before the FTTJ Ethiopian forces had joined with  AMISOM  (The  African
    Union Mission in Somalia). Earlier, Ethiopian forces had been  involved
    in protracted fighting with Al-Shabab in Somalia and had occupied parts
    of the country. In the light of the report  in  the  Christian  Science
    Monitor the claimant would be perceived  as  having  a  link  with  the
    AMISOM forces and this would make his position even worse in  the  eyes
    of Al-Shabab. I was referred to the UNHCR guidelines in the  claimant's
    bundle before the FTTJ starting at page 221 and in particular page 231.
    The claimant fell into the risk category identified there.

 5. Ms Mascord argued that  whilst  that  might  be  a  generally  improved
    security situation in Somalia the claimant faced a specific risk.  This
    was identified in MOJ. The authorities would not and could not  provide
    him with a sufficiency of protection.  The  claimant  would  be  in  no
    position to hire private security guards; he was not a  rich  man.  She
    relied on AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC).

 6. Internal relocation was not available to the  claimant.  He  could  not
    relocate within Mogadishu which was where he faced the  risk  from  Al-
    Shabab. AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees;  FGM)
    Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) was still  good  authority  for  the
    proposition that he  could  not  relocate  anywhere  else  in  Somalia,
    Somaliland or Puntland.

 7. In relation to the Article 8 human rights grounds, Ms Mascord said that
    the Secretary of State had conceded on pages 12 and 13 of  the  refusal
    letter that it would not be reasonable to expect  the  claimant's  wife
    and children to relocate to Somalia. Given the prevailing conditions in
    Somalia and the fact that the three children aged 8,  11  and  12  were
    British citizens she submitted that it would be unduly harsh to  expect
    them to live there. They had never lived in Somalia and  spent  only  a
    few months in Kenya with their mother. They came to the UK with her  in
    July 1996. Their mother was  an  asylum  seeker  who  obtained  settled
    status in 2002 and became a British citizen in 2004. It would be unduly
    harsh for the claimant to be deported if the children remained here, as
    they were entitled to. There was a report from  an  independent  social
    worker supporting this view. The children's best  interests  outweighed
    the public interest in deporting the  claimant.  Section  117C  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 was now  in  force  and  paragraph  2.5.4  of  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions should be applied.

 8. However, Ms Mascord accepted that if the appeal was allowed  on  asylum
    grounds the humanitarian protection, Articles 3 and 8 grounds would not
    be pursued and I need not consider them.

 9. Mr Tufan reviewed the facts of the case and submitted that the claimant
    was no more than an ordinary lorry driver. He would not be at risk from
    Al-Shabab. He  relied  on  the  Country  Information  and  Guidance  in
    particular the Policy Summary, paragraph 1.4 at page 11  and  paragraph
    2.6.12 to 2.6.19 at page 40. The claimant did not fall  within  any  of
    these risk categories. An enormous number of people were  returning  to
    Somalia. I was referred to the head note summary in MOJ and  paragraphs
    366 to 375, in particular 369. Taking into  account  this  guidance  he
    submitted that the claimant would not be at risk.

10. Mr Tufan accepted that the Article 8 human rights grounds needed to  be
    decided under the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014  and  the  new
    Immigration Rules which came into effect at the end of July  2014.  The
    claimant  could  go  back  to  Somalia  and  make  an  entry  clearance
    application to join his wife and children.

11. Ms Mascord did not wish to reply and I reserved my determination.

12. I will not repeat the facts which formed the basis  of  the  claimant's
    claim for asylum which are  outlined  in  paragraphs  4  to  8  of  the
    Appendix to this Determination. The FTTJ found the appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness and his findings of credibility and  fact,  summarised
    here, are preserved.

13. Both representatives accept that  in  connection  with  the  claim  for
    asylum I need to apply a threefold test. Firstly, does the claimant now
    face a real risk of persecution from Al-Shabab for a Convention reason?
    Secondly, will the  authorities  provide  him  with  a  sufficiency  of
    protection? Thirdly, is internal relocation available to  him?  I  must
    consider the position now. The burden of proof falls  on  the  claimant
    and the standard of proof is that  of  a  real  risk  or  a  reasonable
    likelihood.

14. I find that the claimant is not, as Mr Tufan suggests, just an ordinary
    lorry driver. He  may  have  been  an  ordinary  lorry  driver  but  in
    addition, for reasons which are not clear because they are  within  the
    knowledge of Al-Shabab, but may  have  included  the  opportunities  to
    gather information which travelling as a lorry driver  gave  him,  they
    came to suspect him of working as a spy for the  Ethiopian  government.
    His first period of detention and serious  ill-treatment  was  not  the
    only occasion on which he Al-Shabab showed an adverse interest in  him.
    Subsequent to his escape efforts  were  made  through  his  father  and
    elders in his village to come to some form of reconciliation  with  Al-
    Shabab and an undertaking was given that the claimant did not belong to
    any Ethiopian group and did not work for the Ethiopians.  The  claimant
    was arrested by Ethiopian troops in 2009 and only released on condition
    that he work for them, which he did for about 10 days. This came to the
    attention of Al-Shabab and  they  raided  the  claimant's  village  and
    killed his father. Subsequently, the claimant heard that Al-Shabab were
    still looking for him. In January 2011 he heard  gunshots  outside  the
    place where he was living in Mogadishu. He fled  and  later  discovered
    that in this incident Al-Shabab had killed a friend of his. He returned
    to Mogadishu in 2012 and received a phone call  telling  him  that  Al-
    Shabab were looking for him and threatening to kill  him.  He  fled  to
    Kenya but in a raid by Al-Shabab on  the  home  he  was  occupying  his
    brother was shot in the leg and badly injured.

15. The December 2014 Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
    Somalia: Security and  Humanitarian  Situation  in  South  and  Central
    Somalia states:

         "1.3.5 However in Mogadishu Al-Shabaab  continue  to  target  those
         perceived to be associated with the security forces, any aspect  of
         government or official administration or any NGO  or  international
         organisation. UNHCR identifies amongst its  profiles  of  those  at
         potential risk: "Individuals associated  with,  or  (perceived  as)
         supportive  of  the  Somali  Federal  Government  (SFG)   and   the
         international community, including the AMISOM  forces;  individuals
         in  certain  professions  such  as  journalists,  members  of   the
         judiciary,  humanitarian  workers  and  human   rights   activists,
         teachers and staff of educational facilities, business  people  and
         other people (perceived to be) of means; members of minority groups
         such as members of the Christian religious minority and members  of
         minority clans." [See Country Information for full list of  UNHCR's
         potential risk profiles]"


16. The Policy Summary in the same document at paragraph 1.4, while stating
    that ordinary civilians  returning  to  Mogadishu  after  a  period  of
    absence will in general face no real of persecution or  risk  of  harm,
    sets out in the following bullet points some caveats to which Mr  Tufan
    referred:

         "However,  in  Mogadishu  Al-Shabab  continues  to   target   those
         perceived to be associated with the security forces, any aspect  of
         government or official administration or any NGO  or  international
         organisation." And "those returning  to,  raw  travelling  through,
         areas in south  and  central  Somalia  outside  of  Mogadishu  may,
         nevertheless, face a real risk of harm because of their  individual
         circumstances, particularly those  with  no  recent  experience  of
         living in Somalia, if they are returning  to  live  in,  or  travel
         through, and Al-Shabab controlled area. They will be at  real  risk
         of persecution by Al-Shabab because of actual or imputed  religious
         or political opinion."


17. Paragraphs 2.6.12 to 2.6.19 at page  40  of  the  same  report,  whilst
    indicating that improvements in the security situation in Mogadishu and
    an increasing number of areas in the country has been reflected in  the
    return of "an impressive number of people  from  the  diaspora,"  still
    indicates an implacable continuing hostility by Al-Shabab  towards  the
    returnees who come within the categories in which they have an  adverse
    interest as well as threats to kill them.

18. The summary of the Country Guidance in MOJ prepared by the  authors  of
    the determination states:

         "(i) The country guidance issues addressed  in  this  determination
         are not identical to those engaged with by the Tribunal in AMM  and
         others (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM)  Somalia  CG
         [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC).  Therefore, where country guidance has  been
         given by the Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not addressed  in
         this determination then the guidance provided by AMM shall continue
         to have effect.


         (ii) Generally, a person who is "an ordinary  civilian"  (i.e.  not
         associated with the security forces; any aspect  of  government  or
         official administration or any NGO or  international  organisation)
         on returning to Mogadishu after a period of absence  will  face  no
         real risk of persecution  or  risk  of  harm  such  as  to  require
         protection under Article 3 of the ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive. In particular, he will not be at real risk
         simply on account of having lived in  a  European  location  for  a
         period of time  of  being  viewed  with  suspicion  either  by  the
         authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or by Al  Shabaab
         as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic  integrity  has  been
         compromised by living in a Western country.


         (iii) There has been durable  change  in  the  sense  that  the  Al
         Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no  real
         prospect of a re-established presence within the city. That was not
         the case at the time of the country guidance given by the  Tribunal
         in AMM.


         (iv) The  level  of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-military
         casualties that clearly fall within Al Shabaab target  groups  such
         as politicians, police officers,  government  officials  and  those
         associated with NGOs and  international  organisations,  cannot  be
         precisely  established  by  the  statistical  evidence   which   is
         incomplete and  unreliable.  However,  it  is  established  by  the
         evidence considered as a whole that there has been a  reduction  in
         the level of civilian casualties since 2011,  largely  due  to  the
         cessation  of  confrontational  warfare  within  the  city  and  Al
         Shabab's resort  to  asymmetrical  warfare  on  carefully  selected
         targets. The present level of  casualties  does  not  amount  to  a
         sufficient risk to ordinary  civilians  such  as  to  represent  an
         Article 15(c) risk.


         (v) It is open to  an  ordinary  citizen  of  Mogadishu  to  reduce
         further still his personal exposure  to  the  risk  of  "collateral
         damage" in being caught up in an Al Shabaab  attack  that  was  not
         targeted at him by  avoiding  areas  and  establishments  that  are
         clearly identifiable as likely Al Shabaab targets, and  it  is  not
         unreasonable for him to do so.


         (vi) There is no real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab  for
         civilian citizens of Mogadishu, including for recent returnees from
         the West.


         (vii) A person returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of  absence
         will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,
         for  assistance  in  re-establishing   himself   and   securing   a
         livelihood. Although a returnee may also seek assistance  from  his
         clan members who are not close relatives, such help is only  likely
         to be forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may
         have little to offer.


         (viii)  The  significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
         changed. Clans now provide, potentially, social support  mechanisms
         and assist  with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing  less  of  a
         protection function than previously. There are no clan militias  in
         Mogadishu, no clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based  discriminatory
         treatment, even for minority clan members.


         (ix) If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
         after a period of absence has no nuclear family or close  relatives
         in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
         there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
         circumstances. These  considerations  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to:


             circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
             length of absence from Mogadishu;
             family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
             access to financial resources;
             prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or
             self-employment;
             availability of remittances from abroad;
             means of support during the time spent in the United Kingdom;
             why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  West  no  longer
             enables an
             appellant to secure financial support on return.


         (x) Put another way, it will be for the  person  facing  return  to
         explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
         opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.


         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
         support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and
         who have no real prospect of securing access  to  a  livelihood  on
         return who will  face  the  prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
         falling below that which is acceptable in  humanitarian  protection
         terms.


         (xii) The evidence indicates clearly that it is  not  simply  those
         who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return to  live
         in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)  risk  or
         facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation in
         Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan  with no former links  to
         the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,  family  or
         social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of
         means to establish a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing  financial
         support there will be a real risk of having no alternative  but  to
         live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
         real possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
         below acceptable humanitarian standards."


19. Paragraphs 366 to 375 of MOJ relied on by Mr Tufan state:

         Al Shabaab


         366. That is the backdrop against which we consider  the  level  of
         risk  posed  by  Al  Shabab  for  civilians  in  Mogadishu   today.
         Significant numbers of people have chosen to  return  to  Mogadishu
         and fewer people are choosing to leave.  The  question  we  address
         next is the level of risk they  have  apparently  been  willing  to
         confront by doing so.


         367. As we have observed, an analysis of the reach  of  Al  Shabaab
         into Mogadishu for the purpose of carrying out its violent  attacks
         and their selection  of  targets  is  at  the  very  heart  of  any
         assessment of risk facing those living in the city today and  those
         facing the prospect of returning there after a period of absence.


         368. It is established by the evidence that the approach  taken  by
         Al Shabaab following withdrawal from Mogadishu has  changed.  There
         has been a  cessation  of  confrontational  warfare  and  with  it,
         generally, an end to the use of artillery which, when  used  in  an
         urban area,  was  certain  to  cause  very  significant  levels  of
         civilian casualties. Instead, Al Shabaab has adopted what has  been
         termed asymmetrical warfare, sometimes launching what are  referred
         to as complex attacks, for example with a suicide bomb attack being
         followed up by a second explosion.


         369. It is plain from the evidence that when  planning  attacks  in
         Mogadishu, Al Shabaab selects  its  targets  carefully.  Dr  Mullen
         spoke  in  oral  evidence  of  an  "international  Jihadist  trend"
         emerging, involving a seeking out of strategic targets such as  the
         High Court and hotels expected to be  frequented  by  military  and
         police personnel and prominent  politicians.  Dr  Mullen  described
         this as:


             "... a much more sinister form  of  targeting  geared  towards
             peacemakers..."


         370. Dr Hoehne agreed. He detects evidence of  significant  changes
         in the structure and ideology of Al Shabaab since their  withdrawal
         from Mogadishu. He explained how, since May or  June  2013  it  has
         purged from its ranks those that stood in the way of its version of
         jihad, including some senior commanders. "Pragmatists"  have  given
         way to "radical purists". Those eliminated from Al Shabaab:


             "were those standing for a less extreme course; at least  they
             were not so much in favour of international or "global  jihad"
             but were rather concerned about Somali (national) issues."


         371. There is  ample  evidence  to  establish  precisely  what  the
         targeting strategy of Al Shabaab is and in  our  judgement  neither
         civilians nor returnees are specifically targeted. For example:


             "The international NGO (B), Mogadishu, stated that  al-Shabaab
             does not kill civilians indiscriminately. On the  other  hand,
             when it is staging large scale attacks it  does  not  mind  if
             civilians are killed."


             "UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that there are no recent  reports
             of al-Shabaab having attacked or killed civilians deliberately
             through armed attacks....


             Regarding IED attacks UNDSS, Mogadishu, explained that  remote
             controlled IED  attacks  or  roadside  bombs  tend  to  target
             AMISOM, SNAF and convoys and such attacks sometimes result  in
             the killing of civilians, i.e. collateral damage."


             And in an Aljazeera news report  dated  11  September  2013  a
             spokesman for Al Shabaab, speaking  after  an  attack  on  the
             Parliament building in Mogadishu, is reported as  saying  that
             their attacks in Mogadishu:


             "... have nothing to do with... stopping Somalis  coming  back
             to their country."


         372. Dr Mullen said in oral evidence that, generally,  the  targets
         selected have a link to government or international  aid  agencies.
         In his evidence, Dr Hoehne  drew  upon  the  report  of  the  joint
         mission of the African Union and the  United  Nations  conduced  in
         Somalia between August and September 2013:


             "They target particularly the Government,  State  institutions
             and the international presence working in  Somalia,  including
             the United Nations."


         The omission of any reference to ordinary  civilians  or  returnees
         from the diaspora from this list of primary targets is to be noted.
         Similarly, we  consider  significant  that  neither  civilians  nor
         diaspora returnees are included in the list of those  at  risk  set
         out in the 2014 UNHCR report which we  discussed  when  summarising
         submissions advanced by  Mr  Gill.  There  is  reference  to  those
         opposing Islamic Sharia  and  "apostates"  and  there  is  evidence
         before the Tribunal from some sources that Al Shabaab is likely  to
         regard those returning from the west as "poisoned" by  exposure  to
         an anti-Islamic way of life so  as  to  be  regarded  as  spies  or
         apostates. However, if that  approach  were  thought  to  be  taken
         towards  returnees  generally  we  would  expect  a  more  specific
         reference to have been made. For  those  reasons  we  consider  the
         omission of such a specific reference to diaspora returnees  to  be
         significant.  Further, as the evidence simply  does  not  establish
         that returnees to Mogadishu experience such  targeted  difficulties
         at the hands of Al Shabaab, we are satisfied that there is no  real
         risk arising on that account.


         373. It has been submitted on behalf of  the  appellants  that  the
         bombing of hotels and restaurants does demonstrate  that  civilians
         and returnees from the diaspora in particular, are targeted  by  Al
         Shabaab. In oral  evidence  Dr  Mullen  spoke  of  civilians  being
         regarded by Al Shabaab as being "fair game". But as our analysis of
         the  attacks  highlighted   in   those   submissions   illustrates,
         invariably the establishment has been said to  have  been  selected
         because it is a venue used by government/official or NGO associated
         personnel. There is no reason to suppose that would not be known by
         others who choose to patronise those establishments. Indeed,  there
         are a number of examples of such venues,  which  include  the  more
         expensive hotels and restaurants, being targeted  more  than  once,
         frequently followed by publicly  reported  pronouncements  from  Al
         Shabaab explaining why that target had been attacked.


         374. We are satisfied that the evidence  does  not  establish  that
         "ordinary civilians" including diaspora returnees are  targeted  by
         anyone. Specifically, we are satisfied that the evidence  does  not
         establish  that  "ordinary  civilians"  including  returnees,   are
         targeted by Al Shabaab or the authorities or criminal elements.  We
         are satisfied that it matters not that  a  returnee  who  has  been
         absent for some considerable time would be recognisable as such  by
         his dress, behaviour or language. That perhaps  explains  the  news
         report from May 2013 we discussed above:


             "After  two  decades  of  anarchy  and  misery,  Mogadishu  is
             enjoying something of a renaissance. The spectacular ruins are
             being patched up. Hotels  are  being  built.  There  are  even
             streetlights in some places. And everywhere you hear  accents:
             Texan,  Geordie,  Minnesotan,  south   London,   Scandinavian.
             Somalia's far-flung Diaspora is coming back - in big numbers -
             to visit, to help out, to make money, and to find out if  this
             renaissance has any chance of lasting. The jury is  still  out
             on that one."


         375. Having said that, we accept that whenever an attack  involving
         explosives or gunfire is carried out  within  an  urban  city  area
         there will be a risk of civilian  "collateral  damage"  and  it  is
         clear that civilians are killed and injured  in  the  attacks  that
         continue to be perpetrated in Mogadishu. We accept also  that  some
         attacks have been carried out at venues such as a football  stadium
         and a retail shop, which appears to at least indicate some level of
         targeting  of  civilians.   However,  there   are   other   reasons
         motivating violence in Mogadishu, the evidence suggesting that even
         Al Shabaab members are sometimes available as "guns  for  hire"  to
         those with the resources and motivation  to  hire  them  to  settle
         personal disputes. In any event, such attacks  are  the  exception,
         not the norm."


20. I find that Al-Shabab had an adverse interest in the claimant which  is
    likely to continue to this day. They perceive him to be a spy  who  has
    worked for their long-standing enemies, the Ethiopian  authorities.  If
    that is possible Al-Shabab's view  of  the  Ethiopian  authorities  and
    military is likely to have become even  more  hostile  after  Ethiopian
    joined with the AMISOM forces in January 2014.

21. In one sense were the claimant to return to Mogadishu he  would  be  an
    ordinary  citizen  or  an  ordinary  returnee.  However,  there  is  an
    important factor particular to him which is relevant to risk. It is the
    adverse interest in him by Al-Shabab arising from their perception that
    he has been a spy for the Ethiopian authorities. It is clear  that  Al-
    Shabab  can  and  do  target  individuals  in  Mogadishu.  Because  the
    Ethiopians are now part of AMISOM he is now likely to be  perceived  as
    associated with an international organisation with whom  Al-Shabab  are
    in conflict. He is likely to be identified as a returnee  from  abroad.
    This, whilst it will not on its own put him at risk, is likely make him
    stand out to an extent which  will  increase  the  risk  of  his  being
    identified and the connection made with  his  past  problems  with  Al-
    Shabab. Clearly Al-Shabab are ruthless. They have tortured him  in  the
    past. They are capable of and likely to do this again or  kill  him.  I
    find that  he  has  established  a  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason. The Convention reason  is  his  perceived  political
    opinions as an opponent of Al-Shabab.

22. Mr Tufan did not seek to argue that the authorities would  provide  the
    claimant with a sufficiency of protection. I agree with what Ms Mascord
    sets out in her skeleton, that whilst MOJ was primarily concerned  with
    the general security situation in Mogadishu in relation to  Articles  3
    and 15(c), it contains important  findings  directly  relevant  to  the
    claimant. I find that is no efficient and  effective  police  force  is
    available to  help  civilians  in  Mogadishu;  AMISOM  and  the  Somali
    National  Army  do  not  exist  to  provide  protection  to  individual
    civilians and, whilst is possible for gaps in protection or security to
    be addressed by private security personnel, the claimant will not be in
    a position to procure this sort of help.

23. Furthermore, Mr Tufan did not seek to argue  that  internal  relocation
    would be available to the claimant. I find that he will not be able  to
    relocate within Mogadishu which is where he had his problems  with  Al-
    Shabab in the past. AMM Somalia still provides guidance. The claimant's
    home area was Mogadishu where he faces the current risk from Al-Shabab.
    He cannot go to Somaliland or Puntland and the Secretary of  State  has
    not suggested that he could relocate to any other part  of  Somalia.  I
    find that internal relocation is not available to the claimant.

24. In summary, I find that the appellant has  established  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution for a Convention reason. The authorities in Somalia
    cannot or will not provide him with a  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation is not available to him.

25. Ms Mascord accepted that if the claimant succeeded on asylum grounds he
    would not pursue and it was not necessary for me to address  any  other
    grounds.

26. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction  and  can  see  no
    good reason to do so.

27. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I now remake the decision and
    allow the claimant's appeal on asylum grounds.



Signed:     Date: 8 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
                                  APPENDIX


 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the
    Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Somalia who was
    born on 21 October 1972 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of State has
    been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 18 February 2014 to make a
    deportation order against him by virtue of section 32(5) of the UK
    Borders Act 2007.

 2. The claimant came to this country on 18 June 2013 using a Swedish
    passport to which he was not entitled. He claimed asylum on the basis
    that he feared persecution in Somalia from Al-Shabab. His asylum claim
    was refused on 10 December 2013. The claimant was prosecuted for using
    the false passport, pleaded guilty and was convicted at Chelmsford
    Crown Court on 16 July 2013 of having in his possession or control an
    identity document with intent. He was sentenced to 12 months
    imprisonment.

 3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 8 August 2014.
    Both parties were represented, the claimant by Ms Mascord who appeared
    before me.

 4. The basis of the claim was that the claimant was born in Somalia not
    far from Mogadishu. He lived there with his family. He did not attend
    school and is illiterate. His father worked as a court Registrar but
    was killed by Al-Shabab in 2009. The claimant worked as a lorry driver
    out of Mogadishu. He married in late 2002 or early 2003 and had a son.
    His marriage ended some years ago.

 5. He claimed that his problems started in 2007 when Ethiopian troops came
    to Somalia. He drove his lorry between Somalia and Ethiopia. He was
    accused by Al-Shabab of working as a spy for the Ethiopian government.
    They arrested him and he was held for a month, beaten up, interrogated
    and accused of belonging to a group opposed to Al-Shabab. He managed to
    escape and went to stay in his aunt's house in Mogadishu, in hiding,
    for about six months. He contacted his father and attempts were made to
    come to some form of reconciliation with Al-Shabab. An undertaking was
    given that he was not involved the Ethiopians.

 6. The claimant said that in 2009 he was arrested by Ethiopian troops on
    the Ethiopia/ Somali border. He was detained, held for 10 days and
    released on condition that he worked for the Ethiopians. Al-Shabab came
    to hear about what he was doing, raided his home and killed his father.
    The claimant went back to Mogadishu where he stayed effectively in
    hiding for about two years. In 2010 he heard that Al-Shabab were still
    looking for him. In January 2011 he heard gunshots outside his aunt's
    house where he was staying. He fled and managed to get to Kenya. Later
    he heard that a friend who had helped him get away had been killed by
    Al-Shabab.

 7. The claimant lived in Kenya from 2011 for about 2 � years. He lived
    illegally with a maternal aunt in Nairobi. Whilst there he met the
    woman who later became his wife. He went back to Mogadishu in 2012
    believing that the situation had improved and that he would be able to
    live there with his wife and stepchildren. He received a call on his
    mobile phone from Al-Shabab threatening to kill him. He fled Mogadishu
    and went back to Kenya. He discovered that there had been a raid on the
    home where his brother lived and that his brother had been shot in the
    leg, suffering severe injuries.

 8. The claimant contacted his mother in Mogadishu, she sold her house and
    the money was used to pay an agent who provided the appellant with a
    Swedish passport. He flew to Sweden, stayed there for about 25 days and
    then flew to London where his false passport was detected. He claimed
    asylum. His wife and three stepchildren had come to the UK before him.

 9. The Secretary of State did not accept the claimant's account of events
    and concluded that because Al-Shabab had in effect withdrawn from
    Mogadishu and the claimant had a low profile he would not be at risk.

10. The FTTJ heard evidence from the appellant, his wife and her children.
    He found that the claimant had given a detailed, consistent and
    coherent account of events. He concluded that the claimant was a
    credible witness and accepted his account of events. As a result he was
    entitled to refugee status. The FTTJ went on to consider the appeal on
    Article 8 human rights grounds. He found that the claimant's
    stepchildren had a close and loving attachment to him and that he had
    become their father figure. His removal would have a strongly
    detrimental effect on them. His stepchildren were British citizens who
    could not be expected to go and live in Somalia. The family should be
    allowed to stay together. His offence was at the "very bottom end" of
    the scale. It was concluded that the situation was exceptional,
    outweighed the public interest and that it would be unduly harsh for
    the family and the children if the claimant was deported.

11. The FTTJ allowed the appeal against the making of the deportation
    order, on asylum and human rights grounds.

12. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to
    appeal. It is argued that the FTTJ erred in law in his assessment of
    the claimant's circumstances in relation to both his asylum claim and
    his Article 8 human rights grounds. The FTTJ had applied an incorrect
    test by asking whether the government in Somalia could "exercise full
    and effective control". The claimant had failed to seek government
    protection from Al-Shabab. There had been a failure to give proper
    consideration to the current situation in Somalia in the light of the
    material before the FTTJ. In relation to the Article 8 claim, the FTTJ
    had erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons why the
    deportation of the claimant would be unduly harsh. There had been a
    failure to give proper weight to the public interest in the deportation
    of foreign criminals.

13. Mr Wilding relied on the grounds of appeal and drew my attention to
    paragraph 371 of AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;
    returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) where it was said;
    "Accordingly, except as regards the issue of FGM, it is unlikely that a
    proposed return to Mogadishu at the present time will raise Refugee
    Convention issues. Fact-finders will, nevertheless, need to be alive to
    the possibility of such issues emerging in the future if, for example,
    the city were (as in the past) to become prey to powerful clans,
    enforcing their rule over weaker clans by means of armed militias."

14. Mr Wilding argued that the FTTJ had failed to engage with all the
    relevant issues. He appeared to have muddled up the risk test in
    paragraph 51. At the hearing before the FTTJ the Secretary of State had
    submitted that there had been a durable changes in Mogadishu in the
    context of Article 15C humanitarian protection. In effect, in paragraph
    54, the FTTJ had said that the position had not changed since AMM. The
    FTTJ should have had regard to KAB v Sweden [2013] ECHR 814 at
    paragraphs 89 to 91 dealing with the position in about March to July
    2013.

15. In reply to my question, Mr Wilding agreed that the test which the FTTJ
    should have asked himself was threefold. Firstly, did the claimant face
    a real risk of persecution from Al-Shabab for a Convention reason?
    Secondly, would the authorities provide him with a sufficiency of
    protection? Thirdly, was internal relocation available to him? Mr
    Wilding also agreed that if the answer to the first question was yes
    then, in the current circumstances in Somalia, the answer to the other
    two questions would have to be no. Mr Wilding submitted that in the
    light of the Swedish LANDINFO report as to security and protection in
    Mogadishu and south central Somalia dated May 2013 it was not
    necessarily the case that the claimant would be targeted by Al-Shabab
    in 2014 even in the light of what happened to him in 2011 and 2012. He
    submitted that the FTTJ had failed to give proper reasons for his
    conclusion.

16. In relation to the Article 8 grounds, Mr Wilding accepted that part of
    the FTTJ's reasoning in paragraph 55 relating to paragraph 399 of the
    Immigration Rules was correct at the date of the Secretary of State's
    decision. However, in the light of the Immigration Act 2014 and the
    Immigration Rules in force at the date of the hearing there were
    circumstances in which it could be appropriate to separate the family.
    Where the provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply it would
    only be in very compelling circumstances that the public interest would
    be outweighed. He argued that the reasoning demonstrated muddled
    thinking and failed to take into account the fact that the claimant's
    wife did not have to go with him but could remain with the children. It
    was unhelpful to describe the offence as being at the lower end of the
    scale.

17. Ms Mascord relied on her skeleton argument and accepted that the
    threefold test which I suggested to Mr Wilding was the one which the
    FTTJ should have applied. In that context she pointed out that the FTTJ
    found the claimant entirely credible. That finding was not now disputed
    by the Secretary of State who was confusing the position for the
    general class of persons who might return to Mogadishu with the
    particular circumstances of the claimant. The LANDINFO report had been
    superseded by the Danish report which was before the FTTJ. Whilst Al-
    Shabab no longer controlled Mogadishu they were still carrying out
    attacks and targeted killings. The killings were not just targeted at a
    narrow class of individuals.

18. It was argued that the finding of the Tribunal in AMM as to Refugee
    Convention claims should be read in the context of what was said in
    paragraphs 370 and 371. The Tribunal was not saying that nobody could
    succeed on Refugee Convention grounds. Clan issues were no longer as
    important as they once were. KAB was not binding on me and in any event
    was mainly directed to the question Article 3 risk.

19. In relation to the Article 8 grounds, Ms Mascord accepted that both the
    Immigration Act 2014 and a new Immigration Rules coming into effect on
    28 July 2014 should have been applied by the FTTJ at a hearing after
    that date. Clearly it would be unduly harsh to expect the children to
    go to Somalia and it was open to the FTTJ to conclude that it would
    also be unduly harsh for the family to be split up. The FTTJ's
    description of the offence as being at the bottom end of the scale was
    appropriate, properly leading to the conclusion that less weight should
    be given to the public interest.

20. I was asked to find that there was no error of law, but if there was
    such an error it was not material. Ms Mascord submitted that if I
    concluded that there was a material error of law I could re-determine
    the appeal without hearing further evidence or submissions.

21. In his reply Mr Jarvis submitted that the new country guidance case of
    MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)
    at paragraph 355 to 365 was relevant to the asylum issues in this case.
    It was also relevant because if, on the facts, the appellant was not
    entitled to asylum then his appeal would need to be considered on
    Articles 3 and 15 C grounds. These were still part of the claimant's
    appeal. If I concluded that there were material errors of law further
    submissions would be needed. He suggested that this should be done in
    the Upper Tribunal. Ms Mascord then agreed that this would be the
    appropriate course in the circumstances.

22. I reserved my determination.

23. I find that the determination does contain errors of law. There has
    been confusion as to the proper test to be applied to consideration of
    the asylum claim. In paragraph 51 the FTTJ said; "If the appellant is
    truthful in that account then it seems to be plain that he is entitled
    to refugee status. I should clear up the issue as to the present
    country conditions. I do not consider, looking at the totality of the
    material, that there has been such a marked change in the situation in
    Somalia that it can rightly be said that the government can exercise
    full and effective control. Particularly in the circumstances of this
    appellant's case, where Al-Shabab are targeting him, the risk to the
    appellant, if he is truthful, is extremely high, as I see it. They are
    a violent group who have obviously been involved in a number of violent
    terrorist acts. This is not a question in other words the appellant
    been caught up in some general mayhem or an innocent victim of some
    street grenade incident, this is quite deliberate picking out of the
    appellant as someone who is seen to be opposed to Al-Shabab because of
    perceived association with the Ethiopians." And, in paragraph 54, "I
    conclude, therefore, that as the appellant is credible as to the core
    features of his account that he is indeed entitled to refugee status. I
    conclude that there has not been such a durable change in Somalia to
    mean that the appellants somehow is not going to be at risk from Al-
    Shabab. I repeat that they are a highly dangerous organisation and,
    given that they have targeted him, that he does require international
    protection."

24. In relation to the asylum claim what should have been applied was a
    three-step test. Firstly, did the claimant face a real risk of
    persecution from Al-Shabab for a Convention reason? Secondly, would the
    authorities provide him with a sufficiency of protection? Thirdly, was
    internal relocation available to him? Instead the question asked was
    whether "it can be rightly said that the government can exercise full
    and effective control". The FTTJ appears to have intermixed some
    elements of the requirements for asylum on the one hand and
    humanitarian protection or the other.

25. I find little merit in the submission based on paragraph 377 of AMM
    that "it is unlikely that a proposed return to Mogadishu at the present
    time will raise Refugee Convention issues." AMM is mainly directed to
    issues of Article 15C protection and does not focus on issues such as
    those faced by the claimant. There is no reason why this claim should
    not be one of the unlikely ones.

26. I find that there was an error of law in the conclusion that there had
    not been a durable change in the situation in Somalia, presumably since
    AMM, although this is not entirely clear. There has not been proper
    consideration of all the material before the FTTJ as to how
    circumstances might have changed since AMM. It might have been open to
    the FTTJ to come to this conclusion, but not without proper
    consideration of this material and a reasoned conclusion.

