
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: DA/00565/2016


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision& Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 March 2018                     |On 21 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                         Ausrine Nekrosiute    Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                     And

              Secretary of State for the Home Department  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Burrett, of Counsel, instructed by BHB Law.
For the respondent:    Ms P. Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions

 1. The appellant, a national of Lithuania born on 25 April 1984, has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andonian who, in a decision promulgated  on  5  December  2017
    June 2015 following a hearing on 10 November 2017, dismissed her appeal
    against a decision of the respondent of  4  November  2016  to  make  a
    deportation order under regulation 19(3)(b) and regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at the hearing
    before the judge on 10 November  2017.  The  judge  said  that  he  was
    satisfied that the Notice of Hearing dated 11  October  2017  was  duly
    communicated to the appellant at the address  to  which  she  had  been
    bailed. He decided to proceed in the absence of the appellant  and  any
    representation on her behalf, for the reasons he gave at paras  2-9  of
    his decision. He proceeded to consider the substantive issues under the
    EEA Regulations and in relation to Article 8. He went on to dismiss the
    appeal on each of these grounds.

 3. The grounds of appeal contend that the appellant had not  received  the
    Notice of Hearing dated 11 October 2017. In relation to the  appellant,
    the Notice of Hearing  was  sent  to  the  address  to  which  she  had
    previously been granted bail, on 9 December 2016. This was the  address
    of a [BD] who had stood as surety  for  her  in  connection  with  that
    previous grant of bail. That grant  of  bail  came  to  an  end  on  29
    September 2017 when the appellant  was  taken  into  detention  at  HMP
    Bronzefield on a criminal matter.

 4. At paragraph 2 of his decision, the judge made reference  to  the  fact
    that the respondent's representative (a Mr. D Harvey) had informed  him
    that the appellant had been in prison at HMP Bronzefield on a  criminal
    offence "since 29 September 2017".  However, at para 7 of his decision,
    the judge noted that the Notice of Hearing dated 11  October  2017  had
    been sent to the appellant at the address to which she  had  previously
    been bailed and said, inter alia, that the surety had not informed  the
    court that the appellant was serving another prison term.  This  latter
    comment suggests that the judge was not aware that the appellant was in
    prison as at 11 October 2017, the date of the Notice of Hearing for the
    hearing on 10 November 2017.

 5. At the hearing before, Mr Duffy confirmed that, as at 11 October  2017,
    the appellant  was  in  detention  in  HMP  Bronzefield  and  that  the
    respondent's representative  at  the  hearing  before  the  judge  (Mr.
    Harvey) had informed the judge of that fact.

 6. In view of the fact that the judge had been informed that the appellant
    was in detention as at the date of the Notice of Hearing and  the  fact
    that the Notice of Hearing  was  not  sent  to  the  appellant  at  HMP
    Bronzefield, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in  law  in
    concluding that the Notice of Hearing had been  duly  served.  In  this
    regard, the judge appeared to take into account the fact that [BD], who
    had previously stood as surety for the  appellant,  was  somehow  under
    some obligation to inform the Upper Tribunal that the appellant was  in
    detention. In fact, [BD]'s responsibilities as a surety came to an  end
    when the appellant's bail ended. The appellant's bail  ended  when  she
    was taken into detention on 29 September 2017.

 7. It is clear that the judge was  informed  that  the  appellant  was  in
    detention when the Notice of Hearing was sent  to  the  parties.  Given
    that the Notice of Hearing had not been served on the appellant at  HMP
    Bronzefield, the judge materially erred in law in proceeding  with  the
    hearing of the appeal on the basis that the  appellant  had  been  duly
    served with the Notice of Hearing. As a consequence, the appellant  has
    been deprived of having the opportunity to have an oral hearing.

 8. For the above reasons, I set aside the decision of  Judge  Andonian  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal. None of his findings shall stand.

 9. For the same reasons, I am satisfied that para 7.2(a) of  the  Practice
    Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal (the "Practice Statements") applies.  I
    am therefore satisfied that a remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    the right course of action.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  material
error of law such that the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  set  aside.
This case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  of  the
Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules by a judge  other  than  Judge
of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 19 March 2018
