
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00246/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 17 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WARBY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        JOAO PAULO MONTEIRA FERREIRA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Lemer, instructed by Duncan Lewis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), in a  case  of  removal  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016   ("the
    Regulations").  The appeal is brought with the permission of the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The respondent, ("Mr Ferreira"), is a citizen  of  Portugal,
    born on 2 November 1962.

 2. On 8 March 2018, the Secretary of State decided to remove  Mr  Ferreira
    from the UK on grounds of public policy ("the Decision").  Mr  Ferreira
    challenged the Decision by way of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
    His case  was  that  the  Decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the
    regulation 27 and Schedule 1 of the Regulations,  and/or  that  it  was
    incompatible with his rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the  Convention,
    and thus unlawful by reason of s 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. By a decision and reasons promulgated on 25 March 2019, the FtT  (Judge
    O'Keefe) allowed the appeal, holding  that  the  Decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Regulations. The judge did not  need  to,  and  did
    not, consider the Convention grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed,  with  the  permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal. In summary, the grounds of appeal were that the judge  failed
    to apply or misapplied the Regulations and binding precedent,  reaching
    findings of fact which were not open to her, and provided  insufficient
    reasons for her proportionality assessment. We heard the  appeal  on  8
    October 2019. At the end of the hearing we announced  our  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal, for reasons to be given later. This is  the  formal
    decision and our reasons for it.

    Factual background

 5. The key factual background is relatively straightforward, and  was  not
    contentious before us.  It is set out in detail in the decision of  the
    judge, from paragraph [22]  onwards,  where  the  judge  sets  out  her
    findings of fact. We can outline it shortly.

 6. Mr Ferreira came to the UK in 1991 and, apart from visits  to  Portugal
    from time to time, he has resided here since then. He has  a  long-term
    drug addiction. Between 1994 and the date  of  the  hearing  below,  he
    accumulated 58 convictions for 121 offences, including  99  convictions
    for shoplifting. These  offences  were  mostly  low-level  thefts  from
    supermarkets, carried out to fund his addiction to Class A  drugs.  The
    judge found that all of the offending was "directly related to his long-
    standing addiction to heroin."  The judge also  found  that  whilst  Mr
    Ferreira's record showed that he had offended almost every  year  since
    1994, there had been no convictions between  March  2013  and  December
    2016, and the most recent conviction was in December 2017.

 7. Before the judge, Mr Ferreira  sought  to  dispute  or  play  down  his
    offending to some extent, whilst at the same  time  expressing  remorse
    and shame. The judge rejected his attempts to dispute his guilt of some
    of the offences, and found that he  did  himself  no  favours  by  this
    contradictory stance. She found, however, that there was  a  wealth  of
    evidence that he was now seeking "professional and targeted support" to
    deal with his addiction.

 8. He had completed a six-week course with Mind, and engaged with a  local
    Wellbeing  Centre.  The  offender  manager  assigned  to  Mr   Ferreira
    following his most recent  custodial  sentence  reported  that  he  had
    attended most of  his  appointments,  and  had  engaged  with  offender
    management. His engagement with  treatment  was,  found  the  judge,  a
    factor in the reduction in the rate of his offending.  He had been drug-
    free  since  his  release  from  custody,  save  for   one   "relapse",
    unaccompanied by further offending. Since 29 January 2019 he  had  been
    screened weekly, and found to be drug-free.

 9. In late 2013, Mr Ferreira met Emma Mitchell, a British  national,  with
    whom he established a relationship. They became a couple in 2014. There
    had been a break in their relationship, and at one time they had  lived
    separately, and they seem to have had differing  views  as  to  whether
    they were or were not engaged to be married.   But  the  judge,  having
    considered the evidence about this relationship, found, contrary to the
    case of the Secretary of State, that this was a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship. This was supported by a report from an independent social
    worker, indicating that the couple lived  together  in  Folkestone.  It
    was, she found "clear ... that this relationship has had an  impact  on
    the appellant's offending behaviour although not stopped it entirely."

    The Law

10. Regulation 27 of the Regulations provides, so far as relevant:

         27.- Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public  security
      and public health


         (1)  In this  regulation,  a  "relevant  decision" means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.


         (2) ...


         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of  a  person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.


         (4)  A relevant decision may not be  taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-


             (a)  has a right of permanent residence under  regulation  15
             and who has resided in the United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
             period of at least ten years prior to the  relevant  decision;
             or


             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision  is
             in the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for
             in the Convention on the Rights of the Child  adopted  by  the
             General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 19892.


         (5)  The public policy and public  security  requirements  of  the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights  otherwise  conferred  by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests  of
         society, and where a relevant  decision  is  taken  on  grounds  of
         public  policy  or  public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
         accordance with the following principles-


             (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the   principle   of
          proportionality;


             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;


             (c)  the personal conduct of  the  person  must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking  into  account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does  not  need
             to be imminent;


             (d)  matters isolated from the particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;


             (e)  a person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision;


             (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,  even
             in the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.


         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on the  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security in relation to a  person  ("P")  who  is
         resident in the  United  Kingdom,  the  decision  maker  must  take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health,  family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the  United
         Kingdom, P's  social  and  cultural  integration  into  the  United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin.


         ...


         (8)  A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements  of
         this regulation are met must (in particular)  have  regard  to  the
         considerations contained in Schedule 1  (considerations  of  public
         policy, public security and the fundamental  interests  of  society
         etc.).


11. Schedule 1 contains the following relevant provisions:

         "3.  Where an EEA national or the family member of an EEA  national
         has received a custodial sentence, or is a persistent offender, the
         longer the sentence, or the  more  numerous  the  convictions,  the
         greater the likelihood that the individual's continued presence  in
         the United Kingdom represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting of the fundamental interests of society.


         4.   Little weight is to be attached to the integration of  an  EEA
         national or the family member of an EEA national within the  United
         Kingdom if the alleged integrating links were formed at  or  around
         the same time as-


         (a) the commission of a criminal offence;


         (b)  an  act  otherwise  affecting  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society;


         (c) the EEA national or family member of an EEA national was in
         custody."


         5.   The removal from the United Kingdom of an EEA national or  the
         family member of an EEA national who is able to provide substantive
         evidence of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (for  example,  through
         demonstrating that the EEA national or the family member of an  EEA
         national has successfully reformed or rehabilitated) is less likely
         to be proportionate.


         ...


         7. For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental interests
         of society in the United Kingdom include-


         ...


         (c) preventing social harm;


         ...


         (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family  member  of  an
         EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct of that
         person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused,  public  offence)
         and maintaining public confidence in the ability  of  the  relevant
         authorities to take such action;


         (g) tackling offences likely to cause  harm  to  society  where  an
         immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify  but  where
         there is wider societal harm  (such  as  offences  related  to  the
         misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension as mentioned
         in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European
         Union);


         (h) combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly  in
         relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may otherwise be
         unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation 27);


         ...


         (j) protecting the public; ..."


    The Decision

12. The Secretary of State noted that Mr Ferreira had not demonstrated that
    he had been residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations,  and
    that he had not acquired a permanent right of residence.  Consideration
    had therefore been given to whether his deportation  was  justified  on
    grounds of public policy or public security. The evidence was found  to
    demonstrate a propensity to offend, such that Mr Ferreira represented a
    genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  public  to
    justify deportation. The language is that of Regulation 27(5)(c).

13.  The  decision  letter  went  on   to   consider   the   principle   of
    proportionality  (Regulation  27(5)(a)).  It  reviewed  Mr   Ferreira's
    offending history, the extent to which he had demonstrated respect  for
    the law, remorse,  and  progress  towards  rehabilitation.  The  letter
    considered his age, his health - including his drug use and his  mental
    health -  and his connections with Portugal, before concluding that his
    deportation was proportionate and in the public interest.

    The decision of the FtT judge

14. The judge recorded that  it  was  common  ground  before  her  that  Mr
    Ferreira did not qualify for the higher levels  of  protection  against
    deportation enshrined in Regulations 27(2) and (3). His entitlement was
    to the lesser protection conferred by Regulation 27(5)  in  combination
    with Schedule 1, which has been  described  as  "the  basic  level"  of
    protection.

15. Unsurprisingly, the judge had  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  Mr
    Ferreira was a persistent offender, within paragraph 3 of  Schedule  1:
    [31]. She was also satisfied that his personal  conduct  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. She  identified  in  particular,  the
    fundamental interest specified in Schedule 1, para 7(f).   Mr  Ferreira
    has not sought to challenge those conclusions. The issue, therefore, is
    whether the judge was wrong to allow the appeal, as  she  did,  on  the
    issue of proportionality.

16. The judge's reasoning on that issue was detailed, but can be summarised
    as follows. Mr Ferreira was 56. He was born in Portugal and lived there
    until 1991, and speaks Portuguese. His mother lives in Portugal, but is
    in a care home due to dementia. He has a  daughter  in  Portugal,  with
    whom (contrary to his own account) he  had  been  in  contact  to  some
    extent. On the other hand, he has been here since 1991,  and  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a British national, with  whom
    he is living. He was reliant on benefits and his partner's income,  but
    looking for employment.  There was much evidence to show links  to  the
    community in Folkestone, including a  petition  signed  by  almost  500
    people, opposing his deportation.  That  said,  Mr  Ferreira  had  been
    offending for most of his long residence  in  the  UK.  The  Regulation
    required little weight to be given to  integration  achieved  during  a
    period of offending. There had however been times, including the period
    since 2017, when no offending had occurred, to which some weight  could
    be given. In addition, although his criminal activity was prolific,  no
    single crime could be considered particularly serious; his  record  was
    one of acquisitive crime; he showed no propensity to commit violent  or
    public order offences.

17. The judge  referred  to  the  medical  and  other  evidence  about  the
    appellant's health, and the  practical  support  given  to  him  by  Ms
    Barlett. He had chronic physical health conditions  which  limited  his
    mobility. His condition was progressive and likely to  deteriorate.  Ms
    Bartlett provided support and a high level of care  in  the  community.
    The judge accepted that without that support  he  was  likely  to  lose
    motivation and experience  debilitating  loneliness,  and  to  fail  to
    engage with  the  medical  and  therapeutic  supports  he  required  to
    maintain his physical and mental health.

18. The  judge  considered  the  evidence  relating  to  the  prospects  of
    integration in Portugal. There was evidence from a  Chartered  Clinical
    Psychologist, Roy Shuttleworth, that  the  outcome  of  deportation  to
    Portugal "could be quite catastrophic" for Mr Ferreira's  physical  and
    mental health. His mental state would make it very difficult for him to
    provide adequately for his day to day  existence.  Maintenance  of  his
    current regime of treatments was crucial to  his  physical  and  mental
    health. Significant changes would "hasten his deterioration and  reduce
    his life expectancy ..." The judge's conclusion was that  the  evidence
    demonstrated that Mr Ferreira was suffering from  mental  and  physical
    ill health for which he would require ongoing treatment. Deporting  him
    to Portugal would have a significant adverse effect on both aspects  of
    his health.

19. A material issue, therefore, was the  prospect  of  rehabilitation,  an
    issue considered by this Tribunal in Essa. The judge's approach to  the
    issue was to direct herself by reference to this Tribunal's decision in
    MC (Essa Principles Recast) Portugal [2015]  UKUT  00520  (IAC),  which
    summarised the law in the light of the decision in SSHD  v  Dumliauskas
    [2015] EWCA Civ 145. She found as facts that:-

    1) The risk was that the appellant  would  continue  to  offend  if  he
       continued to misuse drugs, in order to feed his habit. But he  would
       be "highly unlikely to reoffend if he was able to remain drug free".
       He had engaged with local services successfully, bar a brief relapse
       which did not lead to reoffending [44], [48].

    2) There was a reasonable prospect of rehabilitation  in  the  UK;  the
       reduction  in  his  offending  behaviour  "can  be  linked  to   his
       engagement with treatment and the positive influence of" Ms Bartlett
       [45]; her role in ensuring he continued to take his  medication  and
       attended appointments was crucial [46].

    3)  His  prospects  of  continued  rehabilitation  in   Portugal   were
       "considerably lower than they are in the UK"; he  had  forged  links
       with relevant drug  and  alcohol  services  and  other  health  care
       professionals here;  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  Mr
       Ferreira's daughter would be willing or able to  take  on  the  role
       adopted by Ms Bartlett in the UK [46]; there  was  a  risk  that  he
       would not engage with the facilities available in  Portugal  without
       the support he has in the UK: [49].

    4) There was a very real risk to his mental and physical health,  given
       the risk that he would fail to engage promptly with the  appropriate
       services in Portugal: [51].

20. Summarising (at [50-51]) her chief conclusions, the  judge  gave  "some
    weight" to Mr Ferreira's integration into the UK and "some  weight"  to
    the better prospects of rehabilitation in the UK; she gave "substantial
    weight" to his health problems and the  risk  of  harm  to  his  health
    attendant on deportation. She took account of his  links  to  Portugal,
    but noted that they were limited. She took into account the strength of
    the relationship with Ms Mitchell and the support she  provided  to  Mr
    Ferreira.   Overall,  she   concluded   that   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate, and hence not in accordance with the Regulations

    The appeal

21. Ms Cunha did not press the written grounds, which asserted a failure to
    consider factors specified in Schedule 1. Rightly so, in our  judgment.
    The judge made clear reference to Schedule 1, and we are  in  no  doubt
    that she gave consideration to all the listed factors,  in  so  far  as
    they are material to this case.

22. Ms Cunha did seek to persuade us that the judge had made  one  or  more
    errors of law in her approach to the question of  proportionality  and,
    in particular, the application of the Essa principles.  The  judge  had
    accepted that Mr Ferreira's continuing presence in the UK represented a
    threat to society. Rehabilitation, on the authorities, is an  issue  to
    be given little weight in a case concerning someone with  no  right  to
    reside in the UK. The judge had given the matter undue  weight.  In  Mr
    Ferreira's  case,  there  was  no  evidence  the   he   had   in   fact
    rehabilitated, nor was there any evidence that there was a  "reasonable
    prospect" of rehabilitation which might limit his risk  to  society  in
    the UK. Ms Cunha argued that there had been a one-sided approach to the
    assessment of the prospects of rehabilitation.  She  further  submitted
    that the judge had failed to ask herself a key question: what were  the
    prospects of Ms Bartlett continuing to provide the  support  which  the
    judge considered so crucial, given the differing views of the couple as
    to whether or not they were engaged? The reality was that  the  highest
    it could be put was that there was a possibility of rehabilitation.

23. The Tribunal queried whether some of  these  points  could  fairly  and
    properly be advanced. In paragraph [44] of her decision the  judge  set
    out in full the headnote  to  MC  (Essa  Principles  Recast)  Portugal,
    including  paragraph  5,  which  reads,  "Reference  to  prospects   of
    rehabilitation concerns reasonable prospects of  a  person  ceasing  to
    commit crime ... not  the  mere  possibility  of  rehabilitation."   In
    paragraph [45], the judge found in terms that  there  were  "reasonable
    prospects" of rehabilitation.   It  also  seemed  to  us  difficult  to
    maintain that the judge had given undue  weight  to  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation, when she  twice  reminded  herself  of  what  the  Essa
    principles say about the weight that should be  given  to  the  matter.
    Pressed by the Tribunal to encapsulate the Secretary of State's grounds
    of appeal, Ms Cunha confirmed that she was not seeking to suggest  that
    these passages amounted to nothing more than lip service.  Her  central
    contention was that the judge's decision on this aspect of the case was
    Wednesbury irrational.

    Our assessment

24. The issue before the FtT was whether the decision was proportionate  to
    the public interest aim  pursued,  having  regard  to  the  appellant's
    health, family and economic situation, his length of residence  in  the
    UK, his social and cultural integration here, and  the  extent  of  his
    links abroad, as well as  the  public  interest  factors  specified  in
    Schedule 1 to the Regulations.  The  judge  was  required  to  make  an
    evaluative judgment, that took account of all the material facts.  This
    Tribunal would not  interfere  with  such  an  assessment,  unless  the
    appellant in this Tribunal was able  to  show  that  the  decision  was
    infected by an error of law.

25. We see no merit in the criticisms contained in the grounds  of  appeal,
    and initially advanced in argument by Ms Cunha, that the  judge  failed
    to have regard to the factors listed in Schedule 1 to the  Regulations,
    or failed to apply the relevant authorities. As we have indicated,  the
    decision of Judge O'Keefe expressly cites the legal materials to  which
    she  is  alleged  to  have  failed  to  have  regard,  identifies   the
    appropriate tests, and expressly applies them.

26. A suggestion was made in the grounds  and  skeleton  argument  for  the
    Secretary of State, that there was a conflict or inconsistency  between
    (1) the judge's acceptance that Mr Ferreira represents a present threat
    to society and (2) her findings in relation to rehabilitation. This  is
    a false dichotomy. The first issue concerns the situation as it  stands
    at the time of the Tribunal's decision, and is concerned with the  risk
    that something may happen in the future. The second issue is  what  may
    come to pass in the future, and the degree of likelihood of it happing;
    the  question,  to  be  precise,  is   whether   the   "prospects"   of
    rehabilitation are reasonable. The fact  that  Mr  Ferreira  could  not
    demonstrate that he was already rehabilitated was relevant,  but  could
    not properly be viewed as determinative of  what  might  reasonably  be
    expected in the future.

27. The grounds of appeal, and to some extent Ms Cunha's submissions to us,
    criticised Judge O'Keefe for allegedly overlooking material  facts,  or
    failing to make  findings,  or  providing  an  insufficiently  reasoned
    decision. We see no merit in  any  of  those  criticisms.  The  grounds
    complain, for example, that  the  judge  made  no  finding  as  to  the
    likelihood of Mr Ferreira's rehabilitation if Ms Barrett  travelled  to
    Portugal with him, if he was deported. But, as the  judge  recorded  at
    [16], Mr Ferreira's case was that he could not expect her to  do  this,
    her whole life being in the UK. We see no sign that this was challenged
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.

28. In our judgment, Mr Lemer was right to submit  that  the  Secretary  of
    State comes nowhere near making out a case of irrationality. The  judge
    identified the applicable principles, reviewed the  relevant  evidence,
    made findings of fact which were open to  her  on  that  evidence,  and
    arrived at an assessment of proportionality which cannot be impugned as
    irrational.

29. The reality is that this appeal is borne of  little  if  anything  more
    than disagreement with the decision of the FtT  judge.   That  decision
    was one which the judge was entitled to reach on  the  evidence  before
    her. The Secretary of State has failed to establish any of  the  errors
    of law which have been alleged, and the decision of the FtT must stand.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Warby         Date 16 October 2019
The Hon Mr Justice Warby, sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
