
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00095/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 2 February 2017                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by Marsans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department but
    I shall refer to the parties as they were described before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that is the Secretary of State as the respondent  and  SC
    as the appellant.  The Secretary of  State  appealed,  with  permission
    granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin,  against  a  decision
    promulgated by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hanbury on  4  November
    2016.   Judge  Hanbury  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision on 12 March 2015  to  make  a  deportation  order
    against him  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  and  21  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. The appellant is a national of Germany, of  Tamil  ethnicity,  born  in
    1993 and he entered the United Kingdom in 2001 when he was 8 years old.
     He has lived in the UK since and on 16 December 2004 the  family  were
    issued with UK residence permits valid until  16  December  2009.   The
    permits were not formally extended after that time, albeit  the  family
    continued to reside in the UK.

 3. On 4 March 2013, some twelve years after coming to the UK, the claimant
    was convicted of one count of sexual assault on a female by penetration
    and two counts of rape of a female aged 16 or over.  On  2  April  2013
    the appellant was sentenced to a total of six years' imprisonment.  The
    victim  was  the  claimant's  former  girlfriend.    Both   came   from
    traditional and conservative  families  that  did  not  condone  sexual
    activity outside marriage.  The offences occurred on  23  and  24  June
    2012 and it is stated that the appellant  effectively  blackmailed  his
    victim into having non-consensual sex  by  threatening  to  inform  her
    family of their relationship.  The  appellant  pleaded  not  guilty  at
    trial and the victim was required to undergo cross-examination.

 4. The Secretary of State's decision letter identified  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant had been resident in the United Kingdom  in
    accordance with the 2006 EEA Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
    five years because he had failed to provide sufficient evidence of  his
    continuous residence.  It was not accepted he  had  acquired  permanent
    residence and it was not accepted he had been continuously resident  in
    the United Kingdom for ten years in accordance with the EEA Regulations
    as he had failed to  provide  sufficient  evidence  of  his  length  of
    continuous residence.

 5. Assessment  of  the  threat  that  the  appellant  posed  was  made  at
    paragraphs 18 to 28 of the refusal  letter.   He  was  subject  to  the
    minimum level of multi-agency public protection arrangements (level  1)
    which was an indication that he was considered to pose continuing risk.
     There was a requirement that  he  registered  on  the  Sex  Offenders'
    Register indefinitely and that in his NOMS 1 assessment he was found by
    the offender manager to pose a medium risk of harm to  a  known  adult.
    It was identified that rape was amongst the very worst kind of  offence
    from which the public should be protected.  The long-term psychological
    harm to the victim was taken into account together  with  that  of  her
    family. The sentencing judge's remarks were also set out in the refusal
    letter and a number of aggravating factors were  identified  such  that
    the appellant failed to use protection during sex, had made threats  of
    a kind of blackmail and subjected the victim to cross-examination.   It
    is added that this was classified as a sustained attack and  there  was
    an abuse of trust.   It  was  identified  that  the  appellant  had  no
    previous conviction of any kind and had been doing well academically.

 6. The decision letter recorded  that  the  offender  manager  in  NOMS  1
    assessment found the appellant posed a low risk of re-offending with  a
    medium risk of harm should he re-offend.  Further there was no evidence
    that he had completed any programmes that could reduce the risk of  him
    re-offending in the future.  It was concluded that he had a  propensity
    to re-offend and he represented a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat to the public to justify his deportation.

 7. In relation to rehabilitation there was no evidence he  had  undertaken
    any rehabilitative work whilst in custody.  There was no reason why  he
    could not work towards rehabilitation in Germany.  It was concluded  he
    had committed serious criminal offences in the UK and given the  threat
    of serious harm that he posed to  the  public  it  was  considered  his
    personal circumstances did not preclude his deportation being pursued.

 8. The recent immigration history before the Immigration  Tribunal  is  as
    follows.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore on  24
    March 2016 who allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  an
    application for permission to appeal on the basis of an  error  of  law
    and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum  set  aside  that  decision  preserving
    paragraphs 24  and  26  only.   UTJ  Blum  identified  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moore had failed to apply correctly MG (prison - Article
    28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT  392  (IAC)  which
    considered the judgment of the Court of Justice of the  European  Union
    in KC-400/12 (SSHD and MG) and the meaning of the "enhanced protection"
    provision.  The CJEU case made clear that the ten year period should be
    calculated by counting back from the date  of  the  expulsion  decision
    (the  deportation  decision)  and  that,  in  principle,   periods   of
    imprisonment interrupted the continuity of the period of residence.   A
    period of imprisonment did not however  necessarily  prevent  a  person
    from  qualifying  from  enhanced  protection   if   that   person   was
    sufficiently integrated even though according to the  same  judgment  a
    period of imprisonment had a negative impact  insofar  as  establishing
    integration was concerned.

 9. As such the matter was remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury.

10. The Secretary of  State  proceeded  to  appeal  that  determination  on
    grounds including

         (i) that the judge had failed to follow MG (prison: Article  28(3))
         and where it was confirmed that for the purpose of Regulation 21(4)
         the ten year period of residence must in  principle  be  continuous
         and calculated back from the deportation decision.  In other  words
         the correct approach to the question of the existence or not of the
         imperative grounds of public security test at Regulation 21(4)  had
         not been applied.  It was suggested that counting back he  had  not
         acquired the ten  years'  residence  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
         Regulations.  Any ten  years'  residence  still  needed  to  be  in
         accordance with the Regulations and he would  still  need  to  show
         that he had been genuinely integrated during that period.   It  was
         also submitted that the  appellant  needed  to  show  that  he  had
         obtained the requisite  five  years'  qualifying  residence  for  a
         permanent right of residence at some point during that  period  and
         that was the stepping stone  to  the  act  of  genuine  integration
         following Onuekwere v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EUECJ C-378/12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to make
         any reference as to how the appellant has established  five  years'
         continuous residence in the Regulations.

         (ii) The Secretary of State from paragraph 9 of her grounds onwards
         also asserted that  the  applicant  was  obliged  to  show  if  the
         appellant fell into the 'maybe' class of  case  under  MG  why  his
         alleged integration, even if proved as arguably above on the  basis
         of previous compliance with the Regulations, had not been broken by
         the act of imprisonment and  the  associated  criminality  in  this
         case.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  it  was  argued  failed  at
         paragraph 48 to consider the level of his integration in the  light
         of his conviction and sentence of six years' imprisonment for  rape
         and  sexual  assault.   He  committed  this  offence  before  being
         imprisoned in June 2012 demonstrating his disregard in the laws  of
         the UK.  Furthermore, the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
         aggravating features of the  appellant's  offending  and  this  was
         crucial to the assessment of integration.  Further it was submitted
         at paragraph 10 of the grounds that the  appellant  had  failed  to
         take responsibility for his actions.

         (iii) As a separate argument it was submitted that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had  materially  misunderstood  what  "serious"  was  when
         considering whether the applicant had acquired a permanent right of
         residence.  Even if the lower  level  of  protection  applied  then
         "they would question whether there are serious  grounds  of  public
         policy and public security  in  this  case".   The  fact  that  the
         applicant's offending was in a domestic context and  therefore  was
         not a general threat was  an  example  of  the  judge  misdirecting
         himself.  The offence was very serious and all future partners were
         members of the public and would be at risk.  It was also  noted  at
         [49] that the judge appeared to make  a  contradictory  finding  in
         relation to the risk posed.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Norton confirmed that he only relied on the
    grounds as from paragraph 9 onwards  (that  is  (ii)  and  (iii)).   He
    accepted that the second level of protection had  been  established  by
    the appellant.

12. Mr Bazini submitted that there had been a concession at the hearing  by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer that at paragraph 21(3), that is the
    second level of protection had been established, because the  appellant
    had been living in the  UK  whilst  his  father  had  exercised  treaty
    rights.  Mr Norton confirmed that he had considered the file and agreed
    that there had been evidence that the father had been exercising treaty
    rights whilst he was in the United Kingdom.  Mr Norton agreed that  the
    grounds related to the level of integration and the seriousness and did
    not take it further than that.

13. Mr Bazini submitted that the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hanbury  had  accepted  that  the  level  of
    protection in relation to paragraph 21(3) applied on the basis of  five
    years' residence.  Mr Bazini also referred to  Supreme  Court  case  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Franco Vomero [2016]  UKSC
    49 which, at paragraph 26, confirmed that there was no identified  need
    for a right of permanent residence in order  for  a  union  citizen  to
    invoke enhanced protection and that if any right of  residence  at  all
    was required in this context a simple right to reside should suffice.

Conclusions

14. The headnote of MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a)  of  Citizens  Directive)
    Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) reads as follows:

         "(1)     Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  contains  the
             requirement that for those who have resided in the host member
             state for the previous 10 years, an  expulsion  decision  made
             against them must be based upon imperative grounds  of  public
             security.

         (2)       There is a tension  in  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
             Justice of the European Communities in Case C-400/12 Secretary
             of State v MG, ECLI:EU:C:2014:9 , in respect of the meaning of
             the "enhanced protection" provision.

         (3)       The judgment should  be  understood  as  meaning  that  a
             period  of  imprisonment  during  those  10  years  does   not
             necessarily prevent a  person  from  qualifying  for  enhanced
             protection if that person is sufficiently integrated. However,
             according to the same judgment, a period of imprisonment  must
             have a negative impact in so far as  establishing  integration
             is concerned.".

15. Warsame sets out that it is possible to track the  10  years  residence
    back from the date of imprisonment rather than  the  Deportation  Order
    whereby the level of integration must be assessed.

         "[9]     ...Be all that as it may, Mr  Greatorex  submits  that  FV
         (Italy), on which the second Upper Tribunal determination depended,
         is no longer good law. He further  submits  that  any  sentence  of
         imprisonment in the ten years before the deportation order must  in
         principle prevent an applicant from accruing 10  years'  residence.
         He accepts that there is a  "maybe"  category  of  cases  under  MG
         (Portugal) where a person has resided in the host state during  the
         ten years prior to imprisonment, depending on an overall assessment
         of whether integrating links have been broken,  and  that  in  such
         cases it  might  be  relevant  to  determine,  by  way  of  overall
         assessment, the degree of integration in the host member  state  or
         the extent to which links with the original member state have  been
         broken..."

16. As recorded above, Mr Norton abandoned the ground (i) of the  challenge
    and which  referred  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirecting
    himself with regard the 10 years residence.    It  is  clear  from  the
    decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hanbury  that  the  judge  was
    referred to and he applied the case of Ahmed Warsame v SSHD [2016] EWCA
    Civ 16.  In considering whether an EEA national should be removed after
    residing in the UK for ten years prior to the  offence,  Judge  Hanbury
    identified that an overall  assessment  had  to  be  made  whether  the
    appellant had integrated with the host country.

17. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury noted at paragraphs [10] and [11] the
    following:

         10.      Mr Bazini went on to outline the issues as follows:

             (1) whether the appellant had become sufficiently  integrated;
                  and

             (2) whether or not he posed a threat of  a  particularly  high
                  level of risk to security of the public.

         11.      Helpfully, Mr Bryant, who  appeared  for  the  respondent,
             broadly agreed with those being the issues."

18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury also noted that Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Blum had preserved the findings of  fact  and  conclusions  from  Judge
    Moore's decision at paragraph 22 and 26 which read as follows:

         "22.     I am satisfied that this appellant entered the UK when  he
             was  approximately  8  years  of  age  in   2001.    In   such
             circumstances he has therefore lived in the UK for  in  excess
             of 14  years.   Reference  to  the  appellant's  supplementary
             bundle clearly demonstrates that for every year  between  2003
             and 2013 this appellant resided in the UK.  Whilst the  oldest
             document is a Karate  award  dated  31st  January  2003  I  am
             nevertheless satisfied that it must have been some little time
             prior to that date that the appellant entered the UK, and I am
             willing to accept in these circumstances  that  the  appellant
             entered the UK on 29th  August  2001.   The  evidence  of  the
             sister of the appellant supports the claim of residence in the
             UK, and I find  no  reason  to  doubt  the  veracity  of  such
             evidence which concurs with the evidence  of  the  appellant's
             mother given at this hearing.

         ...

         26.      Turning to the  issue  of  the  index  offences  they  are
             undoubtedly serious and involved an abuse of trust against the
             appellant's girlfriend.  This is aggravated by the  fact  that
             this appellant pleaded not guilty at his trial which  at  that
             time clearly  would  not  have  demonstrated  the  appropriate
             regret and remorse, though I have no doubt that this appellant
             at the present time having been sentenced to imprisonment  has
             had time to reflect, and now genuinely  regrets  his  conduct,
             and is remorseful and understands the trauma that  has  placed
             his victim under  up  until  his  conviction.   The  appellant
             accepted that there were aggravated features which included  a
             kind of  blackmail  by  threatening  to  inform  his  victim's
             parents.  However, I also take note that the sentencing  judge
             recorded that both the appellant and his  girlfriend  '...were
             both young and inexperienced'.   He  further  noted  that  the
             victim did not wish the appellant 'any harm', and  that  these
             were her words and not those of  the  sentencing  judge.   The
             victim also wished 'to remain  on  friendly  terms'  with  the
             appellant.  The sentencing judge found the appellant to be  at
             that time lacking in maturity.  I think it also worthy to note
             that the sentencing judge found the offences to be 'completely
             out of character', and that  the  appellant  had  no  previous
             convictions of any kind.  The judge also recorded that he  had
             carefully read the pre-sentence report  which  suggested  that
             the appellant was of 'low risk of re-offending', and the judge
             went further in recording that he would 'hope and expect  that
             that is right'.  It would therefore appear that the judge  had
             an expectation of low risk of re-offending.  In his concluding
             remarks the sentencing judge stated that the  appellant  would
             be sent to a young offender's institution until he reached his
             21st birthday and then transferred  to  an  adult  prison  and
             thereafter be eligible for release after half that sentence or
             maybe something less, and then be placed on licence thereafter
             until the end of 6 years.   That  was  the  anticipated  penal
             process, but the sentencing judge  significantly  in  my  view
             recorded the following:

                  'I do not think it will apply, but if you were  to  commit
                  any offence thereafter during  that  period  you  will  be
                  liable to be recalled to prison'.

             It would therefore appear to that sentencing judge  who  heard
             all the evidence that he was of the view that  this  appellant
             would not be recalled to prison due to the commission of  'any
             offence' during the period of licence."

    These  paragraphs  formed   the   starting   point   of   the   judge's
    determination.

19. The key sections of Judge  Hanbury's  determination  were  set  out  at
    paragraphs 44 to 49 and to which I refer below.

20. In his decision  Judge  Hanbury  referred  to  the  various  levels  of
    protection available to EEA nationals such as the appellant  and  these
    are set out at paragraph 45.   Judge  Hanbury  referred  to  the  legal
    position as set out such that a claimant who had resided in the UK  for
    a continuous period of ten years prior to his incarceration could  only
    avail himself of the highest level of protection if he had sufficiently
    integrated into the UK society.  There is some tension in the  judgment
    of the CJEU as referred to by the Upper Tribunal in MG whereby a period
    of imprisonment can be included in  the  period  before  the  ten  year
    period but that also the period of imprisonment has a  negative  impact
    insofar as establishing integration.

21. It is clear that the judge at paragraph 44 accepted that the  appellant
    had resided in the UK  continuously  for  a  period  of  ten  years  by
    implication and there was a concession by Mr Norton that the father was
    living in accordance with the EEA  Regulations.  The  file  showed  his
    father was exercising treaty rights.  At paragraph 2  of  his  decision
    the judge had set out that the appellant was born in 1993, entered  the
    UK in 2001 at the age of 8 years old, and  thereafter  was  at  school.
    The judge recorded that the appellant was in fact convicted  of  sexual
    offences on 4 March 2013 and that the  appellant  was  sentenced  on  2
    April 2013 to six years'  imprisonment  for  those  offences.   He  was
    informed by the respondent on  22  May  2013  that  he  was  liable  to
    deportation by way of service of an ICD.0350 and on 16  March  2015  he
    was served with a decision for deportation  and  a  signed  deportation
    order. By the date of his sentence of imprisonment on  2nd  April  2013
    the appellant was still under the age of 21 years thus dependent on his
    father under the EEA Regulations and living in accordance with the  EEA
    Regulations.  He was thus a 'family member'.

22. Whether the ten years prior to imprisonment has been broken will depend
    by way of overall assessment on the degree of  integration.   As  noted
    above, the judge at paragraph 11 of his determination  identified  that
    the Home Office Presenting Officer at the  First-tier  Tribunal  agreed
    that one of the two questions in issue was whether  the  appellant  had
    become sufficiently integrated.  Paragraph [45] of the  decision  shows
    that the judge did proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  highest  level  of
    protection.  As recorded in the decision, there was  a  great  deal  of
    common ground between the advocates and the facts were essentially  not
    in issue.  At paragraph 49 the judge identified:

         "it was accepted that the appellant had resided in  the  UK  for  a
         continuous period of at least ten years".

23. The question of integration  was  indeed  addressed  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph [48] where he referred to the findings of Judge Moore.  As Mr
    Bazini indicated it was difficult to see how much more the judge  could
    have said about integration prior to the period of imprisonment. From a
    reading of the decision as a whole it is clear that the judge concluded
    that the appellant was sufficiently  integrated  and  that  integrating
    links had not been broken and that  by  the  date  of  the  deportation
    decision but also prior to imprisonment the appellant  had  achieved  a
    significant level of integration.  There is no authority on whether  it
    is harder for a child to integrate but from a reading of  the  decision
    it would appear the judge accepted that the  appellant  had  integrated
    throughout his childhood prior to his imprisonment.   The  judge  noted
    that the appellant attended school and  university,  which  contributes
    significantly to the analysis and acceptance of sufficient integration.
     The appellant lived with his  parents  and  his  sister  was  also  at
    University. In other  words  the  whole  family  were  integrated.  The
    appellant had worked at Sainsbury's whilst he was a student.    He  had
    no recollection of Germany from whence the family  came  [12]  and  the
    appellant had gone to primary school in the UK.

24. Even if more were required it is evident from  the  determination  that
    the judge adopted the findings of Judge Moore  and  further  identified
    that the appellant was a child when he came here at the age  of  8  and
    developed during his formative period at school and in part at college.
     The judge overall clearly accepted that the appellant  had  lived  for
    over half his life in the UK and that is in excess of  fourteen  years,
    attended school and university and had many friends here.  All  of  the
    family were in the UK. The judge found that the appellant  had  neither
    friends nor relatives in Germany.

25. Finding that there  must  be  imperative  grounds  of  public  security
    justifying removal the judge found they were not in existence  in  this
    case. The judge recorded at paragraph [39] in  relation  to  imperative
    grounds that the level of threat needed was, 'a particularly high level
    of seriousness' being 'more general  than  a  threat  to  a  particular
    individual'.  The judge addressed himself to the  question  of  whether
    the imprisonment had broken the integrating links  at  paragraph  [33].
    The point was also recorded that it would be bizarre to treat  a  child
    more harshly than an adult and in effect to  conclude  because  of  the
    appellant's dependence on his parents that he could not have integrated
    sufficiently. The judge,  at  paragraph  [47],  clearly  rejected  that
    notion for good reason that an adult but not a child would be  able  to
    establish entitlement to rely on  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

26. The judge considered that the appellant was fully integrated and it  is
    clear from the decision overall found thus his imprisonment  (also  for
    the reasons given in [49] in relation to the offence) did not break his
    integration.

27. The judge at [49] found that even if he was wrong about  that  and  the
    appellant was only entitled to the  lower  level  of  protection  under
    Regulation 21(3), he analysed whether there  were  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public security in this case.  The Secretary of  State
    challenged the judge's treatment and approach to  the  offence  in  his
    reference to the domestic context and  the  failure  to  refer  to  the
    aggravating features.   It was not helpful  that  the  judge  expressed
    himself  poorly  in  referring  to  the  offence  being   against   the
    appellant's girlfriend but the judge did certainly  identify  that  the
    sentencing remarks showed that the offence was out of character and the
    appellant had no previous or subsequent offences.  Although  the  judge
    referred to  the  offence  as  being  in  the  "domestic  context"  and
    therefore did not appear to be  a  general  threat  to  the  public  he
    nonetheless identified that rape was always a serious offence.

28. The seriousness of the offence and  the  circumstances,  including  the
    aggravating features, were indeed referred to in the  paragraph  26  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore's decision which was preserved  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, clearly laid  out  and  these  were  adopted  by  Judge
    Hanbury.  In particular there was reference to the  sentencing  remarks
    by the Sentencing Judge and I set these out.  It is not that the  judge
    considered that the  offence  was  not  serious  but  that  there  were
    extraneous circumstances to take into account.

29.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore,  whose  findings   were   adopted,
    identified  that  the  appellant  "at  the  present  time  having  been
    sentenced to imprisonment has had time to  reflect  and  now  genuinely
    regrets his conduct and is remorseful and understands the  trauma  that
    he placed his victim under up until his conviction."   Judge  Moore  at
    [26] also noted that

         "the appellant accepted that there were aggravating features  which
         included a kind of blackmail by threatening to inform his  victim's
         parents" although the sentencing  judge  recorded  that  "both  the
         appellant   and   his   girlfriend   ...were   both    young    and
         inexperienced"".

         "The sentencing judge found  the  appellant  to  be  at  that  time
         lacking in maturity"

    and that

         "the offences were  completely  out  of  character"  and  that  the
         appellant had "no previous convictions of any kind".

    There was detailed reference to the pre-sentence report which suggested
    that the appellant was at

         "low risk of re-offending".

    Of particular note was that the appellant was placed on licence for six
    years after his release and that Judge Moore at the preserved paragraph
    [26] concluded that the sentencing judge

         "significantly in my view recorded the following -

         'I do not think it will apply,  but  if  you  were  to  commit  any
         offence thereafter during that period you  will  be  liable  to  be
         recalled to prison'.  It would therefore appear to that  sentencing
         judge who heard all the evidence that he was of the view that  this
         appellant would not be recalled to prison due to the commission  of
         any offence during the period of licence."

30. I am not persuaded that the judge misunderstood what "serious" was when
    considering the lower level of protection or diminished the seriousness
    of the offence.  It was a finding that there was an  expectation  of  a
    low risk of re-offending in the light  of  all  the  circumstances  and
    factors to be taken into account.  Overall the judge did not take  into
    account irrelevant circumstantial considerations when  finding  he  was
    not a threat to public policy and made findings open to him and adopted
    preserved findings. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  correctly  addressed
    himself to the issues such as integration, the effect  of  imprisonment
    and the serious nature of the offence. Overall I find no error  in  the
    analysis or approach of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury.

31. I find that the challenge on the  grounds  as  set  out  are  merely  a
    disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

32. As a result I find no error of law and the decision is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date Signed 31st  January
    2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

