
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 27 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                         mr Olaoluwa Adebisi Agbana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, instructed by Birleys Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Mr Olaoluwa Adebisi Agbana was born on 26 August 1976 and
    is a citizen of Nigeria.  The appellant appears  to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom sometime between 2003-2004.  On 26  November  2007,  the
    appellant was arrested in possession of  a  number  of  false  identity
    documents and was convicted on 2 January 2008 and sentenced  to  twelve
    months' imprisonment.  He was advised of his liability  to  deportation
    as a result of his conviction.  The appellant subsequently made a claim
    for asylum which was refused by the respondent on 25  June  2008.   His
    appeal  against  deportation  was  dismissed  on  7  January  2008.   A
    subsequent appeal was dismissed in 2009.

 2. In June 2012, the appellant (by then  an  absconder)  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of drink driving.  He submitted  further  representations  in
    December 2012 and on 25 February 2014 a decision was made to deport the
    appellant.  It was against that decision that the appellant appealed to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lever)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 4 June 2014, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  was
    initially refused permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  but
    permission was granted by Judge O'Connor on 17 November 2014.  Granting
    permission, Judge O'Connor wrote:

         Whilst the appellant cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         399(a) or 399(b)  of  the  Rules  -  given,  inter  alia,  (i)  the
         nationality of his spouse and (ii) that his spouse is able to  care
         for his children it is  arguable  that  the  Tribunal's  First-tier
         Tribunal determination  fails  to  display  a  lawful  adequacy  of
         reasoning in  relation  to  the  consideration  of  the  issues  of
         'exceptional circumstances'  under  paragraph  398  of  the  Rules,
         including in its consideration of whether it would be reasonable to
         require the children to move to Nigeria.

 3. Mr Timson, for the appellant, accepted that the  version  of  paragraph
    399(a) in force as at the date of the application and decision was that
    which provided that an applicant might only succeed if  there  was,  in
    the United Kingdom, no other family  member  who  could  care  for  his
    children; in the case of the  appellant,  that  family  member  is  the
    mother of the children, Precious Ronke Agbana.

 4.  Mr  Timson  submitted  that,  notwithstanding  the  inability  of  the
    appellant to meet the requirements of paragraph 399, he should  succeed
    under the "exceptional circumstances" provisions of paragraph 398.   He
    argued that the judge  had  failed  to  pay  proper  attention  to  the
    statements of the appellant and his partner and to a  report  from  the
    school.  The children (J and N) are both Nigerian citizens.  Mrs Agbana
    has discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 2015.

 5. Judge Lever "entirely agreed" with the reasons  given  in  the  refusal
    letter refusing the appellant's application  under  paragraph  399  and
    399(a). He  then  turned  to  consider  the  question  of  "exceptional
    circumstances" in his determination at [24] et seq.   The  judge  noted
    that Mrs Agbana had herself made a claim  for  asylum  which  had  been
    refused and her appeal subsequently dismissed. It  is  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge  was  puzzled  that,  notwithstanding  the
    outcome of her asylum  application  and  appeal,  Mrs  Agbana  and  the
    children had  been  granted  further  leave  to  remain,  albeit  on  a
    discretionary basis.  At [31], the judge wrote:

         [Mrs Agbana] is Nigerian who has spent most of her life in Nigeria.
          Her children are Nigerian.  They have  had  the  benefit  of  free
         schooling in the UK  as  a  result  of  the  decision  to  grant  a
         discretionary leave.  There was no obstacle to the removal  of  any
         of this family to Nigeria.  On current known evidence it would  not
         be unreasonable to direct the removal of the wife and the  children
         at the termination of the discretionary  leave  in  2015.   In  any
         event, and more importantly, the fact that the appellant's wife and
         children have discretionary leave to remain does  not,  of  course,
         prevent them returning to Nigeria to be with  the  appellant.   The
         children's best interests are to be with both of their  parents  in
         the country of their nationality namely Nigeria and to therefore be
         brought up and to experience her own culture.

         There are no exceptional circumstances in this case nor anything to
         suggest that her circumstances would indicate a  need  to  consider
         the appellant's Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules.   Furthermore
         there is clearly in my view no difficulty in terms of  the  removal
         of the appellant to  Nigeria  nor  for  the  appellant's  wife  and
         children to themselves go to Nigeria to be reunited with him.

 6. It is clear that, in order to establish the  existence  of  exceptional
    circumstances, an appellant must show that his or her circumstances  go
    beyond those considered under the Immigration Rules.   The  version  of
    the Rules applying in  this  case,  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
    because the mother of the children would  be  able  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom to look after  them.   By  Judge  Lever's  reasoning,  a
    different scenario might be envisaged which might properly exclude  any
    recourse the appellant might have to "exceptional circumstances" namely
    that Mrs Agbana and the children move  to  live  in  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant.  It is clear that Judge Lever considered this to be  a  case
    where the duty of the Tribunal to have regard to the best interests  of
    the children might be discharged  by  providing  for  the  children  to
    remain in a family unit with their parents, a family unit  which  would
    leave the United Kingdom together in order to enjoy family life in  the
    country of their nationality.  That was, in  my  opinion,  an  entirely
    proper and reasonable observation.  As Mr McVeety submitted, there are,
    thankfully, no health or educational issues affecting the  children  in
    this case.  There is, indeed, nothing "exceptional"  about  what  would
    seem to be an entirely normal family.  The  evidence  which  Mr  Timson
    submitted established the existence  of  exceptional  circumstances  is
    nothing more than a plea by  both  parents  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the children on grounds that  they  have  lived  here  for
    quite a long time whilst the school reports do no more than record  the
    fact that the children regularly attend lessons.   I  find  that  Judge
    Lever has properly considered all the relevant circumstances  and  that
    his  conclusion  was  clearly  available  to  him  on   the   evidence.
    Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 27 January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
