
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00479/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2013                                |On 16 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                 murat ayhan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey,  born  on  15  August  1984.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 27 February 1997, with  his  parents,  at
    the age of 12.  He  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  24
    February 1998.  He made an application for naturalisation as a  British
    citizen on 10 March  2003  but  that  application  was  refused  on  15
    September 2004, on character grounds.

2.   The appellant is a 27 year old man who is  divorced  and  has  a  child
    with his ex-wife.

3.   The appellant was convicted of a number of offences,  the  key  offence
    for the purposes of this appeal being that committed on 21  April  2011
    when he was  convicted  of  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,
    assault by beating, destroying and damaging  property  and  threats  to
    kill  for  which  he  received  a  sentence  of  twenty   two   months'
    imprisonment.

4.   On 20 September 2011 he was served with a notice informing him  of  his
    liability to deportation.  The appellant sought to appeal against  that
    decision, which appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parker,
    sitting with Mrs J Holt, Non-Legal Member, on 14 January 2013.

5.   The appeal against deportation was  dismissed  as  was  his  appeal  in
    respect of human rights.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision,  essentially  on
    the basis that  the  court  should  have  considered  and  applied  the
    decision of the European Court on Human  Rights  in  Maslov  v  Austria
    1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546 (23 June 2008).  Further it is  contended  that
    there were insufficient findings relating to family life.

7.   Initially the permission to appeal was refused but was  renewed  before
    the Upper Tier Tribunal.  Leave to argue the Maslov test was granted on
    18 March 2013.

8.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

9.   The appellant appeared unrepresented from immigration  detention.   His
    solicitors had not notified the  Tribunal  that  they  were  no  longer
    acting and were contacted by my clerk.  They indicated that  they  were
    not attending because they were without instructions.   Subsequently  a
    letter by facsimile was dispatched  from  Crystal  Partners  Solicitors
    confirming that they did not have any specific  instructions  from  the
    appellant in relation to the matter in court and therefore were  unable
    to provide him with representation.

10.  The letter went on to indicate that if the appellant wished to  provide
    further instructions to Crystal Partners Solicitors they would  request
    an adjournment for five weeks in order for them to meet him  in  prison
    to take his instructions.

11.  It is to be noted that the date of the hearing  was  notified  both  to
    the appellant at Pentonville Prison and to his  solicitors  on  5  June
    2013.  There had been adequate time for representation to be  clarified
    and any instructions taken.  The appellant indicated that he  had  last
    met the solicitors at a bail application and was not very pleased  with
    the service which they had provided to him.

12.  It is to be noted that the appellant was represented by  that  firm  as
    at the date of the original hearing and they had been  instrumental  in
    preparing  the  grounds  of  the  appeal.   Given  that   the   grounds
    essentially sought to raise a matter of law rather than expand  further
    on the facts of the case, it is difficult to understand what  would  be
    gained by any further consultation with the appellant  at  this  stage.
    This  is  particularly  so  given  that  the  appellant  expressed  his
    dissatisfaction with their services in any event.

13.  The appellant himself did not make any request for an  adjournment.   I
    have considered the matter whether it would be in the interests of  the
    appellant to adjourn  the  matter  for  further  representation  to  be
    obtained.  I have come to the conclusion that it would not  be  in  the
    interests of justice for a further delay to be made in respect of  this
    matter.  The issue at large is clearly identified  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and submissions made upon it.

14.  Recognising as I did the practical difficulties facing an appellant  to
    address the court in relation to an error of law, being unrepresented I
    invited Mr Wilding, the Home Office Presenting Officer to  outline  his
    submissions,  thereby  giving  the  appellant   some   opportunity   of
    responding to them.

15.  Mr Wilding first of all submitted that the appellant's  case  could  be
    distinguished from that of Maslov.  In Maslov there were  a  number  of
    particular factors which were found to be of significance.   The  first
    being that the appellant in that case came to Austria at the age  of  6
    years and had therefore spent the vast majority of his  youth  in  that
    country.  By contrast the appellant had come when he was 12 years  old,
    having spent therefore much of his childhood in Turkey.

16.  Secondly, the  offences  to  be  held  against  Maslov  were  committed
    essentially when he was a juvenile whereas the key offences in the case
    of the appellant in the present appeal were committed when  he  was  an
    adult.

17.  It is also considered by the Court in Maslov  that  the  appellant  had
    little connection with his home country and was not able to  speak  the
    language.  By contrast, it was the finding of the Tribunal in the  case
    of the appellant that he had continuing connections in Turkey and spoke
    fluently the Turkish language.  Indeed although the appellant indicated
    he could speak English, he did ask for  the  legal  submissions  of  Mr
    Wilding to be interpreted to him in  the  Turkish  language  which  was
    done.

18.  In Maslov no further  offences  were  committed  after  2000  and  when
    assessing his conduct since the commission of the offences, the Chamber
    attached weight to the period of good conduct after his release.   That
    was not the case of the appellant who has continued to commit  offences
    over a considerable period of time.

19.   Mr Wilding submitted that  the  court  in  Maslov  were  concerned  to
    express a number of factors which  should  be  borne  in  mind  in  the
    application of expulsion.  Those included:-

    (1)  the nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  by  the
         appellant;


    (2)  the length of the appellant's stay in the country from which he or
         she is to be expelled;


    (3)  the time that has elapsed since the offence was committed and  the
         appellant's conduct during that period;


    (4)  the solidarity of social, cultural and family ties with  the  host
         country and with the country of destination.


20.  Mr Wilding submits that the offences committed by  the  appellant  were
    all serious of nature, particularly so the key offences.  He invited me
    to  find  that  the  Tribunal  had  borne  clearly  in  mind   in   the
    determination when it was that he had come and how long he had been  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Tribunal  bore  in  mind  the  nature  of  the
    offences and the appellant's conduct as well as his social and cultural
    ties, both in the host country and in Turkey.

21.  I was invited to find  therefore  that  the  practical  application  of
    Maslov had been incorporated into the  determination  even  though  the
    case itself had not been named as such.

22.  The burden of course of Maslov was to the effect  that  for  a  settled
    migrant who has lawfully spent all or  a  major  part  of  his  or  her
    childhood and youth in the  host  country,  very  serious  reasons  are
    required to justify expulsion.

23.  So far as the very serious reasons are concerned,  Mr  Wilding  invited
    me to find that that was uppermost in the mind  of  the  Tribunal  with
    regard to the nature of the offence.  The  remarks  of  the  sentencing
    Judge were set out in detail at paragraph 15 of the determination.   It
    was a sustained attack by the appellant upon his former wife  at  about
    midnight in the presence of  her  friend,  and  indeed  his  son.   She
    obtained a broken nose and required medical treatment.   The  applicant
    also assaulted Miss Iyam who was the friend,  who  sought  to  try  and
    protect his former wife.  An aggravating feature as specifically  noted
    by the Judge in his sentencing  remarks  was  that  the  child  of  the
    appellant  was  present  and  witnessed  the  whole  matter.   It   was
    significant in  the  mind  of  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  has
    consistently denied that that was the case.

24.  In terms of the serious nature of the matter  my  attention  was  drawn
    indeed to the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550.   In
    that case, Lord Justice Laws  considered  the  balance  between  public
    interest and private right.  It is recognised at paragraph  48  of  the
    judgment that insufficient attention has been paid to the weight to  be
    attached to the  policy  of  deporting  foreign  criminals,  given  its
    endorsement in primary legislation.  The more  serious  the  offending,
    the stronger is the case for deportation and this applies readily to  a
    case where the appellant is  subject  to  automatic  deportation.   The
    pressing nature of the public interest is vividly informed by the  fact
    by Parliament's express declaration that the public interest is injured
    if the criminal's deportation is not effected.  This is particularly so
    in matters of automatic deportations.  Comments in paragraphs 53 and 54
    of that judgment are particularly relied upon in that connection.

25.   The  appellant's  offence  was  not  only  of  extreme  violence   and
    seriousness but one in which the Tribunal was  in  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant continued to pose a high risk of similar offending  and  harm
    to his ex-partner and future partners and his  son  who  witnessed  the
    violence.  There is a medium risk of harm to those who might intervene.
     The Tribunal had in paragraph 48 considered the issue as to whether or
    not there was an indication that the appellant's behaviour would modify
    so as to change the risk.  The Tribunal concluded that there  was  not.
    The OASys assessment was considered in paragraph  49.   That  had  been
    conducted on 11 June 2012, shortly before the appellant's  release,  he
    was assessed as being high risk to children and  known  adults  in  the
    community and medium risk to members of the community in public.

26.  Thus, Mr Wilding submits that on any view there  were  serious  reasons
    which justified expulsion.

27.  I invited any comments from the appellant  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    submissions by Mr Wilding.  He said that currently he was  on  speaking
    terms with his wife and son.  His wife  was  ready  to  provide  him  a
    second chance and so he wished to stay within the jurisdiction to prove
    it.

28.  It is significant that similar  comments  were  made  at  the  original
    hearing.  Both the appellant and  indeed  his  former  wife  had  given
    evidence at the hearing, concerning his close relationship with his son
    and resumed contact with him. This was somewhat surprising in the light
    of the restraining order that had been made by  the  sentencing  court,
    preventing the appellant from contacting his  explanation-wife  or  her
    friend or having any contact with his child.

29.  At  the  hearing  the  appellant's  stepfather  and  cousin  also  gave
    evidence about contact which the appellant had had with Kadir, his son.
     The Tribunal spent considerable time in the determination in assessing
    the nature of the evidence which was given and of  its  quality.   That
    can be seen from paragraphs 20 to paragraph 40 of the determination.

30.  In essence,  and  for  reasons  that  are  carefully  set  out  in  the
    determination, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that what  was  said
    by the appellant and by his wife and other witnesses was not  credible.
    There was a specific finding that the appellant had not been in contact
    with his son and had not seen his son for almost two years.   There  is
    also a finding at paragraph 39 of the determination in particular  that
    the appellant was not remorseful nor had he taken any meaningful  steps
    to address his offending.  It was also the finding of the Tribunal that
    the appellant's son had indeed witnessed part of the  attack.   It  was
    the finding of the Tribunal at paragraph 44  of  the  determination  in
    particular that the appellant had fabricated a claim  to  have  contact
    with his son so as  to  improve  the  prospects  of  his  appeal.   His
    explanation-wife and family members had attempted,  unsuccessfully,  to
    assist him in this endeavour.  The Tribunal went on to say, "we believe
    that the appellant has attempted to use his child to help  him  in  his
    efforts to remain here and we find that this undermines his claim  that
    it is in the child's best interests for his father to remain".

31.  It is to be noted significantly that the relationship  as  between  the
    appellant's ex-wife and himself was a difficult one.  The appellant has
    twice been convicted of offences arising out of  such  a  relationship.
    Indeed, on 8 September 2009 the appellant was convicted of  two  counts
    of battery and of destroying and damaging property and made the subject
    of a community order with an unpaid work requirement.

32.  Although the Tribunal recognised  that  prior  to  his  conviction  the
    appellant had had a relationship with his son, it was considered  that,
    following his conviction and in the light of the restraining order that
    had been made, such contact had ceased for two years.  It was the  view
    of the Tribunal that it was in the best interests  of  Kadir  that  his
    father leave the jurisdiction.  To reside in Turkey would still  permit
    of some contact in the future, should that be permitted or desired.

33.  The Tribunal noted at paragraph 48 that the appellant had  completed  a
    one-to-one domestic violence programme which had not led to any  change
    of behaviour.  The Tribunal considered that they were entitled to place
    weight on the sentencing remarks, pre-sentencing and OASys Reports.

34.  The Tribunal at  paragraph  51  considered  the  social,  cultural  and
    domestic ties with Turkey.  They were  noted.   The  Tribunal  did  not
    accept the contention that the appellant was without ties or support in
    Turkey.

35.  Having considered the determination as a  whole  I  find  it  to  be  a
    careful and well-considered determination.

36.  Although the case of Maslov may not have been cited  explicitly  it  is
    entirely clear that in coming to its findings  the  Tribunal  had  paid
    careful regard to the key factors which are set out in Maslov.  It  has
    borne in mind the connections that the appellant has  with  the  United
    Kingdom and analysed carefully the nature of  his  private  and  family
    life.  The Tribunal has considered his connections  with  Turkey.   The
    panel  considered  the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the  offence  and
    particularly noted that for the most part the offences  were  committed
    when he was an adult and not a juvenile.  Indeed, it was the  beginning
    of his offending in 2003 that had led to his application  for  being  a
    British citizen to being rejected.

37.  In essence, the appellant has committed a serious  crime.   Recognition
    of that serious crime should be given in relation to the provisions  of
    automatic deportation.  The appellant continues to pose  a  very  "high
    risk of offending not only to members of his family but also to a  more
    limited extent, to the wider public".  It is clear  that  the  Tribunal
    found there to be very serious reasons to justify deportation.

38.  The second  ground  contends  that  there  were  insufficient  findings
    relating to private life, bearing in mind the historical nature of  the
    relationship.  The Tribunal clearly had in mind that there had  been  a
    relationship but that that had ceased  to  all  practical  purposes  as
    between the appellant and his former  wife  and,  indeed,  between  the
    appellant and his son, for the reasons as set out in the  determination
    and for the good reason of the violence offered in 2009  and  2011  and
    the  restraining  orders.   The  best  interests  of  the  child   were
    considered and sustainable findings made as to family life.

39.  I find that the Tribunal, in a careful  determination,  has  considered
    all relevant factors and has given adequate reasons for their  findings
    and has considered all relevant as both for, and against the appellant.
     I detect no material error of law in that determination.

40.  In the circumstances therefore the  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.
    The decision therefore  stands.   His  appeal  against  deportation  is
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules.   The  appeal  is  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
