
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00650/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th June, 2013                            |On 3rd July 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                 ebru alcin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Burnett, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer









                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Turkey, who was born on  16th  November,
    1979.  On  4th  January,  2011,  at  Southwark  Crown  Court,  she  was
    convicted of five  offences  of  what  are  described  as  'controlling
    prostitution for gain'.  She was sentenced to  a  term  of  two  years'
    imprisonment.  As a result of her conviction, on  4th  September  2012,
    the respondent made her  the  subject  of  a  Deportation  Order  under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  She appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and her appeal was heard by  a  panel  of  the  Tribunal,
    (First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow sitting with Mr B Bompas)  who  in  a
    determination dated 15th March, 2013, dismissed her appeal.  She sought
    to challenge that determination and did so on the basis of the  failure
    of the Tribunal to make clear properly reasoned findings.

2.   At the hearing before  me  I  indicated  to  Mr  Bramble  that  without
    actually having reached any firm conclusion it did seem to me that  the
    determination lacked clear findings.  I pointed out that  at  paragraph
    19 the Tribunal appeared to accept  the  need  for  making  credibility
    findings, but then failed to make any.  I told Mr Bramble  that  I  was
    happy to be persuaded otherwise, but it appeared on the face of  it  at
    least that the determination was defective.

3.   He drew my attention to paragraph 20 of the determination  and  to  the
    basis of the appellant's claim that members of the  appellant's  family
    in Turkey would come to know that she has been  convicted  of  managing
    brothels in the United Kingdom and  that  she  is  perceived  to  be  a
    prostitute.

4.   He also drew my attention to paragraph 28  where  the  panel  concluded
    that since Turkey is  a  vast  country  with  a  large  population  the
    appellant can reasonably be expected to relocate  to  another  part  of
    Turkey.  The Tribunal point out that it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant to be returned to Turkey.  Mr Bramble accepted  that  the
    findings were brief, but suggested that the findings were adequate.  He
    appeared to accept that the panel's findings  in  relation  to  private
    life in the United Kingdom were  brief.   I  advised  Mr  Bramble  that
    having heard his submissions, I very reluctantly had concluded that the
    determination could not stand.

5.   There are no findings in relation to the appellant's  private  life  at
    all, and reading the determination it appeared to me to  be  devoid  of
    any clear findings of fact.  I accept that there are some findings but,
    in my view they are wholly inadequate  and,  in  the  circumstances,  I
    concluded that  the  correct  course  was  for  me  to  set  aside  the
    determination. Both representatives agreed that they had  no  objection
    to the matter being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   I am satisfied that this is a case which falls square within  paragraph
    7 of the Senior President's Practice Statement given the length of time
    the parties would have to wait for the matter to be re-listed before me
    at Field House  and  that  it  could  conversely  be  heard  relatively
    speedily by the First-tier Tribunal and,  in  view  of  the  overriding
    objective in forming the onward conduct of this appeal, I decided  that
    the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  afresh
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Callow and if appropriate a Non-Legal Member other than Mr P Bompas.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
