
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00954/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 16th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                     and


                               Mr Amir Amirani
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr S Kerr, Karis Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese, and Dr P L Ravenscroft) in which they allowed the  claimant's
    appeal against a decision by the Secretary of State that  the  claimant
    is a foreign criminal who must be deported from the United  Kingdom  as
    he has been convicted of false  imprisonment  and  inflicting  grievous
    bodily harm to which he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  six
    years.

 2. The claimant was born on 24 September 1990 and is a  citizen  of  Iran.
    It is his case that his deportation from the United Kingdom is  not  in
    accordance with Immigration Rules and/or contrary to the  Human  Rights
    Convention, specifically articles 3 and 8.  He has lived in the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 6 and his  family  have  been  naturalised  as
    British citizens.  He states that he has turned  his  life  around  and
    would not be at risk of reoffending.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is set  out  in  detail  in  the  refusal
    letter of 10 May 2013.  In summary she  considered  that  the  claimant
    would not be at risk of persecution on return to Iran either on account
    of his mother's activities before she  left  or  because  he  would  be
    forced to do military service; and, she was not satisfied  that  either
    would put him at risk on return to Iran, finding no sufficient evidence
    that he would come to the adverse attention of the Iranian  authorities
    on return.  She considered also, having had regard to paragraph 398  of
    the Immigration Rules, that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    return to Iran.

 4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal found that there was nothing  on  the
    facts of the case that would put the claimant at risk  on  return  [18]
    and that he would not be at risk of treatment contrary to Article 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention if returned to Iran [19].

 5. The First-tier Tribunal set out paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules
    noting[12], [13]  that it would only be  in  exceptional  circumstances
    that a person's right to family and/or private life would outweigh  the
    public interest in seeing a person deported who had been sentenced to a
    period of imprisonment for at least four  years.   The  Tribunal  found
    that:-

      i) on the evidence, the  claimant  had  satisfied  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 276ADE because he spent more than half his life  in  this
         country and has established a private life under the Rules;

     ii) in the alternative that he met the requirements of Article 8 in the
         test set out in Razgar on the basis of proportionality for the same
         reasons as set out previously.

 6. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law:-

      i) by allowing the appeal under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
         Rules which is not applicable in deportation appeals;

     ii) in failing to give any consideration to the public interest  which,
         given the severity of the offence committed, was significant and in
         respect of which the panel's findings were inadequate [4];

    iii) by failing to take into account the public interest and  to  assess
         the claimant's ties to Iran which is indicative that  the  findings
         with respect to proportionality were fundamentally flawed [6].

 7. On 8 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hemingway granted permission on
    all grounds.

Did the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law?

 8. Mr Jack submitted that the Tribunal's consideration  of  paragraph  398
    was inadequate and in their finding of proportionality  [23]  there  is
    insufficient indication that the Tribunal had taken  into  account  the
    public interest in this case or directed themselves properly as to  the
    facts to be taken into account; nor was there any  indication  of  what
    they had considered on the facts of this  case  were  exceptional  such
    that the deportation would be disproportionate.

 9. Mr Kerr relied on his skeleton argument submitting that the  panel  had
    properly set out the law in their determination and  that  whilst  they
    had not expressly referred to either Maslovv Austria [2006] ECHR 546 or
    Masih (deportation -  public  interest  -  basic  principles)  Pakistan
    [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC) it was  evident  from  their  consideration  of
    these matters that this had been taken into account.  He did,  however,
    accept that there is a difficulty in  arguing  that  the  Tribunal  had
    given proper weight to the public interest  when,  as  here,  they  had
    already  found  that  the  claimant  fell  within  the  terms  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

10. In reply Mr Jack submitted that there had been no real consideration of
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.   He  submitted  also  that  no
    account had been taken of the  claimant's  history  of  offending.   He
    submitted this case could be distinguished from Maslov given  that  the
    most serious offence had been committed when the claimant was an adult.

11. Paragraph 276ADE(1) provides as follows:-

         276 ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of a private life in the UK are that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3 and S-LTR 3.1 in Appendix FM; and..

12. S-LTR in turn provides that:-

         S-LTR 1.1 the applicant will be refused limited leave to remain  on
         grounds of suitability of if any of paragraphs  S-LTR  1.2  to  1.7
         apply

         S-LTR 1.2 the applicant is at the date of application  the  subject
         of a deportation order

         S-LTR 1.2 the presences of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because they have been convicted of  an  offence
         for which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for at  least  4
         years.

13. It is abundantly clear that as the  claimant  in  this  case  had  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four years and is the subject of
    a deportation order that paragraph 276 ADE could not apply.  It  was  a
    serious error of law on the part of the Tribunal to allow the appeal on
    that basis.

14. While the Tribunal held that, in the alternative, the  requirements  of
    Article 8 would be met in any event, it is not evident  that  they  had
    had proper regard to the significant and  weighty  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals particularly those sentenced to a  term  of
    imprisonment of over four years.  Further, it is difficult to  see  how
    proper weight to the public interest could have been considered by  the
    Tribunal when, as  here,  they  wrongly  considered  the  claimant  was
    entitled to remain under the Immigration Rules.

15. The fact-finding of the Tribunal is confined to the most part to  those
    findings  necessary  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE   but   there   is
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  panel  had  considered  those
    matters which would  have  needed  specific  findings  with  regard  to
    paragraph 398.

16. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the errors of law  in  this  case  are
    material.  As both parties were agreed, this is a case which requires a
    further extensive fresh fact-finding exercise and thus it  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard afresh on the issue of deportation.

17. There has been no cross-appeal  by  the  claimant  in  respect  of  the
    finding that his removal would not be in breach of the United Kingdom's
    obligations with regard to the refugee convention or article 3  of  the
    Human Rights Convention and the errors made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    with respect to deportation do not infect those findings.

18. That said, I am aware that there is pending in  the  Upper  Tribunal  a
    appeal which, when promulgated, is likely to give new guidance  on  the
    risks of return to Iran. In the circumstances, it would  not  therefore
    be appropriate to restrict the basis on which this appeal is  remitted,
    and thus I direct that none of the findings  of  fact  reached  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





Summary of Conclusions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and I set it aside.

 2. The matter is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  fresh
    decision on all issues.  None of the findings of fact  reached  by  the
    Tribunal are to stand.

 3. The parties should be aware that the Upper  Tribunal  expects  to  hand
    down within the  next  few  months  a  new  country  guidance  decision
    regarding risks on return to Iran.  It is advisable that that is  taken
    into account when listing the matter for rehearing.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

