

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00470/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 29 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              IRFAAN ALI JUGUT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The respondent, who of course was the appellant before the  First-tier
      Tribunal, is a citizen  of  Mauritius  born  on  11  March  1995.  For
      convenience of expression we shall refer to him in this  determination
      as the claimant and to the appellant as the Secretary of State.


   2. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2000, then aged
      5 years old, with his mother and  younger  brother.  They  came,  with
      entry clearance, to join the appellant's father who was present  as  a
      student. In due course  each  member  of  the  family,  including  the
      claimant, was granted indefinite leave to remain.


   3. The claimant was convicted before the Luton  Crown  Court  of  serious
      offences of robbery, attempted robbery and possession of an  imitation
      firearm. Although then only 15 years old, these  were  not  his  first
      offences and he  was  sentenced  to  3  years  detention  in  a  Young
      Offenders' Institution. As he was under 18 years of age when convicted
      he was not liable to "automatic deportation" under the  provisions  of
      s.32 of the UK Borders Act 2007. Despite that the Secretary of  State,
      who was plainly entitled to take a serious view of  the  offences,  as
      was reflected in what was a lengthy custodial sentence to  be  imposed
      on a 15 year old child, decided that deportation of the  claimant  was
      conducive to the public good so that a  deportation  order  should  be
      made under s.5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

   4. The claimant, who we are told was not in receipt at that time of legal
      advice, did not appeal against that decision and a  deportation  order
      was made on 10 January 2014. Subsequently he did access  legal  advice
      and solicitors  advanced  some  representations  on  his  behalf.  The
      Secretary of State treated those representations as an application  to
      revoke the deportation order but, by a letter  dated  11  March  2014,
      decided not to do so but to maintain the decision that the  claimant's
      deportation was conducive to the public good and not unlawful  because
      of rights protected by article 8 of the  ECHR.  It  was  against  that
      decision that the claimant brought his first appeal.

   5. That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox, sitting with  a
      non-legal member of the Tribunal, on 18 June 2014. By A  determination
      promulgated on 24 June 2014 the judge allowed the appeal. In so  doing
      the judge said:

           "... the real issue in this case is a narrow one..."


      And went on to focus upon paragraph 399A(b) of the  immigration  rules
      and the question of whether the claimant retained any  ties  with  his
      country of nationality. Before we consider what the judge  said  about
      that it is helpful to put it into its context by setting out paragraph
      398 also, so far as is relevant to this  appeal,  in  the  form  those
      rules were at the relevant time:
           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and
           (a) ...
           (b) ...
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive  to
           the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,
           their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
           offender who shows a  particular  disregard  for  the  law,  the
           Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
           paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it will  only
           be in exceptional circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
           deportation will be outweighed by other factors.
           399. ...
           399A. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -
           (a) ...
           (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he  has  spent  at  least
           half of his life  living  continuously  in  the  UK  immediately
           preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting  any
           period of imprisonment) and he has no  ties  (including  social,
           cultural or family) with the country to which he would  have  to
           go if required to leave the UK.
           399B. Where paragraph 399 or 399A applies limited leave  may  be
           granted for periods not exceeding 30 months. Such leave shall be
           given subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State deems
           appropriate. Where a person who has previously  been  granted  a
           period of leave under paragraph 399B would not fall for  refusal
           under paragraph 322(1C),  indefinite  leave  to  remain  may  be
           granted."
   6. It will be seen from this that where a foreign criminal  falls  within
      paragraph 399A the Secretary of State accepts that the public interest
      in his deportation will have been outweighed by other factors so  that
      he may, instead, be granted a period of leave  to  remain.  The  judge
      said, concerning this:


           "... that suffices without more to settle the  "proportionality"
           issue and to prevent deportation. In other words, neither we nor
           the Secretary of State need concern ourselves with such  matters
           as the seriousness of the offences, the risk to  the  public  or
           the need to deter others or to reflect  society's  revulsion  at
           the offending. On the Secretary of State's criteria as enshrined
           in the Rules, deportation would be disproportionate in Article 8
           terms."

   7. The current guidance set out in the IDIs certainly supports that view:


           "Paragraphs 398 to 399A of the Immigration Rules set out when  a
           foreign criminal's private and/or family life will outweigh  the
           public interest in deporting him..."


   8. Thus the focus of the determination  was  upon  the  narrow  issue  of
      whether it could properly be  said  that  the  claimant  had  no  ties
      (including  social,  cultural  or  family)   with   his   country   of
      nationality.

   9. Before embarking upon an examination  of  the  evidence  available  to
      inform that assessment the judge directed  himself  in  terms  of  the
      guidance given in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT
      60 (IAC) saying that ties:

           "... may be strong, they may perhaps be more or  less  loose  or
           weak, but they must in context, and on authority, be meaningful,
           that is to say something more than  merely  remote  or  abstract
           links to the country of proposed deportation."

  10. The judge said that the only ties identified by the Secretary of State
      in the refusal letter was the fact that the appellant  spoke  English,
      that being one of the languages of Mauritius. That was said  to  be  a
      cultural tie. He went on to extract from the evidence before  him  the
      following matters, which he considered relevant to the  assessment  to
      be made:


        a. Since his arrival in the United Kingdom aged 5  years  old,  the
           claimant had spoken English at home and was no  longer  able  to
           speak Creole;


        b. The claimant said he had no relatives in Mauritius.  His  father
           volunteered the  information  that  he  had  a  younger  brother
           remaining in Mauritius, who would be the  claimant's  uncle  and
           who had a son. However, that brother had Downs Syndrome and  the
           claimant's father had fallen out with him and there had been  no
           contact with either;

        c. The claimant's father is now divorced from the claimant's mother
           and had re-married a lady who is presently in Mauritius but  who
           is expecting to come to  the United Kingdom;

        d. The claimant's mother had two sisters in Mauritius but there had
           been no contact with them since they fell out some time ago over
           a land dispute.



  11. The key findings made by the judge are set out at paragraph 17 of  the
      determination, which we reproduce in full:


           " We have considered all of the above. As  to  the  Respondent's
           original and still major point concerning English as a  cultural
           tie, we do not find this a viable argument. One  might  just  as
           well say that because  my  colleague  and  I  speak  English  we
           thereby have a cultural tie with  Mauritius.  In  any  event  if
           language alone could qualify as a  cultural  tie  sufficient  to
           defeat compliance with paragraph 399A(b), it is difficult to see
           how anyone could qualify  thereunder  and  the  provision  would
           thereby be rendered nugatory. In our finding, language by itself
           cannot constitute a meaningful cultural tie.  As  to  the  other
           matters bulleted above, we again find that nothing meaningful in
           the way of ties is revealed. The appellant has,  understandably,
           forgotten Creole but in any event we would repeat what  we  have
           already said on  the  language  issue.  There  are  some  family
           members still in Mauritius but without exception, as  we  accept
           because we found father and mother credible witnesses  who  were
           entirely open with us, they are estranged from the appellant and
           his family and essentially unknown  to  the  appellant  himself.
           There is no prospect  of  help  for  the  appellant  from  those
           quarters and in any event they do not  constitute  any  sort  of
           meaningful family tie with Mauritius. The  suggestion  that  the
           appellant could go and live with his father's new wife,  who  is
           in any event planning to come back  to  the  UK  to  rejoin  her
           husband when entry clearance permits, is neither  realistic  nor
           indicative of a meaningful family or social tie with Mauritius."

      Having made reference once again  to  the  guidance  in  Ogundinu  and
      noting the potential relevance of  length  of  residence  and  age  on
      arrival; the extent of exposure to the cultural norms of  the  country
      of nationality; language and family and  social  networks  there,  the
      judge said that he was reinforced in his conclusions by that guidance,
      He then went on to say:

           " We therefore come to the conclusion that  the  appellant  fits
           squarely into the paragraph 399A(b)  criteria.  ...  The  appeal
           against the respondent's refusal to revoke the deportation order
           must therefore be allowed."


  12. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal complained that the judge
      had failed to engage  properly  with  "the  entirety  of  the  factors
      present"; was wrong not to  appreciate  that  the  claimant  was  "not
      incapable" of picking up Creole, as he has once spoken that  language,
      and had failed to appreciate the significance of the  claimant  having
      grown up with Mauritian national parents. The  grounds  asserted  that
      the judge was wrong to rely upon the estrangement from those relatives
      remaining in Mauritius because on return it would be open  to  him  to
      "build bridges" and strengthen those ties.

  13. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin made
      clear that he was unimpressed by the challenge to the finding of  fact
      that the claimant had no meaningful ties with Mauritius,  saying  that
      the challenge in that respect was "no more than  a  disagreement  with
      the panel's finding which was open to them on the  evidence".  However
      he granted permission because, in his view:

           "... it is arguable that the panel's failure then either  to  go
           on to consider whether the revocation order  should  be  revoked
           having regard  to  all  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
           case..."

  14. Mr Smart made clear that he did pursue the challenge  to  the  finding
      that  the  appellant  had   no   meaningful   ties   with   Mauritius,
      notwithstanding the view taken in the  grant  of  permission  that  it
      disclosed no error of law but was simply an expression of disagreement
      with a finding of fact open to  the  judge.  The  main  focus  of  the
      challenge he pursued before the Upper Tribunal was, though,  that  the
      judge erred  in  failing  to  appreciate,  or  failing  to  appreciate
      sufficiently, that he was dealing with an appeal against a refusal  to
      revoke a deportation order rather than an appeal against the  decision
      to make the deportation order. In Mr Smart's submission,  a  different
      approach was  called  for  in  a  revocation  appeal  in  that,  while
      paragraphs 399 and 399A of HC 395 were relevant, that was in informing
      the assessment to be carried out under paragraph 390 of HC395.


  15. Before we address that issue, we  can  deal  shortly  with  the  first
      aspect of the Secretary of State's  challenge.  We  agree  with  Judge
      Levin that no error of law  is  disclosed  in  the  reasoning  or  the
      finding it led to that the claimant had no remaining  ties  (including
      social, cultural or family) with Mauritius. The judge looked carefully
      at all the evidence the parties chose to put before him, and in  doing
      so had the advantage of hearing  oral  evidence  from  the  claimant's
      parents which he was  plainly  entitled  to  accept  as  truthful  and
      correct. He gave clear and legally sufficient reasons for arriving  at
      a conclusion that was plainly one  open  on  the  facts.  This  was  a
      claimant who left Mauritius when just 5 years old, since when  he  has
      had no contact with anyone living there; has had  no  cause  to  speak
      Creole, which he has lost command of, and it was open to the judge  to
      find that the claimant had no social network of any kind available  in
      Mauritius to look to for assistance in establishing  himself  in  what
      would be for him an entirely unfamiliar country. True it  is  that  he
      might be  able  to  "build  bridges"  and  attempt  to  repair  broken
      relationships with relatives who were estranged from his  own  family.
      But he himself has had no contact at all with those  persons.  Indeed,
      he was unaware that he had  an  uncle  with  Downs  Syndrome  in  that
      country, that information being volunteered  by  his  father  in  oral
      evidence. Further, the judge was required to consider the position  as
      it was at the date of the hearing and not how  it  might  be  at  some
      indeterminate point in the  future.  Having  said  that,  the  judge's
      finding was that "there is  no  prospect"  of  the  claimant  securing
      assistance from the estranged relatives, which does indicate a  degree
      of contemplation of what might be achieved at least in the foreseeable
      future.


  16. Which leave's Mr Smart's challenge to the approach taken by the judge.
      Before examining that, it is helpful to set out paragraphs 390 and 391
      of HC395, so far as they are relevant:

           "Revocation of deportation order


           390 An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
           considered in the light of all the circumstances  including  the
           following;
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.


           390A Where paragraph 398 applies the  Secretary  of  State  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  will  be
           outweighed by other factors."

  17. We  are  entirely  satisfied  that  the  judge  had  in  mind  clearly
      throughout that he was dealing with a revocation  appeal  and  not  an
      appeal against the initial  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order.
      Having referred specifically at paragraph 5 of  the  determination  to
      the Secretary of State's "refusal to revoke the order" he said:


            "It is against that decision that the Appellant now appeals..."

      Making clear beyond doubt that the judge had not become distracted  by
      his examination of paragraph 399A, he referred again to the fact  that
      this was an appeal against a refusal to revoke a deportation order  at
      paragraph 19, in setting out the conclusion that the appeal fell to be
      allowed.

  18. Nor are we persuaded that the judge fell into legal error in focussing
      on paragraph 399A to the extent that he did. As can be seen, paragraph
      390 itself requires, in  the  context  of  a  revocation  appeal,  the
      question to be asked  whether  paragraphs  399  or  399A  applies.  Mr
      Smart's submission,  if  we  understand  it  correctly,  is  that  the
      difference in a revocation appeal is  that  the  conclusion  that  the
      claimant did fall within paragraph 399A was not a complete  answer  to
      the matter, as it would be in a deportation  appeal,  because  instead
      that was a factor to be taken into account when addressing the  issues
      raised in paragraph 390.


  19. The difficulty with that submission is illustrated by considering, for
      example, what is required by paragraph  390(ii).  The  representations
      made in support of revocation included that the claimant  fell  within
      paragraph 399A. Once that was accepted by the judge to be established,
      the position was that  a  deportation  order  had  been  made  against
      someone in respect of whom the Secretary of State accepts, both in the
      immigration rules and in her own  policy  guidance,  that  the  public
      interest in his deportation has  been  outweighed  by  other  factors.
      Therefore, a review of the grounds upon which  the  deportation  order
      was made, the representations made in support of  revocation  and  the
      interests of the appellant would all point  to  the  same  conclusion.
      Paragraph 390 mandates also a review of the public interest  arguments
      but, as we have explained, the Secretary of State accepts  that  those
      will be  outweighed  by  the  fact  that  the  claimant  falls  within
      paragraph 399A.

  20. For all those reasons we are satisfied that the determination  of  the
      judge discloses no error of law. The question is not whether we  would
      have reached the same conclusion but whether  the  conclusion  reached
      was open to him. Essentially, this was a factual  assessment  for  the
      judge to make and, having heard oral evidence from the  witnesses,  he
      was best placed to make it. He made no error in his  approach  to  the
      legal framework applicable either.

 Conclusions:

    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no  error  of   law   and   his
    determination will stand.


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    26 August 2014

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


