
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00465/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  EFREN [M]
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Gore, Counsel instructed by McKenzie Beute &
                    Pope Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, whom we  shall  call  "the
    appellant", although he was the respondent in an appeal by  Efren  [M],
    an Italian citizen, whose appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal
    on 10 September 2018 following a hearing on 11 July 2018.

2.   On the face of it the appeal was against a decision  of  the  Secretary
    of State refusing to revoke a deportation, or  exclusion,  order  which
    was made on 6 March 2017.  It is contended on his behalf that  in  fact
    the appeal was against the making of the order itself and  not  against
    the refusal to revoke it.

3.   The claimant is said to have been deported to Italy and that he  waived
    certain rights and signed certain documents, into which we need not  go
    in detail, but as a matter of fact, no findings of fact were made about
    that by the First-tier Tribunal and we are not in a  position  to  make
    any finding on that whatsoever.

4.   One thing which is  clear  is  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal can best be described  as  something  of  a  hybrid  document.
    Reference is made to the original decision of the Secretary  of  State.
    Reference  is  made  to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations  2016  and  in  particular  to  Regulation  34   of   those
    Regulations.  34(1) provides that an exclusion order remains  in  force
    unless it is revoked by the Secretary of State under  this  Regulation.
    Regulation 34(3) says that a person, who is subject to  deportation  or
    an exclusion order, may only apply to the Secretary of State to have it
    revoked on the basis that there has been a  material  change  in  their
    circumstances that justify the making of the order.

5.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 71 that:-

         "I therefore find that the deportation order should now be  revoked
         in view that there has been a material change in the  circumstances
         that justify the making of the order, namely that the order  should
         never have been made."

    This is, it seems to us, confusing the criteria for  appealing  against
    the making of an order and the criteria  for  revoking  it.   Where  an
    order is to be revoked a material change in  circumstances  has  to  be
    identified in terms of the Regulations.  It will not do simply  to  say
    that the order should never have been made in the first place; that  is
    not a relevant material change of circumstances; it is not a change  of
    circumstances at all, except that a different legal interpretation  has
    been placed on circumstances which already prevailed at the time of the
    making of the order.

6.   However, a finding that the order  should  never  have  been  made  was
    perfectly appropriate in an appeal against the making  of  that  order,
    which is why we say that this decision is something of a hybrid.

7.   A number of difficulties in relation to  the  process  of  serving  the
    original order were referred to by Counsel, but no finding of  fact  is
    made about that, as we have indicated. We are not in a position to make
    any finding of fact ourselves, no evidence having been laid before  us.



8.   There is  an  issue  as  to  whether  the  claimant  was  appropriately
    apprised of his rights to appeal.  We cannot deal  with  that  in  this
    application, but we note that representations were made in  June  2017,
    resulting in a decision of 26 July 2017 to refuse to revoke the  order.
    The representations were treated  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as  an
    application to revoke.  It is contended before us that in fact  it  was
    an appeal, albeit apparently out of time, against  the  making  of  the
    order in the first place. We note that the decision which is  appealed,
    according to the form IAFT7, is that of 26 July, namely the refusal  to
    revoke.

9.   On any view, what has happened here is that the Judge appears  to  have
    confused two separate appeals in the process.  She has not dealt with a
    number of the issues of fact which may or may not assist in determining
    the appeal, namely precisely what happened when or if the documentation
    was served on the claimant.  Both the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    and Counsel agree that  the  decision  is  deficient  in  a  number  of
    respects, such as to amount  to  a  material  error  of  law.   We  are
    satisfied that the whole proceedings have gone off the rails at a  very
    early stage (if they were ever on the rails) and  the  matter  will  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal before  a  different  judge  for  a
    complete rehearing. The parties will need to be clear as to the  nature
    of the appeal that is being presented.

    DECISION: The appeal by the Secretary of State succeeds  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set  aside  to  be
    remade in the First tier Tribunal de Novo and upon an agreed basis.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                       [pic]


                                                           For LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                          Date: 7th Dec 2018

