
IAC-FH-NL-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00526/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 10 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                              eddie idowu kwomo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse of Counsel, instructed by A & A
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appeals  with  permission  a
    determination of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Scott-Baker dismissing
    his appeal against a decision made by the  respondent  on  27  February
    2014 to make a deportation order by virtue of s.32(5) of the UK Borders
    Act 2007.  That decision was made in light of the fact that he had been
    convicted of an offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
    least twelve months.  On 11 August 2011 he was convicted of  conspiring
    to steal and was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.  The  year
    before, on 21 July 2010, he was convicted of possession or  control  of
    false  or  an  improperly   obtained   ID   card   and   making   false
    representations for gain.

2.   The grounds of appeal are essentially sixfold.  It  is  contended  that
    the  FtT  judge  erred  firstly  because  she  wrongly   assessed   the
    appellant's son's autism as  not  being  at  a  high  level;  secondly,
    because she wrongly considered that the daily  lives  of  the  children
    would remain the same if the appellant were deported;  thirdly  because
    she had taken into account an offence apparently committed in  the  USA
    which "isn't  a  relevant  offence  for  the  purpose  of  this  appeal
    hearing";  fourthly,  she  had  attached  excessive   weight   to   the
    description given to the appellant by the sentencing judge in 2011 that
    he was a "professional criminal"; (allied to this, it was  argued  that
    the judge gave insufficient consideration to  the  OASys  Report  which
    assessed the appellant  as  being  at  a  low  risk  of  re-offending);
    fifthly,  she  erred  in  failing  to  recognise  that  s.117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 sets out a "more  generous
    test for the appellant" than the Immigration Rules; finally, the  judge
    was said to have made inadequate credibility findings in respect of the
    appellant and witness.

3.   At the hearing, by reference to a further document headed "Grounds  for
    the Renewed Application  for  Permission",  Ms  Hulse  made  amplifying
    submissions.  I am grateful to her and Mr Deller for their  ventilation
    of the important points.

4.   As regards the final point, the judge who granted  permission  rejected
    this ground and Ms Hulse did not seek to revive it before me.

5.   Turning to the first ground, I am entirely  satisfied  that  the  judge
    dealt properly with the medical circumstances of the  appellant's  son.
    Neither the social worker report  nor  the  GP  letter  nor  any  other
    document identified the  child  as  having  severe  autism.   They  did
    identify that he had severe behavioural problems  but  the  judge  took
    these fully into account and properly sought  to  have  regard  to  the
    evidence as to the child's situation at the date of hearing and not  to
    confine herself entirely to reports on a 6 year  old  child  that  were
    over two years old: see paragraphs 77 and 79, with reference  to  31-38
    and 63-65 in particular.  Ms Hulse sought  to  argue  that  the  expert
    evidence established that the child had "severe autism" but was  unable
    to point me to any document asserting that.

6.   As regards the contention that the judge wrongly assessed that  removal
    of the appellant would make no difference to the  daily  lives  of  the
    children, the simple answer is that she did not say that.  At paragraph
    93 she stated that his departure would clearly affect the children  and
    in that regard she noted at paragraph 93 that they  are  "used  to  him
    living with them as a family unit" and that he  "has  played  a  caring
    role in [C's] life and as  an  autistic  child  change  will  adversely
    impact on him".  The grounds appear to rely on the subsequent statement
    of the judge in the same paragraph that "[t]heir daily life will not be
    materially altered" but this was followed by  a  passage  that  clearly
    circumscribed what the judge meant: "....in that they will continue  to
    live in the same house with their mother and  will  attend  their  same
    schools.  The children would be denied the  daily  contact  with  their
    father but this has happened in the past."  In paragraph 93 and  allied
    paragraphs the judge can be seen to make a measured assessment  of  the
    best interests of the children and the impact the  appellant's  removal
    would have on them.  It was  clearly  in  her  mind  from  her  earlier
    decision of whether as an alternative to the  appellant  being  removed
    and the children and mother staying here, the family could resettle  in
    Nigeria, that in the UK C had the guarantee of a supportive school  and
    care environment (the family also receives  disability  benefits).   It
    was open to the judge to consider that the mother would  be  prevented,
    by the appellant's absence, from continuing to ensure the children were
    able to live with her; indeed the  judge  noted  that  the  mother  had
    managed that when the appellant was in prison.  She noted also that the
    mother ran her own business as a beauty consultant.

7.   The grounds also argue more widely that the judge failed to  apply  the
    full panoply of best interests of  the  child  principles  set  out  in
    Zoumbas but that is belied by the very full and careful application the
    judge made of these principles.

8.   As regards the third ground it is  simply  wrong  to  assert  that  the
    judge should have wholly disregarded the  appellant's  offence  in  the
    USA.  It was part of the evidence before her and in  the  OASys  Report
    she noted at paragraph 76, sixth bullet point, that:

         "The offender manager noted that the appellant had convictions  for
         fraudulent offences during his time in the USA.  Records  from  the
         USA indicated a longstanding history of dishonesty and  inquisitive
         (sic) crime.  Whilst the offender manager did not find the  current
         matters an escalation  in  seriousness  from  previous  convictions
         there  was  evidence  of  an  established  pattern  of   offending.
         However, due to the relatively low number of convictions in the UK,
         the  actuarial   assessment   indicated   a   low   likelihood   of
         reconviction."

9.   Against this background it was entirely open to the judge  when  making
    her overall assessment to treat as one relevant factor "his history  of
    financial fraud since 1996 in foreign countries".  Indeed, if  she  had
    wholly disregarded this matter, it would have  been  an  error  of  law
    since it was clearly relevant to the issue of the appellant's  criminal
    profile which the UK sentencing judge had concluded  meant  he  merited
    the description "professional criminal".

10.  That brings me  to  the  fourth  ground  which  takes  issue  with  the
    "excessive weight" the judge was said to have attached to the fact that
    the appellant was a professional criminal.  Given that  (i)  the  OASys
    Report of June 2012 identified  an  established  pattern  of  behaviour
    underpinned  by  a  pro-criminal  attitude;  (ii)  the  appellant   had
    committed a similar offence whilst on bail and  (iii)  the  appellant's
    claim that he would not offend now because of  the  importance  of  his
    children and the diagnosis of autism in 2010 did not  square  with  the
    fact that he was offending in 2008/9 after the birth of both  children;
    and (iv) the offender manager noted that his offences were prompted  by
    lack of finances and these circumstances still appertain - the FtT  was
    quite entitled to conclude that the evidence as a whole did not support
    the offender manager's conclusion that there was  a  low  risk  of  re-
    offending.  The  judge  clearly  attached  significant  weight  to  the
    offender manager assessment, but she was not bound to follow it and she
    gave sound reasons for not following it in the matter of  risk  of  re-
    offending.

11.  The  fifth  point  raised  relates  to  whether  the  judge  failed  to
    recognise that s.117D applies a "more generous test" than the Rules.  I
    can be very brief in respect of this ground.  It is not in dispute that
    the judge considered both whether the appellant could succeed under the
    Immigration Rules and whether he could succeed outside the Rules and in
    both contexts she clearly applied the considerations set out in ss.117A-
    D: this ground is poorly articulated but even if it decided to focus on
    the test under s.117C(5) on the  basis  that  both  the  children  were
    "qualifying children", that requires the appellant to  show  that  "the
    effect of [an appellant's] deportation on the partner or child would be
    unduly harsh".  But the FtT judge plainly considered the issue of undue
    hardship in depth when considering paragraph 399(b)(iii): see paragraph
    95.  At paragraph 109 she  notes,  a  propos  of  s.117C-D,  that  both
    children are qualifying children and that "[r]easons for  finding  that
    the appellant cannot establish this [undue  hardship  under  s.117C(5)]
    have been set out above".  It is  contended  that  the  judge  elevated
    "unduly harsh" to the level  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  but  that
    overlooks that leading cases  have  not  accepted  that  insurmountable
    obstacles means anything more stringent.  It also  overlooks  that  the
    judge plainly did not apply any test higher than under hardship.

12.  The  grounds  fail  to  identify  any  respect  in  which  the  judge's
    assessment of undue hardship  under  paragraph  399(b)(iii)  failed  to
    fully comply with the s.117C(5) test.

13.  For completeness I shall deal with two other points that Ms Hulse  drew
    from the renewed grounds.  It was  contended  therein  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to take account of the social worker  report.   It  is
    difficult to conceive of a more hapless ground:  the  report  played  a
    prominent part in several passages of her decision.

14.  It is contended that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  an  inconsistency
    between the letter of November 2010 which  states  that  the  appellant
    works overseas and this 2014 report which states that one of the couple
    worked in the day and the other at night (see paragraphs  63  and  76).
    However, when one looks at the second  bullet  point  of  paragraph  76
    where the judge finds an inconsistency, it is clear she was not  solely
    relying on what the position was in November 2010 but on this  evidence
    as indicating that his patterns was one of working overseas.  Indeed on
    the next bullet  point  she  adverts  to  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellant  himself  to  explain  why  he  had  stayed  in  Nigeria  for
    significant periods (see also paragraph 92).  It was his  own  evidence
    (see paragraph 39) that he had been in Nigeria from  December  2013-May
    2014.  The judge considered his claim that  this  was  unavoidable  but
    gave cogent reasons why he had failed to show this:  At  paragraphs  69
    and 72 she noted the Home Office Presenting Officer's  submission  that
    through a construction of the appellant's absences in Nigeria and  time
    in prison, C was "used to his father being  away"  and  her  subsequent
    finding at paragraph 95, when assessing  undue  hardship,  that  "there
    have been periods in the past where he has  not  been  present  in  the
    family home" was wholly apposite.

Notice of Decision

15.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law and her decision shall stand.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

