
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00462/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 August 2013                              |On 29 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                         NARROL CHADWICK LIVINGSTON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shamin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 30 April 1990, is a national of Jamaica.
     He appeals against a panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill  and  Dr  J  O  de  Barros,  non-legal  member)
    promulgated on 4 June 2013, following a hearing at Kingston Crown Court
    on 22 May 2013, whereby the panel  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision, made on 26 February 2013, to make a  deportation
    order against him by virtue of Section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

 2. The immigration background to this decision is set out in  the  panel's
    determination, and I summarise the account which was given there.

 3. The appellant arrived in this  country  in  December  2001,  using  his
    Jamaican passport and was granted six  months'  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor.  His parents had come to this country  the  previous  year  as
    visitors.  The appellant's mother later varied her leave to remain as a
    student. The appellant applied himself for permission to  remain  as  a
    student, but that application was refused on 15 February 2003.   Twelve
    days later he made an application for leave to remain as the  dependant
    of his mother who, by that stage, had been granted leave to remain as a
    student.  That application was also refused.  His appeal  against  this
    decision was dismissed in September 2005, and the appellant was written
    to by the UK Border Agency, explaining that he was requested  to  leave
    without delay and that he would be liable to prosecution for an offence
    under the Immigration Act if he failed to do so.

 4. In May 2006 a firm of solicitors made an application on the appellant's
    behalf that he should  be  allowed  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
    reference to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  Subsequently, on 23  August
    2009,  the  appellant  was  granted   indefinite   leave   to   remain.
    Thereafter, on 21  September  2011,  the  appellant  was  convicted  at
    Kingston-upon-Thames Crown Court of three counts of robbery, for  which
    on 9 November 2011 he was sentenced to  terms  of  imprisonment  of  40
    months on each count to run concurrently.  The appellant did not appeal
    against this sentence.  In light of these convictions and the  sentence
    imposed, on 29 October 2012 the appellant was notified formally of  his
    liability for deportation under Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

 5. The seriousness of the offences of which the appellant was convicted is
    apparent from the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,  which  are  contained
    within the file.  The judge treated the three defendants the same,  and
    regarded the offences, of street robbery, as having been committed by a
    gang.  The judge noted that  "This  was  extreme  continued  gratuitous
    violence, gratuitous after the event, extreme  violence  before  it  as
    well, no doubt to achieve the aim  of  obtaining  property  from  these
    victims".

 6. The judge also considered that

         "This was a  planned  robbery  or  robberies,  these  victims  were
         clearly targeted and in the second count we have - and third  count
         - we have clearly very vulnerable victims, and I can  say  that  it
         was planned when I come to my sentencing  remarks  because  of  the
         disguises, the balaclava, the scarves, you were  ready  to  conceal
         your identity in these robberies and I can be  satisfied  therefore
         of that particularly important aggravating feature".

 7. Although each of the appellants had claimed to be  less  involved  than
    the others, the judge considered that "you were a team,  you  take  the
    consequences as a team".  The judge also noted that a weapon  had  been
    used in one of the robberies, and also that a knife had  been  produced
    during that robbery.  The  robberies  were  also  "of  relatively  high
    value",  one  of  the  items  being  "worth  �1,000".   A  particularly
    aggravating feature of these robberies was that  one  of  the  victim's
    ventolin inhaler was taken and as the judge remarked,

          "To take somebody's ventolin inhaler you  do  really  wonder  what
         people, what level, people, are stooping to ... that sort of  thing
         ... removed from a victim, medication which is  needed  for  asthma
         and I would have thought that that's the one thing that  you  might
         be suffering from, having suffered the  vicious  attacks  that  you
         indeed inflicted on these victims".

    The judge also noted that "there was gratuitous violence, the  slap  at
    the end on that girl in count 2, and the boot put in at the end  on  Mr
    Gupta".

 8. It is clear that the offences of which  this  appellant  was  convicted
    were extremely serious.

 9. The appellant was invited by the respondent to put forward any  reasons
    as to why he should not be deported following  his  conviction  on  the
    three counts of robbery, the respondent having in mind  Section  33  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007, by virtue of which the appellant could not  be
    deported notwithstanding the provisions of Section 32  if  his  removal
    would be in breach of his rights under the ECHR.

10. Having considered the representations made by  and  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, on 26 February  2013  the  respondent  gave  notice  to  the
    appellant of her decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007
    applied and that the respondent intended to deport  him.

11. As already noted above, the appellant appealed against  this  decision,
    but his appeal was dismissed by the panel.

12. The respondent's letter giving notice of her decision was detailed  and
    in it  the  respondent  formally  noted  her  obligation  and  duty  to
    safeguard the interests of the appellant's daughter, Tianna Hall, under
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   It
    was also noted that the interests of  that  child  must  be  a  primary
    consideration when making the decision.  These matters were  considered
    by the panel.  The panel also noted the respondent's  belief  that  the
    relationship which the appellant had with his mother and  siblings  did
    not constitute family life, because (as noted at paragraph  10  of  the
    determination) "there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  there  was  any
    dependency over and above normal emotional ties between these adults".

13. The panel  considered  the  strength  of  the  relationship  which  the
    appellant had with his daughter, who had been conceived when her mother
    was only 15, but having considered the evidence, found that

         "the reality of the situation is that these two have not maintained
         a relationship as a couple which is how it was presented to us.  We
         think that they have in effect parted  and  that  really  what  the
         evidence was designed to do before us was to try to   show  a  firm
         and more secure relationship than was truly the case." [41]

14. With regard to the relationship between the appellant and   his  mother
    and brother, the panel found (at  paragraph  43)  that  "we  do  accept
    entirely the proposition made by the respondent  in  the  circumstances
    that ... the appellant has not shown anything that goes  beyond  normal
    emotional ties in connection with those relationships". The panel found
    that the appellant "has  not  demonstrated  the  sort  of  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship either with Tianna or, indeed, Jody Hall,  that
    certainly his mother would wish us to accept".  The  panel  noted  that
    the appellant,  while  in this country a long time,  had  not  remained
    here with leave, nor was it persuaded that the  appellant  "has  turned
    over a new leaf in the way that it is presented to  us"  (at  paragraph
    43).

15. Having set out all the factors in some detail, the panel concluded that
    the removal  of  this  appellant  was  not  disproportionate,  and  was
    accordingly not in breach of his Article 8 rights.  With regard to  the
    appellant's relationship with  his daughter, such as it  was  found  to
    be, the panel concluded as follows:

         "We are acutely mindful of Section 55 of the 2009 Act but  consider
         that this young child's best interests will be served by  remaining
         with her mother in this country and getting the support that  quite
         patently she does from her grandparents and  by  seeing  aunts  and
         cousins.  We reiterate that really the role played  by  her  father
         has become a peripheral one and frankly not  a  good  one.   It  is
         hardly desirable that a child should start off seeing her father in
         prison, that is not an influence which in our judgment is likely to
         promote her welfare."



Grounds of Appeal

16. The first ground relied on is that the  panel  did  not  give  adequate
    consideration to the Article 8 rights of the appellant's  brother,  who
    is  mentally  and  physically  disabled,  which  it  should  have  done
    following Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 0039.

17. It is also said that the panel failed to state the  standard  of  proof
    applicable when  considering  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter and his daughter's mother.  It is suggested that it applied  a
    test higher than a test based on the balance of probabilities.

18. It is also said that the panel failed to have regard to  paragraph  364
    of the Rules which provides that "in considering whether deportation is
    a right course on the merits, the  public  interest  will  be  balanced
    against any compassionate circumstances of the case".  It is then  said
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting love relationship  with
    Jody Hall and family life with Tianna.   The  Tribunal  ought  to  have
    accepted the evidence presented to it  in  that  regard.   It  is  also
    asserted that the panel ought to have had regard to the other  factors,
    such as the appellant's length of residence in the UK and the  strength
    of his connections with this country.  Also, it is suggested that he is
    generally a person of good character,   but  brought  up  by  a  single
    parent "under very difficult and challenging circumstances at home".

19. It  is  said  that  the  panel  did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the
    compassionate circumstances in his case and  had  applied  too  high  a
    standard of proof when considering the written and oral statements made
    on his behalf by family members.   It is said, at paragraph 22  of  the
    grounds, that it is hoped that "the Tribunal would take the  view  that
    given the particular exceptional circumstances in this application,  to
    refuse my appeal again would not be in the best interest of maintaining
    a fair and effective immigration control".



The Hearing

20. I heard submissions on behalf of both parties.  As my  notes  of  these
    submissions,  which I made contemporaneously, and in which I  attempted
    to record everything which was said to  me,  are  contained  within  my
    Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out below everything  which  was
    said to me in the course of the hearing.  I have, however,  had  regard
    to everything  which  was  said,  as  well  as  to  all  the  documents
    contained within  the  file,  whether  or  not  the  same  is  set  out
    specifically below.

21. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Shamin produced a skeleton argument, but
    as I noted at the time, this skeleton argument did  not  identify  what
    error  of  law  in  the  panel's   determination   was   relied   upon.
    Effectively, the skeleton argument merely set out what was said  to  be
    the appellant's Article 8 claim.  Under "Issues", the appellant's  case
    was put as follows:

         "The main issue in this case  is,  whether  the  appellant  has  an
         established family life and private life in the  UK  and  that  his
         deportation under Section 32(5) of the UKB Act 2007 would amount to
         a breach of the UK's obligation under the Convention.

         The other issue is, whether in deporting the appellant the right of
         EAA citizens is likely to be compromised."

22. As the Tribunal pointed out to Mr Shamin,  that  was  not  the  primary
    issue.  The primary issue was whether or not in reaching its  decision,
    the panel had made a material error of law.

23. Mr Shamin submitted  that  basically  Article  8  had  not  been  fully
    considered by the panel, and in particular the panel had not considered
    the appellant's family and private life.  It  was  disproportionate  to
    deport him at this stage when he was quite in touch with his  daughter.



24.  When it was pointed out to  him by the Tribunal  that  the  panel  had
    made findings with regard to this, Mr Shamin said that at paragraph  40
    of its determination the panel  had said that Ms Hall  was  the  person
    with  whom the appellant's daughter  primarily  lived,  and  that  "for
    reasons that have not been  expanded upon before us ... [Ms  Hall]  had
    some obvious grave disagreement with her mother and was thrown  out  of
    her mother's home".  This was irrelevant because the fact was that  the
    appellant's daughter had been living with her mother,  whether  in  the
    home of her maternal grandmother or elsewhere,  and  Ms  Hall  was  the
    appellant's partner.

25. The panel also said that although the appellant said he had played some
    part in decisions regarding his daughter, that was  not  borne  out  by
    other evidence, but the appellant's partner  said  the  decisions  were
    made jointly between her and the appellant, for example  which  nursery
    she should go to and what arrangements should be made for her birthday.



26. At paragraph  39,  the  panel  had  said  that  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules would not have had any  application  because  of  the
    appellant's daughter's age, and it was not reasonable to expect her  to
    leave with her father. However, the impact on her would be severe,  and
    she would no longer have day to day contact with her father.  Also,  Ms
    Hall was a British citizen and could not be expected to leave.

27. When it was pointed  out  by  the  Tribunal  that  the  panel  had  not
    suggested that Ms Hall should leave with the appellant, Mr Shamin  said
    that this was an error of law. When asked what he  was  saying  was  an
    error of law, he said the whole of paragraph 40 was an  error  of  law.
    It started with the stance taken that the appellant had not shown  that
    he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter.

28. When  the  Tribunal  pointed  out  to  Mr  Shamin  that  that  was  the
    respondent's case, Mr Shamin said that this was an application for  the
    revocation of a deportation order.  What the appellant was  saying  was
    that he had a private and family life in the UK and had come to the  UK
    at the very tender age of 12.

29. When asked again by the Tribunal what he was saying was  the  error  of
    law which the panel had made, Mr Shamin said that it had not taken  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights into consideration.  The Article 8  rights
    had not been considered in the manner the  law  states  it  should  be.
    That was the error of  law.   The  appellant's  family  life  with  his
    partner was  strong  and  subsisting,  he  had  a  strong  and  genuine
    relationship with his daughter and he  had  a  private  life  with  his
    mother, brother and sister.  Mr Shamin said private instead  of  family
    because he was of an age where he could not say  he  was  dependent  on
    them, but he could  qualify as having a private life.  Sending him back
    to Jamaica where he had nobody and knew no one would be detrimental  to
    him and his family.  These were  his submissions.

30. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Allan considered that all he could draw
    from the submissions just made on behalf of the appellant was  that  it
    was said that the panel had not considered the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights, but the panel patently had done so.  That was the  entirety  of
    what the panel's decision was about.  In those circumstances  Mr  Allan
    considered that it might be more helpful to the Tribunal if instead  of
    responding to the submissions made orally by Mr Shamin, he responded to
    the grounds.

31. The first point in the grounds was that it was suggested at paragraph 2
    that there could be further medical evidence available  supporting  the
    assertions which had been made relating to the appellant's  mother  and
    brother. There were two things which should be noted  in  this  regard.
    First, nothing had been adduced before the panel, and  so  any  further
    evidence could not go to an error of law, and secondly, in  any  event,
    no further medical evidence was even provided for this   hearing.   The
    alleged error set out at paragraph 2 of the grounds was that because of
    the vulnerable nature of the appellant's brother's condition, the panel
    had  erred  in  its  consideration  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his brother and  mother.   In  fact,  however,  that  was
    considered within the determination. The panel was clearly aware of the
    situation but at paragraph 43  it found that the appellant did not have
    a relationship either with his mother or his  vulnerable siblings which
    would constitute family life. It found that this relationship  did  not
    go beyond normal emotional ties.

32. Although it was suggested in the grounds that  the  panel  ignored  the
    position of the appellant's brother, we did not know what evidence  had
    been put before the panel  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  brother.
    However, at the end of paragraph 41 the panel refers to evidence  being
    designed to show that the relationship between  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Hall was more secure than it was.  Also, at  paragraph  28,  the  panel
    refers to evidence given by the appellant's mother that the appellant's
    brother, Santar, "had become very aggressive since  the  appellant  had
    gone into prison", so it was clear that the panel did have in mind  his
    condition.

33. The summary of the appellant's evidence, which was  not  challenged  in
    the grounds, did not indicate that the appellant had been relying  upon
    his relationship with  his  brother.   Rather,  it  appeared  from  the
    panel's summary of the evidence that the evidence given  on  behalf  of
    the appellant had been to the effect that  he  intended  to  leave  the
    family home, in which his mother and brother lived, in  order  to  live
    with Ms Hall.  In other words, the appellant was now  saying  that  the
    panel should have taken into account the relationship with  his  mother
    and brother whereas his evidence had been  that he was no longer  going
    to live with them.

34. The evidence  as to this relationship was accordingly very limited, and
    anticipated a breakdown of that relationship as it stood in any  event.



35. One other discrete point in that ground was that the panel should  have
    considered specifically Santar's rights.  It is suggested that  Section
    55 applied.  However, Santar was not a minor, although it was  accepted
    that if and to the extent that family life was established between  the
    appellant and his brother,  his  interests  would  have  needed  to  be
    considered. However, the panel considered the evidence  very  carefully
    and fully before making its findings.

36. In paragraph 3 of the grounds, two errors were  asserted.   These  were
    first, that the panel failed to state the standard  of  proof  applied.
    While it would be an error of law if the  panel  applied  an  incorrect
    standard, it is not and could not be suggested that in fact it did  not
    apply the balance of probabilities.  Secondly, it was said that when at
    paragraph 40 the panel recorded that  the  appellant's  daughter  would
    come to his mother's house and he would see her there, this ignored the
    fact that he lived there.  In fact,  this  misread  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 40, because it is specifically recorded  that  the  appellant
    was "physically present" when Tianna "was being  moved  from  place  to
    place" while he was living with his mother.  Accordingly,  when  Tianna
    was staying with her grandmother, the appellant would then see her.

37. At paragraph 5, it was said that the appellant's age had not been taken
    into account.  However, specific reference was made to the age  of  the
    appellant and Ms Hall when they became parents in  determining  whether
    there was a subsisting relationship.  At paragraph 40 the panel says in
    terms that Ms Hall was 15 when Tianna was conceived.  There is  perhaps
    a further discrete point which could be taken, which was that  this  on
    its own disclosed that the appellant had  committed  an  offence  under
    Section 9 of the Sexual Offences Act.

38. With regard to what is asserted at paragraph  6  of  the  grounds,  the
    panel did take account of the appellant's length of residence in the UK
    and regarding paragraph 7, the panel also took account of the  strength
    of his connections with the UK  and  with  Jamaica.    With  regard  to
    paragraph 8, the panel also considered his personal history.

39. Quite clearly, the panel had shown in its  determination  that  it  had
    taken into account  everything  which  it  ought  to  have  taken  into
    account.

40. At paragraph 10 it was said that paragraph 353B of the  Rules  had  not
    been  correctly applied.  These grounds might have been drafted  before
    this Tribunal's determination in Khanum  [2013]  UKUT,  in  which  this
    Tribunal had found that paragraph 353B was  not  judicially  reviewable
    and was at the respondent's discretion.

41. Although at paragraph 12 it was said that the panel  applied  a  higher
    test than the balance of probabilities, it was not said  where  it  did
    so, and there is no reference within the grounds to where  the  balance
    had  not  been  applied  correctly.  Any  reasonable  reading  of   the
    determination would indicate  that  the  panel  had   applied  the  law
    properly.

42. With regard to the argument in paragraph 13, this appeared to amount to
    no more than a disagreement with the findings, and simply asserted that
    the Tribunal should have applied  weight  differently  to  the  various
    factors when conducting the proportionality  test.   For  example,  the
    suggestion in the grounds that the appellant poses "no  further  threat
    to society" appeared merely to amount to  a  fresh  submission,  rather
    than  an  attempt  to  identify  any  error  of  law  in  the   panel's
    determination.

43. The rest of the arguments in the grounds (such as at paragraphs 23  and
    28) similarly did not  amount  to  more  than  a  re-statement  of  the
    arguments rejected by the panel and a challenge to the weight the panel
    gave to the various factors.

44. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Shamin said that he had nothing  to  say
    in reply; he had said all he wanted to say.



Discussion

45. I have recorded in some detail the way in which the  appellant's  case,
    such as it is, has been argued,  both  orally  before  me  and  in  the
    grounds, but in my judgment these submissions have absolutely no merit.
     It is clear from the Court of Appeal decision in MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1192, that  when  considering  a  deportation  decision  under
    Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007, the Tribunal must first  have
    regard to paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    must also consider whether the weight to be given to "other factors" in
    the circumstances of any particular case is such that deportation would
    still be disproportionate under  Article  8.   However,  in  line  with
    previous Court of Appeal decisions in Richards  and  SS  (Nigeria)  the
    Court of Appeal recognised in MF (Nigeria) that  "the  Rules  expressly
    contemplate a weighing of the public interest  in  deportation  against
    'other factors' " (at paragraph 39) and that, in cases  of  a  "foreign
    prisoner" (which is what this appellant is) where  paragraphs  399  and
    399A do not  apply,  "very  compelling  reasons  will  be  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation".

46. In this case, the panel considered first whether or not this  appellant
    could succeed under paragraphs 398 and 399 of  the  Rules,  and  having
    decided that  he  could  not,  nonetheless  considered  very  carefully
    whether other factors could  be  given  such  weight  as  to  make  his
    removal disproportionate nonetheless.  The reasons the panel  gave  for
    finding that the removal of this appellant would be  proportionate  are
    compelling and were open to it.  The offences of  which  the  appellant
    was convicted, in circumstances where  one  of  the  victim's  ventolin
    inhaler was taken, apparently gratuitously, and in  which  considerable
    violence was shown to the victims, were  extremely  serious  and  would
    rightly cause revulsion  amongst  the  public  generally.  It  is  also
    important to recognise that one of the purposes  of  deporting  foreign
    criminals such as this appellant is to deter others who must appreciate
    that one of the consequences of committing serious offences is that  it
    is likely that they will be deported.

47.  The  panel  considered  very   carefully   whether   the   appellant's
    circumstances were such that notwithstanding  the  seriousness  of  his
    offending his removal would still be disproportionate, but  decided  it
    would not. The panel was entitled to find that  his  relationship  with
    his mother and brother did not, in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,
    amount to "family life", but given that in any event it was   his  case
    that he would not be living with them anyway, it is  hard  to  see  how
    this  argument  could   help  him  anyway.    Having   considered   the
    determination very carefully  indeed,  in  light  of  the  grounds  and
    submissions,  I have been unable to identify any even arguable error of
    law.

48. Furthermore, given the extremely  serious  nature  of  the  appellant's
    offences, and that this Tribunal considers his Article 8  arguments  to
    be very weak, any error in the panel's determination (and I cannot find
    any) would in any event be immaterial, as it  is  clear  from  all  the
    factors which were considered by the panel,  and  which  are  also  now
    before this Tribunal,  that  the  public  interest  in  deporting  this
    appellant outweighs any interference in  his  Article  8  rights  which
    would thereby be occasioned by a very wide margin indeed.

49. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed, and I will so order.



Decision

There being  no  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.





Signed:                                 Date: 8 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

