
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00980/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 28th November, 2014                        |On 18th December 2014        |
|Signed 16th December, 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          BENTO HELDER DE OLIVEIRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  is  the
    appellant and  to  avoid  confusion  I  refer  to  her  as  being  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent  is  a  national  of  Portugal  who  was  born  on  14th
    September, 1993.

3.   The claimant made a deportation order against the  respondent  on  30th
    April, 2014, under Regulation 19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  on  the  grounds  that  it  had  been
    decided that the appellant's removal was justified on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public heath.

4.   The respondent moved to Portugal when  he  was  9  years  of  age  from
    Angola where he was born.  He stayed only for a matter of months before
    joining his mother who was an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in
    the United Kingdom.  She has  been  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1999, and the  respondent  joined  his  mother  in
    2002, and has lived in the United Kingdom since that time.  It  is  not
    clear when he arrived in the United Kingdom, but he was granted an  EEA
    residence card in December 2002.  He was a dependent family  member  of
    his mother, an EEA national.

5.   The respondent appealed against the  claimant's  decision  pursuant  to
    Regulation  26  of  the  2006  Regulations  on  the  basis  that    his
    deportation would contravene Section 6 of the Human Rights  Act,  1998,
    as being incompatible with his Convention rights under Article 8 of the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms and that  the  decision  to  deport  him  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with his family life with his mother, his
    siblings and  his stepfather and also with  his  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   The respondent's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page  at
    Newport on 22nd August, 2014.  In his decision the judge found  himself
    not satisfied that  the  claimant  had  demonstrated  that  there  were
    serious grounds of public policy or  public  security  to  justify  her
    decision to deport the respondent.  He noted that  the  respondent  has
    continually resided in the United Kingdom for more than ten  years  and
    that under Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations  the  claimant  may
    not make a decision to deport  the  respondent  except  on  "imperative
    grounds of public  security".   This  is  the  higher  test  of  public
    security  that  the  respondent  needs  to   demonstrate   before   the
    deportation of an EEA national can be justified.  The judge allowed the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that the respondent had failed to  give
    proper regard to the factors  to  be  considered  in  Regulation  21(6)
    taking account that apart from the offence  leading  to  the  20  month
    custodial sentence, the respondent had  been  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom and was of previous good character.  He had  been  released  on
    licence and provided evidence of his rehabilitation whilst in prison.

7.   The claimant challenged the decision, relying on MG C400/12  where  the
    European Court had, it was said, found that under Article 28(3)(a)  the
    ten year period of residence referred to this provision in principle be
    continuous and must be calculated by counting back from the date of the
    decision ordering the expulsion  of  the  person  concerned.   Further,
    Article 28(3)(c) means that the period of imprisonment is in  principle
    capable of interrupting the continuity of the period of  residence  and
    of affecting  the  decision  with  regard  to  the  grant  of  enhanced
    protection provided even where the person concerned resided in the host
    state for the ten year period of imprisonment.  The  grounds  suggested
    that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  finding  that
    the appellant should be afforded the highest level of protection of the
    "imperative ground" test.

8.   Whilst it was accepted  that  the  respondent  has  acquired  permanent
    residence, there were, the grounds urged,  serious  grounds  of  public
    policy in deporting the respondent, given that he was  convicted  of  a
    serious offence and sentenced to 20 months' imprisonment.

9.   Mr Lee very helpfully set out for me  the  chronology.  The  respondent
    was born in Angola on 14th September, 1993 and at some time during 2002
    went to Portugal.  He remained there only briefly and  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom joining his mother, an  EEA  citizen  exercising  treaty
    rights.  In December 2002 the respondent was granted an  EEA  residence
    card. The offence for which he was convicted  took  place  on  9  April
    2013.  He was remanded in custody but the date of  the  remand  is  not
    known. It must have been on or after 9th April, 2013.  He was  remanded
    in custody but the date of the remand is not known.  It must have  been
    on or after 9th April 2013.   He was sentenced on 4th  September,  2013
    and so he had been in the United Kingdom for a minimum  period  of  ten
    years prior to the commission of the offence.

10.  Mr Lee referred me to the decision of the  Tribunal  in  MG  (Prison  -
    Article 28(3)(a) of the Citizens Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT  00393
    (IAC) which considered the decision of the  Court  of  Justice  in  MG.
    They identified the seemingly categorical statement in the  first  part
    of paragraph 33 of the  European  Court's  judgment  that  "periods  of
    imprisonment cannot be taken into account for the purposes of  granting
    the enhanced protection provided for in Article 28(3)(a) ..."; and  its
    seemingly defeasible statement in the second half of the same  sentence
    (reinforced in paragraphs 35 - 36)  that  "in  principle  such  periods
    interrupt the continuity of the period of residence for the purpose  of
    that provision".

11.  They said at paragraphs 48 and 49:-

         "48. Despite our difficulties, we have concluded that a categorical
             reading of (1) cannot be what the Court meant or at least that
             what it must have had  in  mind  was  to  draw  a  distinction
             between  a  positive  taking  into  account  and  a   negative
             interruption. If the Court inP MG had meant to convey  by  the
             terms  "cannot  be  taken  into  account"  that   periods   of
             imprisonment automatically disqualify a person  from  enhanced
             protection under Article 28(3)(a)  protection,  it  would  not
             have seen fit to proceed  in  paragraph  35  to  accept  as  a
             possibility that the "non-continuous" nature of  a  period  of
             residence did not automatically prevent  a  person  qualifying
             for enhanced protection. Nor would it have chosen in paragraph
             38 to describe  periods  of  imprisonment  as  "in  principle,
             capable both of interrupting the continuity of the  period  of
             residence for the purposes of that provision and of  affecting
             the decision regarding the grant of  the  enhanced  protection
             provided for thereunder..." It would have had to say that,  if
             they fall within the 10 year period  counting  back  from  the
             date of decision, periods of  imprisonment  always  prevent  a
             person qualifying for enhanced protection.  In addition,  what
             the  Court  goes  on  to  say  in  paragraph  37   about   the
             implications of the fact that a person has resided in the host
             Member State during the 10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  is
             clearly intended to underline that even though such  a  person
             has had a period of imprisonment during the requisite 10  year
             period (counting back from the date of decision  ordering  the
             expulsion: see para 27) it  is  still  possible  for  them  to
             qualify for enhanced protection and in this regard their prior
             period of residence "may be taken into consideration  as  part
             of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph 36  above".
             We also bear in mind, of course, as did Pill LJ  in  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA  Civ
             1199 at [42] that in Tsakouridis the CJEU  Grand  Chamber  did
             not  consider  the  fact  that  Mr  Tsakouridis  had  spent  a
             substantial period of time in custody in Germany in  the  year
             prior to the decision to expel him (taken on 9 August 2008) as
             defeating  his  eligibility  for  enhanced  protection   under
             Article 28(3)(a).  Nevertheless (and this is where we consider
             Mr Palmer right and Miss Hirst wrong), the fact that the Court
             specifies  that  "in  principle"   periods   of   imprisonment
             interrupt the continuity of  residence  for  the  purposes  of
             meeting the 10 year requirement can only mean that so  far  as
             establishing  integrative links is concerned such periods must
             have a negative impact.

          49.     Had it been necessary to our reaching a decision  in  the
             claimant's case, we would have given serious consideration  to
             making clear in our decision that if there was an  application
             for permission to appeal our decision to the Court of  Appeal,
             we would have been  likely  to  grant  it,  in  order  for  an
             important point of principle, namely the  precise  meaning  of
             regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations and Article  28(3)(a)
             in the  context  of  a  period  of  residence  which  includes
             imprisonment,  to be addressed by a national court superior to
             our own and in a case in which the  issue  was  material.  The
             issue of deportation of foreign  criminals  is  of  compelling
             public importance.  This would also enable the Court of Appeal
             to consider to what extent its judgment in Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department v FV (Italy)  (which  considered  that
             Article 28(3)(a) was essentially  just  an  integration  test)
             requires modification in the light  of  the  CJEU  rulings  in
             Onuekwere and MG. It would also afford an opportunity for that
             Court to rule on whether, applying the  doctrine  of  indirect
             effect, the  requirement  of  regulation  21(4)  that  an  EEA
             national must have resided in the UK "for a continuous  period
             of  at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  relevant  decision"
             (emphasis added) is inconsistent with the CJEU ruling  in  MG,
             which  clearly  contemplates  that  even  someone  with  "non-
             continuous" residence over that 10 year period can qualify for
             enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a)."

 12. Mr Lee suggested that whether the respondent had been in the United
    Kingdom for ten years or for five years made no material difference
    because of the findings at paragraph 10.  At paragraph 10 the judge
    said this:-

         "The [claimant] was aware of the significant  length  of  time  the
         [respondent] had lived in the UK when making the decision to deport
         him, a  decision  made  without  having  evidence  of  whether  the
         [respondent] posed a high risk  of  reconviction/offending.   There
         was no probation report or NOMS report prepared.  I find myself  in
         agreement with the point made by Mr Alexander that  it  is  unclear
         therefore on what grounds or  on  what  basis  the  [claimant]  has
         reached her decision.  The [claimant] was aware that [respondent's]
         whole family  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  of  course
         includes  his  mother,  stepfather  and   younger   siblings.   The
         [claimant]  was  aware  that  the  [respondent]  has  socially  and
         culturally integrated himself into the UK and given the  length  of
         time he has been here since he  was  a  child  it  must  have  been
         questionable whether the [respondent] could reintegrate  back  into
         Portugal, a country where he  has  hardly  lived.   He  now  speaks
         English fluently and speaks very little Portuguese."

13.  I have concluded that any error in the judge's determination (and I  am
    far from satisfied that there was any error) was not material given the
    level of the respondent's social  and  cultural  integration  into  the
    United Kingdom as identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14.  The making of the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  did  not
    involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  his
    decision.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
