
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00534/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th July 2016                        |On 4th October 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Norman, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Barcello) promulgated on  24th  February
    2016 in which the  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  PP  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  against
    him under the provisions of  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to as "the  Regulations").



 2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008.   Unless  and  until  a
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise the Appellant is granted anonymity.
     No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
    him or members of his family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
    Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to her as the Respondent  as  she  was
    the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to
    PP as the Appellant as he  was  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland.  He appealed against the decision
    of the Respondent  who,  on  30th  October  2015,  decided  to  make  a
    deportation order against him under Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 5. The Appellant's history is set out as follows.  The Appellant claims to
    have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  or  about  2005.   He  began  a
    relationship with his partner shortly after  arriving  and  during  the
    course of their relationship had a child together born  in  2007.   The
    Appellant asserted that since his arrival he had been in employment and
    was therefore exercising treaty rights.

 6. During the course of his residence in the United Kingdom the  Appellant
    committed a  large  number  of  criminal  convictions.   His  offending
    history is set out in the decision letter at paragraphs 4  to  26.   It
    demonstrates that the Appellant received 21 convictions for 42 offences
    from 19th  December  2007  until  20th  August  2015.   Those  offences
    included two offences against a person, offences of theft  and  kindred
    offences,  offences  relating  to  drugs  and  miscellaneous   offences
    relating to driving matters.  The criminal  history  of  the  Appellant
    also demonstrates  that  he  has  a  number  of  offences  relating  to
    breaching orders made by the court including community  orders  imposed
    as an alternative to imprisonment.

 7. The Appellant was sentenced to three periods  of  imprisonment  on  1st
    August 2013 he was convicted for driving whilst disqualified and  using
    a vehicle whilst uninsured and sentenced to twenty weeks' imprisonment.
     On 11th September 2013 he was convicted at the magistrates' court  for
    battery and sentenced to four weeks' imprisonment; this was an  offence
    of domestic violence against his partner and a  restraining  order  was
    also made for a period of  one  year.   On  20th  August  2015  he  was
    convicted at the Crown Court of an offence  of  burglary  and  handling
    stolen goods and was sentenced to a period of ten months' imprisonment.
     It  is  not  necessary  to  set  out  the  large  number  of  criminal
    convictions as they are set out within the decision letter.

 8. On 30th September 2013 the Appellant  was  served  with  a  "Minded  to
    Remove" letter and questionnaire.  It was  sent  to  his  address.   As
    there was no response to that letter, it is said that a warning  letter
    was sent to the Appellant in October 2013, however that was returned by
    the Royal Mail.

 9. Following his conviction in August 2015 at the Crown Court for burglary
    and handling stolen goods for which  he  received  a  sentence  of  ten
    months' imprisonment, he was served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation on 16th October 2015.  He was  detained  under  immigration
    powers and served with reasons for the detention letter on 27th October
    2015.

10. On 30th October 2015 the Secretary of State made a decision  to  deport
    him, having first  taken  into  consideration  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations").  The  relevant  decision  taken  on  30th  October  made
    reference to the issue of his residence and that whilst he  claimed  to
    have arrived in the UK ten years ago, he had  provided  no  documentary
    evidence in support and that whilst his criminal  history  spanned  the
    years of  2005-2015,  it  was  insufficient  evidence  of  five  years'
    residence in the United  Kingdom  and  in  the  absence  of  sufficient
    evidence as to how he had resided in the UK  and  had  been  exercising
    treaty rights in accordance with the  Regulations,  it  was  considered
    that he had not acquired permanent residence.  Reference is  also  made
    to his numerous criminal convictions/history and that the Secretary  of
    State had considered the offence for which he had  been  convicted  and
    his conduct, in accordance with Regulation 21 of the 2006  Regulations.
    The decision set out that the Secretary of State was satisfied that  he
    would pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    interests of public policy if he were allowed to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom and that his deportation was justified under Regulation 21.

11. The decision went onto state that the Secretary of  State  had  decided
    under Regulation 19(3)(b) that he should be removed and an  order  made
    in accordance with Regulation 24(3) requiring him to leave  the  United
    Kingdom and prohibiting him from re-entering whilst  the  order  is  in
    force.  The Secretary of State proposed  to  give  directions  for  his
    removal to Poland, the country of which he was a national.

12. The decision also considered Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and  the  limited
    evidence that had been provided by the Appellant relevant to his family
    life with his child.

13. The full reasons for that decision are set  out  in  a  letter  of  the
    Respondent dated 30th October 2015 (see G2 Respondent's bundle).

14.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It was asserted in the Grounds of Appeal that  the  decision
    was disproportionate in the light of the circumstances of his case, the
    length of sentence and that he was exercising treaty  rights  prior  to
    his arrest and asserted that he had a permanent right of residence.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 18th  February  2016.
    In a decision promulgated on 24th February  of  that  year,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.  The judge found that he
    had acquired a permanent right of residence (see reasons at  paragraphs
    [13(ii)]).  The judge had heard evidence from the Appellant and his ex-
    partner and the judge found that they had given oral evidence which was
    "clear and consistent" and that the documents produced by the Appellant
    supported, in part, that oral evidence.

16. As to the judge's consideration of Regulation 21, the judge set out the
    criminal history at paragraph [13(iv)].  As to the most recent  offence
    in 2015 for which he was imprisoned for a period of eleven months,  the
    First-tier Tribunal had no sentencing remarks of the  judge.   Thus  he
    accepted the Appellant's account set out at [13(vi)].

17. As to the circumstances of his  daughter,  he  made  reference  to  the
    institution of care proceedings and that the child had been  placed  in
    long-term foster care following a care order having been  made.  As  to
    the Appellant's  conduct,  the  judge  found  that  he  had  sought  to
    undertake rehabilitative  activities  and  that  whilst  his  offending
    history was "woeful" that he  was  "desperate  to  re-establish  direct
    contact with  his  daughter  and  to  apply  to  have  the  care  order
    discharged."   The  judge  considered  this  to  remain   a   "powerful
    motivating factor for the Appellant".   In  respect  of  rehabilitative
    work, the judge found that he had attended AA meetings, completed a job
    programme and a "thinking course".  He had participated  on  a  reading
    course and made him useful in the prison environment.  The  judge  also
    referred to a course of therapy.

18. The judge set out the 2006 Regulations at paragraphs [14] to  [19]  and
    made reference to his past criminal record.   The  judge  against  that
    background went onto  consider  whether  the  Appellant  represented  a
    "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat".   However,  he
    concluded that he was not satisfied that the  Appellant  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.  The judge found that
    he had committed a large number of both minor and serious offences  and
    had been imprisoned on a number of occasions.  However, the judge found
    that to consider his offences only would be to ignore the  efforts  the
    Appellant had made to  address  his  behaviour  and  the  "very  strong
    motivation he had to avoid future offending".

19. In  this  regard  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he had made a stupid  decision  to  be  involved  in  the
    offence  of  burglary  and  that  characterised  his  other  offending.
    However, the judge found that he was genuinely motivated to  avoid  re-
    offending. The judge also found that he had made a significant start to
    reforming his behaviour.  Thus he found that he was motivated  to  lead
    an "industrious and crime free life on his return from  prison".   Thus
    the judge found that his  deportation  was  not  justified  on  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security.  Consequently  he  allowed
    the appeal.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

20. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 25th  March  2016  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy.

21. The Appellant was not in attendance at the hearing but was  represented
    by Counsel.  Time was given for the Appellant to attend but  by  midday
    he had still not attended and whilst the bail file was not  before  the
    court, Counsel indicated that bail had been granted at a later stage in
    the proceedings.  Counsel however submitted that there was no need  for
    an adjournment for the Appellant's attendance and  submitted  that  the
    case should be heard in his absence to decide whether or not  an  error
    of law had been established by the Secretary of State.

22. I therefore heard submissions from both parties which are  set  out  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  These submissions will be incorporated into
    my consideration of whether or not the  grounds  demonstrate  that  the
    judge's decision involved a making of an error on a point of law.   The
    Appellant had provided a Rule 24 response  which  Counsel  also  relied
    upon.

The grounds:

23. Dealing with the first ground, Mr Bates submitted that the judge failed
    to give adequate reasons as to how and why the Appellant  had  acquired
    permanent residence and that it had been the Secretary of State's  case
    that he had failed to provide documentary evidence to demonstrate  that
    he had resided in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  five  years  in
    accordance with the Regulations.  In his  oral  submissions  he  argued
    that the judge had made no finding as to why  it  was  unreasonable  or
    impossible to provide documentary evidence in support of his  claim  to
    have acquired permanent residence and to assess  the  credibility  with
    this in mind.  He submitted that it was wrong of the judge to simply to
    accept oral evidence.

24. The written grounds also make reference to the sentence of imprisonment
    following his conviction in 2011 and that the  period  of  imprisonment
    broke the continuity of residence.

25. By way of reply, Miss Norman relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  and
    submitted that the judge had given detailed reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion as to whether the Appellant had acquired a  permanent  right
    of residence and had taken into account the oral  and  the  documentary
    evidence provided.  She submitted that he was an experienced judge  who
    assessed the oral evidence that he had heard and was entitled to  place
    weight upon that oral evidence alongside some documentary evidence that
    had been produced when reaching findings of fact.

26. The relevant findings of fact made by the judge on this issue  was  set
    out at paragraphs [13(1)-(iii)] the judge found that the Appellant  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2005 and had exercised  treaty  rights
    as a worker from November 2005 until the time that he was  remanded  in
    custody on 16th February 2011.  The judge had heard evidence  from  the
    appellant and his ex-partner and that whilst neither were able  to  say
    when in 2005 he had arrived, the judge accepted the evidence of his ex-
    partner that having met whilst working in a bar  in  November  of  that
    year, that on the balance of probabilities, it was likely that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights from that time.  As for employment thereafter,
    he accepted that they began a relationship and that it had lasted until
    they separated in 2013 and that throughout that  period  the  Appellant
    was in employment.  Firstly with the bar in which the  Appellant's  ex-
    partner held a managerial position and secondly, for a company  dealing
    with claims from 2006 to 2008 before establishing his  own  company  in
    2008 along with his ex-partner until it was  dissolved  in  2012.   The
    judge found that there was no break in employment based on the evidence
    given by the appellant and his ex-partner.  The judge found  that  they
    had given oral evidence which was "clear and consistent" and  that  the
    documents produced by  the  Appellant  supported,  in  part,  the  oral
    evidence that he had heard.

27. Contrary to the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent, the judge
    was aware that the Secretary of State's case was that the Appellant had
    failed to establish a permanent right of residence due to the  lack  of
    supporting evidence and the judge set this  out  at  paragraphs  [2(i)-
    (ii)].  Since the decision letter had been served,  the  Appellant  did
    provide some documentary evidence set out in Appellant's bundle  2  and
    also  written  evidence  from  his  ex-partner.   The  judge  therefore
    assessed that evidence and gave sufficient reasons as  to  why  he  had
    reached the conclusion that he was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    been exercising treaty rights  from  November  2005  for  a  continuous
    period of five years.  The judge gave reasons as to why  he  had  found
    the starting date of 5th November and that whilst neither  party  could
    say which month he had arrived in the UK, it was open to the  judge  to
    take into account the evidence given by his ex-partner  that  they  had
    met in  November  2005  whilst  both  working  at  the  same  place  of
    employment.  The judge provided further reasons which he placed  weight
    upon, namely that she had held a managerial position  at  the  bar  for
    some time prior to November and that it was unlikely that he could have
    been working there for any period  without  her  knowledge.   Thus  the
    judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion
    that the beginning of the period was  in  November  2005  and  for  the
    period in which it was claimed that he had worked behind the bar.

28. As to the rest of the five year period which would be required  to  run
    from November 2005 until November 2010, the  judge  accepted  the  oral
    evidence of both parties that they had been  in  a  relationship  until
    September 2013 and that the evidence of his ex-partner  was  consistent
    with the Appellant's evidence as to his work  and  employment  history.
    Whilst the grounds refer to lack of documentary evidence, there  is  no
    requirement  under  the  Regulations   that   the   Appellant   produce
    documentary evidence.  In any event, it is not correct to say that  the
    Appellant had not provided any documents.  As  the  judge  set  out  at
    paragraph [13(ii)] he had made his findings of fact  not  only  on  the
    oral evidence of the  Appellant,  but  also  the  oral  evidence  of  a
    supporting witness and had found that their  evidence  when  considered
    together was "clear and consistent".  He also found that that  evidence
    was supported by the documentary evidence.  I observed that  the  judge
    did not identify what that documentary evidence was nor did he identify
    what it was about the oral evidence which was consistent and  it  would
    have been preferable  for  him  to  have  done  so.   However,  in  the
    Appellant's bundle (AB2) this contained documentary evidence to support
    the  oral  evidence  given  by  both  parties  as  to  the  Appellant's
    employment history, including documentary evidence of the business that
    he and his partner were engaged in between  2008  and  2012  (printouts
    showing the Appellant and ex-partner as directors of a company, when it
    began and when it was dissolved).

29. In those circumstances it was not necessary for the judge to  make  any
    further assessment of the  Appellant's  case  as  to  why  he  had  not
    produced any further documentary evidence as the judge found but he was
    able to make an assessment on the evidence that he did have before him.
    This was not solely based on the oral evidence  but  was  supported  by
    some documentary evidence and the oral evidence of a  witness  whom  he
    found to be clear and consistent.

30. There is also no merit in the submission that the Appellant's period of
    imprisonment in 2011  broke  the  continuity  of  residence.   This  is
    because the five year period of continuous residence was found  by  the
    judge to have begun in November 2005  and  to  end  in  November  2010.
    Those were findings that the judge was entitled to make on the evidence
    that he had heard and  had  read  and  he  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching the decision that the Appellant had acquired a permanent right
    of residence.

31. The second ground relates to the judge's findings  that  the  Appellant
    did not represent a "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society"  (Regulation
    21(5)(c)).

32. In this respect it was submitted that the  Appellant  had  committed  a
    large number of offences and that the assessment in the decision letter
    that he was at a high risk of re-offending was justified and  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  give  adequate  reasons   for   finding
    otherwise.

33. It was further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    engage with the Appellant's offending triggers including  his  lack  of
    culpability and no evidence as  to  his  "reformation".   In  his  oral
    submissions, Mr Bates submitted that the judge had not taken account of
    all the countervailing aspects and in particular  that  when  assessing
    his motivation to change, that the  Appellant's  history  of  offending
    demonstrated that this continued at the time that he was having  direct
    contact with the child.  Thus for the judge to arrive at the conclusion
    that he was motivated to obtain an order for contact had to be  weighed
    against his previous conduct.  He also submitted that the judge had not
    taken into account the contents of the detention review as to  risk  of
    re-offending.

34. By way of reply Miss Norman  submitted  that  the  judge  had  properly
    considered the factors set out in Regulation 21(5) and that there  were
    not serious grounds of public policy justifying deportation.

35. She submitted that the  judge  had  properly  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's offending history as set out  at  paragraphs  [13(iv)-(vi)]
    and reminded himself that a person's previous convictions could not  in
    themselves  justify  a  decision  to  deport  (paragraph  [15]  of  the
    decision).  She further submitted that it was  open  to  the  judge  to
    reach the conclusion based on the Appellant's motivation  that  he  was
    desperate to re-establish contact with his child and that  this  was  a
    "powerful motivating factor" for him.  She  submitted  that  the  judge
    took into account the triggers of alcohol and that he was  more  likely
    to re-offend when unemployed but found that he had  undertaken  courses
    in this respect and had an offer of employment.  The judge had properly
    considered the evidence before him as to the efforts  taken  to  reform
    and was thus entitled to reach the conclusions that he did.

36. She further submitted that  there  was  no  risk  assessment  from  the
    Secretary of State and there had been no OASys report.   The  detention
    review was not an assessment of risk.

37. I have considered with care the submissions  of  the  parties  on  this
    issue and remind myself that I can only interfere with  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal if it is demonstrated that there is an error of
    law in the decision reached.  Contrary to the Respondent's submissions,
    it has not been demonstrated that the judge had either failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for reaching his  decision  (as  the  written  grounds
    contend) or that he failed to  take  into  account  any  countervailing
    factors.

38. Regulation 21(5)(c) requires the personal conduct  of  the  prospective
    deportee to represent a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society".   To
    represent such a threat it is necessary to establish a future  risk  of
    re-offending and the nature and seriousness of such offences.  Thus  it
    is only then an individual would present a "present" threat.

39.  The judge's findings are set out within the determination.  As to  his
    convictions they were dealt with at paragraph [13(iv)].  As to the most
    recent offence in 2015 for which he was  imprisoned  for  a  period  of
    eleven months, the First-tier Tribunal had no sentencing remarks of the
    judge.  Thus the judge accepted the  Appellant's  account  set  out  at
    paragraph [13(vi)].  The judge made reference to the  circumstances  of
    his daughter who had been placed in long-term foster care  following  a
    care order having been made on 8th December 2014.   Neither  party  had
    provided documentary evidence in relation to the care  proceedings  but
    the judge had evidence from the Appellant's  ex-partner  who  had  been
    involved in those proceedings and he accepted what she had said  as  to
    the institution of proceedings and the orders that had been made.

40. As to the Appellant's conduct, the judge found that he  had  sought  to
    undertake rehabilitative activities and whilst  his  offending  history
    was "woeful" that  there  were  powerful  motivating  factors  for  the
    Appellant including wishing to "re-establish direct  contact  with  his
    daughter".  In respect of  the  rehabilitative  work  taken  so  as  to
    demonstrate that he would not re-offend, the judge found  that  he  had
    attended AA  meetings,  completed  a  job  programme  and  a  "thinking
    course".  He had participated also on a reading  course  and  had  made
    himself useful in the prison  environment  for  other  prisoners.   The
    judge also referred to a course of therapy.

41. The judge set out the 2006 Regulations  at  paragraphs  [14]  to  [19].
    When considering the personal  conduct  of  the  Appellant,  the  judge
    considered the criminal offending and the negative impact  on  society.
    The judge took into account his past criminal history including  having
    driven  vehicles  without  insurance  and  when  disqualified  and  the
    numerous occasions on which he had failed to surrender  to  custody  or
    had breached orders.  The judge regarded the  offence  of  burglary  as
    very serious and that this was an escalation in his  offending  career.
    However, the judge found it unfair to characterise  him  as  a  "career
    criminal" and the judge reminded  himself  that  he  had  undertaken  a
    period of custody from 2011 to 2013.

42. Against that background  the  judge  went  onto  consider  whether  the
    Appellant represented a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat".  The judge rejected the Respondent's submission because of his
    refusal to leave the country that that represented a risk  to  society.
    He gave reasons as to why he had found that that was "far too  great  a
    leap".  The judge found that he had committed a large  number  of  both
    minor and serious offences and had been imprisoned but that to consider
    these offences only would be to ignore the efforts  the  Appellant  had
    made to address his behaviour and the "very strong motivation he had to
    avoid future  offending".   In  this  regard  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted the Appellant's evidence and placed weight upon it that he had
    made "a stupid decision" to be involved in burglary and that  had  also
    characterised his other offending.   However,  he  found  that  he  was
    genuinely motivated to avoid  re-offending  and  that  because  of  the
    motivation  this  had  made  a  significant  start  to  reforming   his
    behaviour.  Thus the judge found that he  was  motivated  to  lead  "an
    industrious and crime free life on his return from prison".

43. Contrary to the Respondent's submissions, the judge  did  consider  the
    Appellant's past offending; both the nature of that offending  and  the
    number of convictions.  For  making  an  assessment,  of  his  relevant
    personal conduct the judge  took  into  account  the  contents  of  the
    detention review at paragraphs  [17(1)].   Although  making  no  direct
    reference to it, the contents of paragraph [17(1)] set out  in  summary
    paragraph 9 of the detention review.  As Miss Norman submits, there was
    no OASys report nor any evidence  as  to  risk  of  re-offending.   The
    detention review was not a risk assessment and was  solely  based  upon
    his past convictions.  As  the  judge  reminded  himself,  whilst  past
    offending may be relevant in assessing future risk the  seriousness  of
    the past conviction and indeed the fact that he  has  past  convictions
    cannot in themselves justify the deportation of an EU national,  unlike
    the provisions that deal with non-EEA  foreign  criminals.   The  judge
    also took into account that the last offence was  a  "step-up"  in  the
    offending and  that  his  past  conduct  did  demonstrate  "a  repeated
    indifference to the  laws  of  this  country".   However  at  paragraph
    [17(2)] the judge weighed in the balance against his  criminal  record,
    the Appellant's efforts to address his behaviour and the  "very  strong
    motivation he had to avoid future offending".

44. It is plain from reading the determination that the judge had formed an
    entirely positive view of the Appellant  and  his  evidence.   This  is
    reflected in his finding as to whether  he  had  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence but also on the  issue  as  to  a  future  risk  re-
    offending.  He had set out at paragraph [17(ii)] that he had found  the
    Appellant's evidence to be "sincere and forthright".  He also  accepted
    the Appellant's account of the last offence for which he was sentenced.
     The Secretary of State had failed to provide a  copy  of  the  judge's
    sentencing remarks and had not applied for any adjournment or sought to
    produce them at any stage.  In those  circumstances,  the  judge  could
    only consider the evidence before him which was that of the  Appellant.



45. The judge, having had the opportunity to hear his evidence and  for  it
    to be the subject of cross-examination, formed the opinion that he  was
    "genuinely motivated to avoid re-offending," and considered  that  this
    was due to the Appellant understanding the effects upon  his  own  life
    and those of his daughter with whom  he  was  seeking  to  re-establish
    contact and that this underpinned the judge's view that he would not re-
    offend.

46. Mr Bates submitted that the judge failed to take into account that when
    the Appellant was with his daughter he  still  committed  a  number  of
    offences and thus it did not provide  motivation  for  him  to  change.
    However, the judge made it plain that he was considering  the  evidence
    of the Appellant now and whether it represented a present risk based on
    the totality of that evidence.

47. The determination also sets out that the judge did not only rely on the
    motivation to seek to re-establish contact with his daughter  but  also
    relied upon the judge's own assessment of the Appellant's  evidence  as
    to his efforts to reform.  In this context he found that the "Appellant
    had a good insight into his offended  related  problems  which  he  was
    willing to acknowledge" which included the misuse of alcohol  and  lack
    of employment.  The judge found that he had addressed this by work with
    the AA and that there was evidence in the Appellant's bundle to support
    sessions with them.  There was also evidence, which the judge  accepted
    that he had an offer  of  employment,  that  he  had  completed  a  job
    programme, a thinking course and had participated in a  reading  course
    and also made himself useful to the prison  population  (see  paragraph
    [13(viii)].

48. I remind myself I can only interfere with the decision of a judge if it
    has been demonstrated that there was an error of law and in this  case,
    the judge had  the  opportunity  to  hear  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his witness and for this to  be  the  subject  of  cross-
    examination.

49. As set out in the well-known case of Piglowska v Piglowski [1999]  UKHL
    27, Lord Hoffmann said this:

             "... the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage which
             the first instance judge had in seeing  the  parties  and  the
             other witnesses. This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
             credibility and findings of primary fact. But it goes  further
             than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation of  those
             facts..."


    Then there is a quotation from his own decision in Biogen Inc v  Medeva
    Ltd [1997] RPC 1:

             "The need for appellate caution in reversing the trial judge's
             evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid  grounds
             than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings of
             fact, even by the most meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
             incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon him
             by the primary evidence. His  expressed  findings  are  always
             surrounded by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
             relative weight, minor qualification and nuance ...  of  which
             time and language do not permit exact  expression,  but  which
             may play an important part in the judge's overall evaluation."


50. The judge did not set out all of the evidence that was before  him  but
    it  is  plain  from  reading  the  determination  that  he  found   the
    Appellant's oral evidence to be both credible and persuasive and  along
    with the documents that had been produced  concerning  his  efforts  to
    reform, reached a decision that was open to him on  the  evidence.   It
    may well be that this was not the only outcome possible on the facts in
    this particular case but this judge directed himself correctly  in  law
    and that his conclusion, even if properly  characterised  as  one  that
    might be thought to be a generous one,  does  not  disclose  any  legal
    error.

51. Consequently the grounds do not demonstrate any error of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall  stand;  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                Date 30/9/2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
