
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00238/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 July 2020                      |On 22 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                  Mame [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shore, promulgated on 4 February 2020. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 4 June 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The appellant last entered the United Kingdom after he was issued  with
    an EEA Family Permit on 1 December 2009.  He  was  subsequently  issued
    with a residence card valid until 25 June 2015.  On  9  July  2015,  he
    sought a permanent residence card. That application was refused and the
    appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was   unsuccessful.   The
    appellant received a criminal conviction for drugs offences on 25  July
    2016 and was sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment.

 4. On 15 April 2019, the appellant was served with a  decision  to  deport
    him under regulation 33 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016. This is the decision under appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The  appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, citing injuries resulting from a car  accident.  Counsel  for
    the appellant withdrew following the judge's decision to  proceed  with
    the  hearing  in  the  appellant's  absence.  At  that   hearing,   the
    respondent's representative handed up  a  PNC  record  of  a  different
    person which was said to relate  to  the  appellant  and  which  listed
    sixteen convictions. The judge relied on that record in dismissing  the
    appeal.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argue that ten of the sixteen offences could  not
    relate to the appellant because he was in prison at  the  time  and  in
    addition, the Tribunal had recorded his date of birth wrongly.  It  was
    also briefly argued that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights or the best interests of his children, one
    of whom suffers from autism.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  sought.  In  addition,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce considered that it was not  clear  from  the
    decision whether the serious  grounds  test  at  Regulation  27(3)  was
    applied. Directions were sent to the appellant and respondent  by  post
    on 8 June 2020, inviting submissions as to whether there was  an  error
    of law as well as  whether  the  matter  could  be  decided  without  a
    hearing. The appellant  is  no  longer  represented.  No  response  was
    received from him. Nor was any response received from the respondent by
    29 June 2020, which was the deadline for a response,  nor  by  10  July
    2020 when this matter was considered.

 8. In view of the absence of any response from the respondent as  well  as
    the obvious error regarding the assessment of the convictions, I  could
    see no reason to delay consideration of this matter any further.

Decision on error of law

 9. The decision letter in this case listed only  a  conviction  for  drugs
    offences in 2016, which was followed by a 6-year prison sentence.

10. The PNC lists a large number of convictions apparently committed  by  a
    different person or  people  including  during  the  three-year  period
    following the appellant's 2016 conviction when he was in prison.

11. In addition, the PNC relates to a  person  from  Eritrea,  whereas  the
    appellant is a Senegalese national. The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    this evidence without scrutiny and relied upon it to reach a view  that
    the appellant posed a serious threat to the  fundamental  interests  of
    society [88.19], [89.5] and [89.7]. Anxious scrutiny of this  evidence,
    which  was  handed  up  without  notice  to  the   appellant   or   his
    representatives was essential to ensure a fair hearing.  That  scrutiny
    was absent in this case. Accordingly, the appellant has  been  deprived
    of a fair consideration of his case and the matter must be remitted for
    a de novo hearing, with no findings preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Shore.


Signed:                                 Date 05 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
