


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00134/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th January 2016                      |  On 30th March 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     R K
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer)
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of  State,  with
   permission, against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer
   promulgated on 3rd July 2015 in which he allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
   against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him to  Poland  under
   the EEA Regulations taken on 30th April  2015.   The  Judge  allowed  the
   appeal under the EEA Regulations and on Article 8 grounds.

2. For the sake of continuity we shall  continue  to  refer  to  RK  as  the
   Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent in this decision.

3. The Appellant was born on 27th May 1976.  He  entered  the  UK  with  his
   partner, also Polish in August 2012. He worked in a turkey factory  until
   he was arrested in February 2015.  He remained in custody  until  he  was
   removed to Poland on 14th July 2015, the day before his appeal before the
   First-tier Tribunal.

4. The Appellant's wife worked until she ceased  due  to  pregnancy.   Their
   daughter was born on 6th November 2013.

5. After the Appellant was detained his parents  travelled  from  Poland  to
   assist his partner in the care of the child so that she could work.  They
   live together in a council house in the Appellant's partner's name.   She
   is in employment supporting the family.


6. The Secretary of State's decision to deport the  Appellant  followed  his
   conviction on 20th February 2015 at South Derbyshire Magistrates Court on
   two counts of burglary and theft. He had previously been convicted in the
   UK on 15th July 2013, also at South  Derbyshire  Magistrate's  Court,  of
   handling stolen goods.  On that occasion he was fined and ordered to  pay
   costs.

7. The Appellant  also has a considerable number of  convictions  in  Poland
   as follows:-


          a. 10th February 2004 - 3 counts of burglary and 1 of  theft  -  2
             years and 5 months imprisonment.

          b. 14th April 2005 - possession of narcotic drugs or  psychotropic
             substances - 30 hours unpaid work - amended on 6th July 2007 to
             6 months imprisonment

          c. 28th September 2005 - theft - 10 months imprisonment  suspended
             for 3 years - activated on 17th September 20017 and  imprisoned
             for 10 months.

          d. 8th January 2007 - burglary - 1  years  imprisonment  suspended
             for 3 years.

          e. 30th May 2007  -  illegal  deprivation  of  liberty  -  1  year
             imprisonment suspended for 3 years -  activated  on  20  August
             2009 and imprisoned for 1 year.

          f. 1st  August  2007  -  dealing  in  stolen  goods  -  18  months
             imprisonment.

          g. 14th  October  2008  -  causing  bodily  impairment  of  medium
             severity, insulting a public official -  2  years  imprisonment
             suspended, a supervision order and  to  comply  with  probation
             measures and to refrain from alcohol abuse.

          h. 17th December 2009 - brawl and battery - 2  years  imprisonment
             suspended for 5 years  -  activated  on  2nd  August  2013  and
             imprisoned for 2 years.

          i. 11th September 2012 - theft - 17 months imprisonment.
8. The First-tier Tribunal did not hear evidence from the  Appellant  as  he
   had been removed the previous day. The Tribunal did however hear from his
   partner and his parents. His parents came to the  UK  in  order  to  help
   their "daughter-in-law" with the care of the  child  so  that  she  could
   continue to work after the Appellant was imprisoned.

9. The Judge noted  at  paragraph  29  of  his  Decision  and  Reasons  that
   confirmation of the Appellant's criminal convictions in Poland  were  set
   out in the  notification  from  UK  Central  Authority  for  Exchange  of
   Criminal Records issued in response to  a  request  from  the  Derbyshire
   Constabulary on 27th August 2014 which showed the nine convictions listed
   above.

10. At paragraph 30 the Judge noted that he had not been provided  with  any
   further details of those offences such as  police/prosecution  summaries,
   pre-sentence reports, sentencing remarks or subsequent probation reports.
   He noted that he had no professional assessment of the  Appellant's  risk
   of harm or reoffending in Poland or of criminal offending in the UK.

11. At paragraph 31 the Judge noted  that  he  had  been  provided  with  no
   official record of the outcome of the proceedings at  Derby  Crown  Court
   but was told by the Appellant's partner that he had been sentenced  to  8
   months imprisonment suspended for two years.

12. The Judge then noted at paragraph 51 once again that he had  no  details
   of the various offences in Poland and at paragraph 52 he found that there
   was no clear pattern of serious offending by the Appellant in  Poland  or
   any other State and that he had not indulged in crimes that may  endanger
   the general public or the economic well-being of the UK. He then found at
   paragraph 59 that it  had  not  been  established  that  the  Appellant's
   criminal conduct is such that he poses such a threat to  public  security
   and/or public policy that his deportation was required.

13. So far as his decision under  Article  8  is  concerned  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge  found at paragraph 84 that the Appellant had  established
   private and family life in the United Kingdom such  that  Article  8  was
   engaged and then went on to consider proportionality.  At  paragraph  72,
   when considering the best interests of the child, he concluded  that  the
   best interests of the child were to be cared for by both parents and that
   it was not reasonable to require the child to move to  Poland  where  the
   family had no assets, employment or support.  He concluded  at  paragraph
   92  that  the  proposed  deportation  would  be   disproportionate   when
   considering all matters in the round. He found "in particular as a result
   of his arrest, caution; immigration detention and these  proceedings  the
   Appellant is now aware of the consequences  of  crime".  In  addition  he
   found that "he is now aware of the  prospect  of  deportation  and  these
   combine to ensure that the Appellant could be expected not to  engage  in
   further criminal activities." Having come to that  conclusion  the  Judge
   found that "the ultimate aim of justification of the interference had not
   been made out".

14. At paragraph 93 the Judge found that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
   established that the Appellant's past criminal actions  were  so  serious
   that she was able to justify the decision to deport him. He took note  of
   the public interest issues but found that "in this  particular  case  the
   Appellant's personal circumstances were such as to  outweigh  deportation
   factors  when  considering  the  proportionality  of   the   Respondent's
   decision".

15. Finally at paragraph 94 the Judge found that deportation  would  not  be
   proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued by the Respondent. He allowed
   the appeal both under the EEA regulations and on human rights grounds.

16. The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  having  lodged
   fairly lengthy grounds which can however be summarised  as  an  assertion
   that the First-tier Tribunal's findings and conclusions were bordering on
   irrational or perverse given the Appellant's criminal  record  in  Poland
   and offending during the short time that  he  had  been  in  the   United
   Kingdom.

17. We agree with the Secretary of  State's  submission  that  the  findings
   were perverse in light of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. It
   was immaterial that the First-tier Tribunal did not have more details  of
   the offences in Poland. The Judge had more than  sufficient  evidence  to
   establish that the Appellant was a serial offender in Poland and that his
   offending was sufficiently serious on almost each and every  occasion  to
   warrant custodial sentences being imposed. He clearly did not observe the
   terms of his  various  suspended  sentences  as  most  were  subsequently
   activated. It is not true to say that there was no pattern of  offending.
   The offences are for dishonesty and violence including burglary. It is of
   particular note that his offending in the United Kingdom was of  handling
   stolen goods  and  burglary  which  followed  the  same  pattern  as  his
   offending in Poland. It is also  very  significant  that  since  2004  he
   barely spent any time at large in Poland without offending and he was  in
   the United Kingdom only a very short time before he was convicted  of  an
   offence. Having arrived in March 2012 he was convicted in July 2013.  The
   criminal record was not challenged.

18. Having found that the Judge's findings were perverse we  set  aside  his
   decision in its entirety and we redecide the appeal.

19. The Appellant's partner attended the hearing before us. Regrettably  due
   to an administrative error  by  the  Tribunal,  an  interpreter  was  not
   available.  However,  she  agreed  to  proceed  without  the  use  of  an
   interpreter and was  able  to  give  clear  evidence.  Her  evidence  was
   confined to Article 8 matters. She told us that she had been  working  in
   the UK until she was obliged to cease because of her  pregnancy  and  she
   has been working since the Appellant was detained with the assistance  of
   her parents in law who provide childcare. She told us that as soon as the
   Appellant was  deported  to  Poland  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  Polish
   authorities and he remains detained today.  She  confirmed  that  he  had
   committed a number of offences and had convictions both before and  after
   she had met him.

20. She told us she lives in a house rented from the council in the UK  with
   her parents in law and her daughter  Nicola.  She  has  no  intention  of
   returning to Poland as she would not be able to work  because  she  would
   not have childcare. Working in Poland would not provide the  standard  of
   living for her daughter that employment in the UK does. Her  own  parents
   are alcoholics and unsuitable to care for her daughter. Her  daughter  is
   her primary concern and she will remain in the UK irrespective  of  where
   the appellant is. She told us  that  the  Appellant's  parents  will  not
   return to Poland either but will remain with her.

21. Under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 the Secretary of  State  is
   entitled to  deport  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  19(3)  if  the
   Secretary of State has decided that the person's removal is justified  on
   the grounds of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health  in
   accordance with Regulation 21.

22. The Appellant in this case, not having acquired permanent  residence  in
   the UK or been in the UK for 10 years is afforded the  minimum  level  of
   protection, namely that the decision must be  taken  on  the  grounds  of
   public policy, public health or public security and  in  compliance  with
   the principles set out in Regulation  21(5).   That  Regulation  requires
   that the decision :-

          a. must comply with the principle of proportionality
          b. must be based exclusively on the personal conduct of the person
             concerned;
          c. the personal conduct of the person concerned must  represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one
             of the fundamental interests of society;
          d. matters isolated from particulars of the case or  which  relate
             to considerations of general  prevention  do  not  justify  the
             decision;
          e. a person's previous criminal convictions do not  in  themselves
             justify the decision.


23. Additionally, Regulation 21(6) provides that before  taking  a  relevant
   decision on the grounds of public policy or public security  in  relation
   to a person who is resident in the United Kingdom the decision maker must
   take account of considerations such as age, state of health,  family  and
   economic situation of the person, the person's length of residence in the
   United Kingdom, the personal social and  cultural  integration  into  the
   United Kingdom and the extent of the person's links with his  country  of
   origin.
24. In this case we find that the Appellant clearly  represents  a  genuine,
   present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental
   interests of society. This is not purely based on his past offending.  It
   is based rather on the fact that his life since 2004 has been categorised
   by offending which despite repeated opportunities  by  way  of  suspended
   sentences he has failed to stop. He continued his offending behaviour  in
   Poland until shortly before he came to the UK. He had been in the UK only
   a short time before he committed similar offences here  and  we  have  no
   hesitation in finding that if he were to remain in  the  UK  the  pattern
   would continue and he  would  commit  further  offences.  It  is  in  the
   interests of public security to be protected from crime.

25. Having heard from the Appellant's partner it is clear that his  presence
   in this country is not necessary for her to continue to  exercise  Treaty
   rights in the UK as she has continued to do so  since  his  detention  in
   February 2015 and she has made clear that she  will  continue  to  remain
   working  in  the  UK  with  the  assistance   of   her   "parents-in-law"
   notwithstanding his absence.

26. So far as ties to Poland are concerned, we are not  satisfied  that  the
   Appellant's ties to Poland have ceased given the  very  short  period  of
   time he was in the UK.

27. In conclusion we find it entirely proportionate that this  Appellant  be
   deported from the  UK  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy  and,  public
   security. For the same reasons we  find  it  entirely  proportionate  and
   appropriate for  him  to  be  deported  under  the  EEA  regulations  his
   deportation is not a disproportionate breach of his right  to  a  private
   and family life as protected  by  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   Given  his
   partner's attitude and the infancy of his daughter when he  was  detained
   we do not find that the latter's best interests require his presence.  If
   the future for this Appellant continues as in the past, is highly likely,
   he would be an intermittent presence in the lives of his  family  due  to
   spending so much time in detention.

28. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed.  The
   Appellant's original  appeal  against  the  decision  to  deport  him  is
   dismissed.

29. As the Appellant's partner, daughter and parents  are  innocent  of  any
   wrongdoing and remain in the UK we have decided it is appropriate to make
   an anonymity direction.



Signed                 Dated 11th March 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 11th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
