
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00585/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2014                           |On 31 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                            HAZAR MOHAMMED AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Anderson, Sutovic and Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richard, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 22 April 1982.

2.   He seeks to appeal against the decision of the respondent on  12  March
    2013 refusing to revoke a deportation  order  previously  made  against
    him.  It is his contention in particular  that  his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom will lead to him being persecuted and therefore that  he
    is entitled to protection.  He also raises the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection and that of the fundamental breach of his human rights.

3.   The appellant has a long and complex immigration history in the  United
    Kingdom, having arrived on 19 July 1999 and clamed asylum.

4.   During his time in the United Kingdom the appellant  had  a  persistent
    history of  committing  crime  which  culminated  in  his  receiving  a
    sentence of 42 months' imprisonment for nine  separate  offences  on  3
    March 2008.  On 11 November 2009 he was served  with  notice  of  being
    subject to automatic deportation.

5.   As to the issue  of  asylum,  the  respondent  made  a  fresh  decision
    containing various refusal letters of 30 October 2009,  31  March  2010
    and 27 March 2013.

6.   The appellant's substantive asylum claim and appeal against the  making
    of a deportation order was determined by Immigration Judge North and  a
    non-legal member in a determination promulgated on 8 September 2010.

7.   The hearing of the respondent's decision of 12 March 2013  refusing  to
    revoke  the  deportation  order  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davies and Mr Getlevog, non-legal member, on  8  October
    2013.

8.   The appellant's representative  at  that  hearing  indicated  that  the
    appellant wished to pursue an application for protection under both the
    Asylum and Human Rights Conventions on the basis of evidence  that  had
    arisen since the determination of Immigration Judge North.

9.   It was submitted, and documentation was produced to  the  effect  ,that
    the country condition in Iraq had deteriorated to such an  extent  that
    the general conditions in that country would pose a real danger to  the
    appellant.  Thus it was recognised by the Tribunal in  paragraph  8  of
    the  determination  that  considerable  reliance  was  placed  by   the
    appellant in  his appeal on the humanitarian protection  provisions  in
    particular upon Article 15(c).

10.  The Tribunal had regard to the  previous  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge North and also to  the  recent  decision  of  HF  (Iraq)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.  The Tribunal concluded that  the  appellant  did
    not establish  that he was a proper  beneficiary  of  the  humanitarian
    protection provisions.  The Tribunal went on to consider  the  personal
    situation and circumstances of the appellant and his family members and
    concluded overall that the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  revoke
    the deportation order was in accordance with the  law  and  accordingly
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

11.   Grounds  of  appeal  have  been   submitted  against   that   decision
    essentially on the basis that the Tribunal had erred in its approach to
    Article 15(c) and had paid little regard to the  up-to-date  background
    material which would tend to support a worsening of  the  situation  in
    Iraq.  It was also contended that  inadequate  consideration  had  been
    given for the best interests of the child.

12.  Initially leave to appeal was refused  but  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it  was  just  arguable
    that the treatment by the Tribunal  of  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 15c was  inadequate.

13.  Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant of leave.

14.  Mr Anderson, who represents the appellant, invited my attention to  his
    careful skeleton argument and to a bundle of documents submitted  under
    cover of  a  letter  of  20  February  2014,  setting  out  details  of
    background evidence concerning violence and disruption within Iraq.  He
    specified in particular some 367 pages of background material which had
    been submitted to the Tribunal on the previous occasion under cover  of
    a letter of 3 September 2013.

15.  The thrust of the arguments presented on behalf of the appellant by  Mr
    Anderson seeks to criticise  the  approach  of  the  Tribunal  and  its
    consideration of  Article  15(c).   It  is  contended  first  that  the
    Tribunal adopted an incorrect approach to the previous determination of
    Judge North.

      Secondly,  that  in  any  event  that  analysis  by  Judge  North  was
    defective.

         Thirdly, that in any event the Tribunal  ought  to  have  conducted
    its own assessment of the country conditions particularly in the  light
    of the material that had been  submitted to it.

18.  As to the first criticism, it was noted by the Tribunal at paragraph  5
    of its determination that the appellant's substantive asylum claim  and
    appeal against the making of a  deportation  order  was  determined  by
    Immigration Judge North and  a  non-legal  member  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 8 September 2010.  Paragraph  66  of  the  determination
    reads as follows:

         "It  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the  whole  of  the
         appellant's  previous  asylum  claim  which   was   determined   by
         Immigration Judge North and the non-legal member.  We are bound  by
         the findings   of  that  Tribunal.   That  Tribunal  carefully  and
         methodically considered the whole of the  appellant's  case  taking
         into  account  the  background  information.   Having  received  no
         further  credible  evidence  we  conclude  the   appellant   cannot
         discharge the burden of proof upon  him and satisfy us that  he  is
         entitled to any form of international protection."

19.  The criticism which is offered in relation to that observation is  that
    it is a misdirection. Under the authority of Devaseelan v  SSHD  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 it is settled law that the determination of Judge North was
    properly to be regarded as  the  starting  point  but  not  necessarily
    determinative of all matters. Indeed it was argued that the  obligation
    was upon the Tribunal to consider the  fresh  evidence  that  had  been
    presented, particularly relating as it did to  the  crucial  issues  of
    international protection.

20.  That error it  is  submitted  was  compounded  by  the  fact  that  the
    decision of Judge  North and the evaluation of the appellant's risk  on
    return relied on the previous Iraq country  guidance  case  of  HM  and
    Others (Article 15(c)) (Iraq) [2010] UKUT 331  which  was  quashed  and
    found to be unlawful by the Court of Appeal in HM (Iraq) and Another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 136.   It is
    suggested therefore that relying upon the findings of Immigration Judge
    North in relation to Article 15(c) the panel erred in law.

21,  It may be instructive,  therefore,  to  consider  in  some  detail  the
    reasoning of Judge North  and  Mr  Thursby  in  the  appeal  heard  and
    promulgated on 1 September  2010.   The  appellant  contended  that  he
    originated from Kirkuk and gave details of his political  profile.   He
    claimed that he was a person who was outside  Iraq  for  the  last  ten
    years and who had originated from the disputed territory in Kirkuk  and
    with no family members or close friends in the  KRG  he  would  not  be
    admitted for settlement in the  KRG.   He  claimed  that  he  would  be
    deliberately targeted because of his and his family's links to the  PUK
    if returned to Kirkuk and also spoke of the  widespread  violence  that
    was currently in Kirkuk.

22.   It  was  noted  that  the  appellant  had  said  in  his  2001  asylum
    application  that  his  family  had  been   displaced  from  Kirkuk  to
    Suliemanya.

23.  The issue as to humanitarian  protection  was  raised  specifically  at
    that hearing on the basis that the appellant would face serious harm in
    Iraq for a serious and individual threat to his life or  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in situations of internal armed  conflict.   It
    is argued that the whole of Iraq was  in  a  state  of  internal  armed
    conflict and that the objective evidence supported the proposition that
    there was in Kirkuk such a high level of indiscriminate  violence  that
    solely by being there the appellant faced a real risk to  his  life  or
    person.

24.   The  Tribunal  did   not  accept  as  credible  the  account  of   the
    appellant's political profile or of the specific targeting of  him  and
    his family that he claimed.

25.  In terms of humanitarian protection  the  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant and family continued to live in  Kirkuk  since  they
    had moved from there to live in Suliemanya.  The Tribunal was satisfied
    that the appellant would be able to establish a link  with  Suliemanya,
    his former place of residence, and that  he  would  be  accepted  as  a
    returning resident of that area and take advantage of the protection of
    the authorities there.

26.  Also for those reasons in paragraph  20  of  that  determination  Judge
    North concluded that the appellant could  be admitted  to  the  Kurdish
    area of Iraq  and  will  be  able  to  establish   his  credentials  in
    Suliemanya. Alternatively he could  relocate elsewhere.

27.  The current country guidance that was operative at the hearing  of  the
    matter by Judge Davies and Mr Getlevog  was  that  of  HF  (Iraq),  HJM
    (Iraq), R (Iraq) MK (Iraq) [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.  That was  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 October 2013, but a few days prior to the  hearing on
    28 October 2013.  It is clear from the determination that  that  was  a
    decision brought to the attention of the Tribunal  as  can  be  clearly
    identified in paragraph 52 of the determination.

28.  In general terms that was a decision which upheld the findings  of  the
    Tribunal in HM and Others (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [20121]  UKUT  409
    (HM2) and MK in its   general  application  rather  than  its  specific
    facts.   It was noted in  paragraph  25  of  that  judgment   that  the
    conclusions of the Tribunal were as a result of a careful, reasoned and
    assessment of all the relevant evidence, the Tribunal seeking to ensure
    that the material was as up-to-date as possible  and  in  that  context
    focused particularly on the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines.   These  were
    guidelines were issued shortly after a  hearing  of  HM(2)  on  31  May
    2012.

29.  It was noted particularly that the Tribunal  in  HM(2)  summarised  its
    conclusions as follows:-

         "(i)     Whilst the focus of the present decision  is  the  current
             situation  in  Iraq,  nothing  in  the  further  evidence  now
             available indicates that the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in
             HM1 reached about the country conditions in Iraq were wrong.


         (ii)     As regards the current situation, the  evidence  does  not
             establish  that  the   degree   of   indiscriminate   violence
             characterising the current armed conflict taking place in  the
             five central governorates in  Iraq,  namely  Baghdad,  Diyala,
             Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah al-Din, is  at  such  a   high
             level that substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing
             that any civilian returned there would solely  on  account  of
             his presence there face a real risk of being subject  to  that
             threat.


         (iii)  Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real risk of
             serious harm under Article 15(c) for civilians who  are  Sunni
             or Shia or Kurds or  have  former  Ba'ath  Party  connections:
             these characteristics do not in themselves amount to 'enhanced
             risk categories'' under Article 15(c)'s sliding scale."

     Thus the Tribunal in HM(2) went on to  consider  the  risk  at  Baghdad
    Airport.

30.  The conclusions were challenged, but essentially the  Court  of  Appeal
    upheld the findings of the Tribunal.   Challenge was also made  to  the
    Tribunal's approach to the UNHCR  Guidelines  and  that  again  was  an
    unsuccessful challenge in the event.

31.  The Court of Appeal considered as an  important  issue  in  the  appeal
    whether a sponsor was necessary in order for the appellant to reside in
    the KRG.   This is considered particularly at paragraphs 67  to  76  of
    the Court of Appeal judgment. The Court  concluded generally that  that
    would not be a problem, and in particular at paragraph  68  that  there
    were some governorates (such as Suliemanya)  that  did  not  require  a
    sponsor and that the reason for obtaining a sponsor  was  for  security
    purposes and that in practice that  was  a  very  easy  requirement  to
    satisfy.  It noted  that  there  was  no  real  evidence  of  prejudice
    resulting from a failure to obtain a sponsor  and  in  practice  little
    evidence of anyone being removed from the region for failing to  obtain
    one.

32.  I pause to note that members of the applicant's family  remain  in  the
    KRG according to the appellant in any event.

33.  Relocation within the KRG was also considered.

34.  Whether or  not  the  material  considered  by  Judge  North  had  been
    overturned and subsumed into  further  country  guidance,  it  was  the
    position as at the hearing before Judge Davies  and  Mr  Getlevog  that
    humanitarian protection was not required  given   the  most  up-to-date
    statement of the Country Situation and the Court  of  Appeal  generally
    upholding the Tribunal as to that position. It seems  to  me  that  the
    first tier Tribunal  was entitled to rely upon that decision.

35.  It is contended in the grounds of appeal that the Tribunal should  have
    departed from that guidance even so recently given, in the light of the
    objective material that was presented before it in the bundle to  which
    reference has been  made. It is said by Mr Anderson that that  material
    dating as it did from late 2012 through to 2013 was evidence  that  was
    more recent even than that that had been considered by the Tribunal  or
    by  the  Court  of  Appeal.    Accordingly  the  Tribunal  should  have
    preferred that evidence to  the  general  statement  contained  in  the
    country guidance judgment.

36.  That seems to me to be a  very  bold  assertion  to  make  in  all  the
    circumstances.  No document analysing the material presented  has  been
    placed before me.  I note that the articles which are relied  upon  and
    there  are  many,  relate  to  the  whole  of  Iraq  making   reference
    particularly to suicide bombings and bomb strikes.

37.  It is of course proposed to return the appellant to the KRG and not  to
    Baghdad or other parts of Iraq.

38.  Mr Anderson nevertheless submits that  a  substantial  portion  of  the
    documentation relates to the area of Kirkuk and to an  increased  level
    of violence therein.   Whilst it is to be acknowledged that there would
    seem to be a number of articles relating to Kirkuk, for the most  part,
    the documents in the bundle relate elsewhere.   In  that  connection  I
    notice in a Press Service News Agency report of 31 July 2013  at  pages
    92 to 93 of  the  bundle.  There  are  other  articles  which  are  not
    specifically highlighted in  the  arguments  as  presented  before  me.
    Without some guidance or assistance it is  difficult  without  more  to
    understand how helpful presenting a bundle of  documents  without  such
    explanation is to any Tribunal.

39.  It is to be noted, however, as was recognised by the  Court  of  Appeal
    in its  judgment  that  the  Tribunal  had,  over  a  period  of  time,
    considered many  aspects  of  background  material  in  coming  to  the
    conclusion that had been arrived at.  It seems  to  me  that  it  would
    require something quite compelling to justify any  departure  from  the
    guidance as given in those circumstances and I do not detect  from  the
    documents any such compelling nature.

40.  Mr Anderson relies particularly upon the limitation which is placed  by
    the Court of Appeal upon the issue of relocation.   He  invites  me  to
    find that that is more restrictive than was considered by  Judge  North
    in the original hearing.  It would seem that a person can  only  access
    goods and services  in the  area  of  registration.   Thus  it  is  not
    necessarily open for an individual to relocate  elsewhere  because  the
    tie to the home area is in practice to be maintained.  My attention was
    drawn in particular to paragraphs 116 and 117 of the judgment where  it
    is said the Upper Tribunal also  found,  consistent  with  its  country
    guidance enunciated  elsewhere  in  its  judgment,  that  MK  would  if
    necessary be able to relocate to KRG.   The Tribunal was satisfied that
    she would be able to obtain an information card to be able to  able  to
    reside in KRG. The Tribunal accepted however that  she  would  need  to
    return regularly to Kirkuk  in  order  to  use  a  PDS  card  and  take
    advantage of the food subsidies, and  found  that  this  would  not  be
    unreasonable.

41.  Of course a distinction is to be made in the case of MK  where  it  was
    found that the real issue was  whether  or  not  she  was  specifically
    targeted in Kirkuk as she claimed.  Clearly if she  was  she  might  be
    running an unacceptable risk of harm by regular returns to Kirkuk which
    could  make relocation unreasonable.  The Court of  Appeal  found  that
    this was an issue  that  was  never  addressed  by  the  Tribunals  and
    accordingly it was a matter that fell to be addressed by  it.   In  the
    case of the appellant before me, however, it was a specific finding  by
    Judge North that he was not specifically targeted in Kirkuk and in  any
    event he and his family had relocated to Suliemanya.  Little suggestion
    has been  made in the background material relied upon that the level of
    violence  in  Suliemanya   has   dramatically   increased   since   the
    circumstances  as determined by Judge North in 2010.

42.  Thus although it is attractive to suggest  that  the  determination  by
    Judge North is three years out of date, the general conclusions  as  to
    Article 15(c) have been upheld subsequently by the Tribunal and by  the
    Court of Appeal.

43.  Although the Tribunal was in error in considering itself bound  by  the
    decision of Judge North, it is clear from the principles of  Devaseelan
    that it was properly a starting poin,t both  as  to  the  determination
    that there was no specific targeting of the appellant to give  rise  to
    refugee status and that the level of indiscriminate  violence  was  not
    such as to engage Article 15(c).   That  is  still  the  position  that
    appertains as to the country guidance given by the Tribunal and  upheld
    by the Court of Appeal in HF.

44.  It  may  be  that  the  Tribunal  was  in  error  in  not  specifically
    addressing the argument  as  to  the  current  background  material  as
    presented before it but, as I have indicated, I can  find  little  safe
    basis to conclude that had the Tribunal so considered the material that
    it would have been entitled to have departed from  the  conclusions  of
    the Tribunal in HF and  Others.   This  is  particularly  so  upon  the
    findings that were made that the appellant had previously relocated  to
    Suliemanya and could return there.

45.  Therefore I  do  not  find  that  the  Tribunal's  decision  concerning
    Article 15(c) is at variance with the current country  guidance  and  I
    find no error of law in the approach taken by  the  Tribunal  to  those
    matters.  I do not find that there was sufficient evidence  before  the
    panel to show that the decision in HM and Others  was  no  longer  good
    law.  As I have indicated, I  find  no  safe  basis  or  any  basis  to
    conclude that had the panel considered the background material that  it
    would have departed  from it or was  entitled to depart from HM(2)  and
    Others.

46.  It is submitted also in the grounds of appeal that the panel failed  to
    consider the children's best interests in line with ZH  (Tanzania).   I
    find there to be little merit in that point.  In paragraph  67  of  the
    determination the Tribunal found that the appellant had minimum contact
    with his children Liam and Calam and found there to be  no  reason  why
    that limited contact could not continue were he to be removed to  Iraq.
    It was noted that the mother of Liam and Calam  had  not  attended  the
    hearing to support the appellant's case.

47.  Of more immediate concern was the  contention  made  by  the  appellant
    that he had family life with Chelsea Lee and her child Amiya Brook Lee.
     At paragraph 68 the Tribunal noted that the appellant and Chelsea  Lee
    did not live together but that there were weekly visits and he spoke to
    Chelsea Lee and the child on the telephone. Thus there was clearly some
    contact as between the appellant and Amiya.  However the Tribunal  went
    on to comment:-

         "We are not persuaded, taking into account the appellant's  history
         of  relationships,  that  it  is  likely   that   the   appellant's
         relationship  with  Chelsea  Lee  and  her  child  will  have   any
         permanence even if the appellant were  allowed  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom.  We do not accept that there  is  any  evidence  to
         suggest  that the  effect  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with
         Chelsea Lee  is that his mental health  has  improved,  nor  do  we
         accept that it is likely  that  the  appellant's  presence  in  the
         United Kingdom would be of  benefit to  either  Chelsea  L  or  her
         child."

48.  The Tribunal noted at  paragraph  70  that  the  appellant  had  formed
    relationships and fathered children without taking  any  responsibility
    for those children.

49.  The Tribunal had the advantage of hearing evidence from  the  appellant
    and from Chelsea Lee and forming its impression as to the nature of any
    family and/or private life that may have been established.

50.  It is clear, and I so find, that the Tribunal had  borne  in  mind  the
    best interests of the child in the findings which it made.

51.  In essence the nub of this appeal relates to the risk of return to  the
    appellant given the general level  of  indiscriminate  violence  within
    that country and particularly within the area  to  which  he  would  be
    returned.  I find that the Tribunal has given adequate consideration to
    that issue and has relied upon the case of HF and HM and  in  so  doing
    did not fall into error.  I do not find that  the  material  which  was
    presented before the Tribunal was such that it would have been entitled
    to have departed from the country guidance.

52.  In  the  absence  of  any  specific  fresh  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's own personal situation and circumstances I  find  that  the
    Tribunal was entitled to rely upon the findings of Judge North that the
    appellant was under no specific threat either in Kirkuk and that he and
    his family had to all intents  and  purposes  in  any  event  relocated
    themselves to Suliemanya.

53.  In all the circumstances, therefore, the appellant's appeal before  the
    Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  and  the   findings   of   the    First
    -tierTribunal upheld.  The appellant's appeal in respect of  asylum  is
    dismissed. That in respect of  humanitarian  protection  is  dismissed.
    That in respect of Article  8  is  dismissed.    Essentially,  however,
    those are all but one facet of the central issue as to whether  or  not
    the deportation order should be revoked. In relation to that  also  the
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.  Thus the decisions  of  the  Tribunal
    are to stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
