
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00328/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 April 2013                                 |On 24 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       AGUINAlDO DE ALeMEIDA De JESUS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Donnelly, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Aguinaldo De Alemeida Do Jesus, was born on  24  October
    1970 and is a male citizen  of  Angola.   The  appellant  had  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent dated 29 March 2010 to deport  him
    from the United Kingdom under section 32(5) of the UK Borders  Act  and
    Section 3(5) of the Immigration  Act  1971.   His  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision was heard by a panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a determination promulgated on 23 September  2010,  dismissed
    the appeal on  all  grounds.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which granted permission on 17 December 2010.  By  a  decision
    dated 14 March 2011, Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its determination fell  to  be
    set aside.  He set aside the determination and did not preserve any  of
    the findings of fact.  Judge Hanson did not remake the decision and  on
    5 March 2013, Principal Resident Judge Southern made a transfer  order.
    The resumed hearing eventually took place at Bradford on 2 April  2013.
    It is regrettable that the appeal has taken so long to reach a  resumed
    hearing.

 2. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether  there  is  a  real  risk  that  he  would  suffer,
    respectively,  persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to  the  ECHR  (in
    particular, Articles 2 and 3) if he were to be returned to Angola.  The
    appellant also appeals on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   The  standard  of
    proof in the Article 8 appeal is the balance of probabilities.

 3. I considered each item of evidence and weighed  it  accordingly  before
    considering the evidence as a totality.  Before making any findings  of
    fact  in  reaching  any  conclusion  as  to  the  credibility  of   the
    appellant's account, I considered all the evidence including the expert
    reports of Dr Salisbury and Dr George.  I  sought  to  distinguish  the
    "core" parts of the appellant's account from peripheral  parts  of  the
    evidence and to examine risk of return to Angola in the context of  the
    background material relating to that country.

 4. The appellant claims to fear persecution in Angola as a result  of  his
    political opinion.  He claims to have been  a  member  of  the  Angolan
    government's Rapid Intervention Police (RIP) which was responsible  for
    internal state  security.   His  responsibilities  included  protecting
    government officials and members of the  opposition  UNITA  party.   In
    December 2003, members of the appellant's RIP unit received  an  arrest
    warrant.  The  commander  of  the  appellant's  group  within  the  RIP
    (Commander Da Cunha) was arrested and it was  announced  on  radio  and
    television that he had been planning to overthrow the  government  with
    the assistance of police force officers.   The  appellant  arranged  to
    live with his girlfriend's family in a northern province of Angola but,
    before he could escape, a group of masked men entered his apartment and
    arrested him.  The appellant thereafter  remained  in  prison  until  1
    March 2009 although he was never charged or tried for any offence.   He
    was eventually released from prison after the payment of a bribe by his
    brother.  In prison, the appellant claimed that  he  was  tortured  and
    subjected  to  degrading  treatment,  including  sexual   abuse.    The
    appellant left Angola using a false passport and  flew  to  the  United
    Kingdom via Lisbon.  Following his arrival in the  United  Kingdom,  he
    was charged with using a false document, an offence to which he pleaded
    guilty and was sentenced at Lewes Crown  Court  on  19  March  2009  to
    twelve months' imprisonment.  On 13 April 2009, the appellant expressed
    an interest in the Facilitated Returns Scheme.  He was accepted on that
    scheme but subsequently withdrawn from it when he claimed asylum on  15
    September 2009, more than six months after he had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom (3 March 2009).

 5. The appellant adopted five written statements as his evidence-in-chief.
     He also adopted a number of photographs which appear  in  his  bundle.
    These photographs show the appellant with the woman who is now his wife
    together with his  stepson  (his  wife's  natural  son)  Emanuel.   The
    respondent does not dispute that the appellant is  in  a  marriage  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  his  wife  and  stepchild.   Both   the
    appellant's wife (Conceicao Joachim Jorge - hereafter referred to as Ms
    Jorge) and Emanuel (who is aged 10 years) are  both  British  citizens.
    Ms Jorge was born in Angola.

 6. Cross-examined by Ms  Donnelly,  the  appellant  was  asked  about  the
    physical condition he was in by the time he reached the United Kingdom.
     He said he was "very very bad".  He had suffered from malnutrition  as
    well as having been physically abused in detention.  He  said  that  he
    had not seen a doctor when he had arrived in the United Kingdom and  he
    had received no medical treatment whilst in detention.

 7. The appellant said that his wife did not know much about  his  life  in
    Angola.  He said, "we are more into our religion.  We do  not  want  to
    focus on what has happened in the past".  His  wife  had  had  problems
    with her child's father so she had run away.

 8.  The  appellant  was  asked  about  his  involvement  with  the   Rapid
    Intervention Police Force.  He said that he had taken part in a  "crash
    course" so that he could be admitted as an officer within three months.
     He had never fired a weapon with which he had been equipped.

 9. The appellant agreed that he had attended the Angolan Embassy in London
    with a view to voluntary return.  He thought that the visit had been to
    discover whether or not he was an Angolan citizen.  He had not objected
    to the interview.

10. The appellant was asked about his departure from the prison.   He  said
    that this had taken place in secret.  His family members  had  arranged
    it and had paid the guards at the entrance of  the  prison.   He  said,
    "whoever is there on duty simply paid them and walked out normally".

11. He was asked by Miss Donnelly what he had planned to do when he entered
    the United Kingdom.  He said that he had been assisted by an agent.  He
    thought, following his arrival that he would "find work  or  apply  for
    asylum".  The appellant had discussed asylum with an Angolan man he had
    met in prison in or about June or July 2009.  He was asked why  he  had
    therefore delayed until September 2009  before  claiming  asylum.   The
    appellant said, "I know I could have applied in prison but I was told I
    had to finish six months first".

12. The appellant married  Ms  Jorge  on  10  September  2011  in  a  civil
    ceremony.  Their daughter, Victoria, was born on 10 October  2012.   He
    said that his stepson, Emanuel, continues to require support at  school
    and that he is "not at the  level  of  his  average  classmates".   His
    behaviour problems are "improving".

13. I heard evidence from Ms Jorge, the appellant's wife.  She adopted  her
    written statement as  her  evidence-in-chief.   She  is  a  naturalised
    British citizen although she has not yet received a passport.  She said
    that Emanuel's biological father lives in Angola and she has no contact
    with him.  She said that the appellant  had  assisted  her  greatly  in
    helping to bring up Emanuel but his behaviour problems  had  diminished
    as a consequence.

14. The Tribunal reserved its determination. I find that the  appellant  is
    not a witness of truth.  I do not accept as  reliable  his  account  of
    past events in Angola.  I have reached that finding after examining the
    appellant's evidence in detail and in the  context  of  the  background
    material relating to Angola and also the expert  report  of  Dr  Edward
    George.  I am aware of the expertise of Dr Jorge as regards Angola  and
    as set out in his report.  I am aware that Dr George is of the  opinion
    for finding that  the  arrest  warrant  and  summons  produced  by  the
    appellant  are  genuine  documents.   I  have  considered  Dr  George's
    evidence in the context of all the evidence before  the  Tribunal  (see
    Mibanga (2005) EWCA Civ 367) but also applied the principles  of  Ahmed
    [2002] UKIAT 00439 when considering the authenticity of  the  documents
    produced and the  reliability  of  their  content.   However,  for  the
    reasons that I have set out below, my examination of  the  totality  of
    the evidence leads me to believe that the appellant's  account  is  not
    accurate and consequently that documents which he has produced are  not
    genuine.

15. I find that there is a significant  disconnect  between  the  treatment
    which the appellant claims that he suffered whilst in prison in  Angola
    and his physical condition  upon  entering  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant was arrested in March 2009 when he  attempted  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom using a false passport.   He  was  sentenced  to  twelve
    months' imprisonment very soon thereafter (19  March  2009);  within  a
    month of  his  sentence,  he  had  already  expressed  an  interest  in
    returning to Angola voluntarily.  He said in  oral  evidence  that  his
    intentions upon coming to the United Kingdom  were  "to  find  work  or
    claim asylum".  I find those stated intentions to be unusual to say the
    least, given that the appellant claims to have barely have escaped with
    his life from appalling  prison  conditions  in  Angola  where  he  was
    severely ill-treated.  I do not accept that the  appellant  would  have
    entered a  foreign  country  and  immediately  considered  looking  for
    illegal for work or, soon after his arrival,  express  an  interest  in
    returning to Angola if he  had  genuinely  suffered  the  ill-treatment
    which he claims.

16. I also find that it is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant's
    family would have allowed him to languish  for  so  long  in  appalling
    conditions in detention when the procedure for paying bribes to  enable
    him to leave prison appears to have been so simple and straightforward.
     As the appellant said in his oral evidence, all that was required  was
    for his family members to pay the guard who happened to be on duty  and
    the appellant could then leave at will.  The  appellant  has  given  no
    satisfactory explanation as to why he was left to suffer in  prison  by
    his family or why, having had reason to hold him without charge for  so
    long, the Angolan authorities should have been so  willing  to  release
    him.  I find that the account of the appellant's arrest, detention  and
    release from detention, coupled with his conduct after he  entered  the
    United Kingdom, is such as to diminish very severely the reliability of
    his evidence.

17.  I  also  accept  Miss  Donnelly's  submission  that  the   appellant's
    description of his recruitment into the Rapid  Response  Force  is  not
    credible.  The background material indicates that  the  response  force
    was an elite division of the police and I do not consider it reasonably
    likely that the appellant would have been recruited and rushed  through
    training for the force in the  manner  he  described.   It  is  perhaps
    significant that an identity card which the appellant had  sought  from
    Angola has never arrived or been produced.

18. I also find that it is extraordinary that  the  appellant  should  have
    expressed a wish to return voluntarily to Angola and to change his mind
    when he became aware that he could claim asylum.   That  evidence  does
    not sit easily with his claim to have wished to claim  asylum  when  he
    entered the United Kingdom and he has not explained satisfactorily  why
    he relied upon the unreliable advice of  another  Angolan  man  to  the
    effect that he had to be in the United Kingdom for six months before he
    could claim asylum.

19. The appellant has produced evidence from  Dr  Salisbury  regarding  the
    scars which he has and also in respect of his claimed diagnosis of post-
    traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  I am well  aware  that  medical  and
    other experts can assist the Tribunal in assessing credibility but I do
    find that the weight of Dr Salisbury's evidence (and that of Dr George)
    has being diminished by the fact that they have been told an untruthful
    account  by  the  appellant.   Dr  Salisbury  considered  some  of  the
    appellant's scars to be "highly consistent" with his  account  of  ill-
    treatment but the doctor has failed to consider other  possible  causes
    of the injuries in any detail.  Assessing the evidence as  a  whole,  I
    find that the appellant's scars were not caused in the manner in  which
    he claims.

20. I find that the  appellant's  account  is  further  diminished  by  the
    evidence adduced by the respondent regarding his  weight  and  physical
    condition.  When the appellant was at HMP Canterbury he was weighed and
    examined on 6 April 2009.  Dr Salisbury in his  report  [1.14]  records
    that "[the appellant] experienced a lot of back pain during  this  work
    and also became profoundly depressed.  He had  lost  his  memory.   His
    weight dropped to 45 kilograms and he lost  the  will  to  live".   HMP
    Canterbury recorded that the appellant weighed 76.20 kilograms a little
    over a month after he arrived in the United Kingdom.  I do not consider
    it reasonably likely that the appellant can have put on  more  than  30
    kilograms in weight between the time he left prison in Angola and April
    2009.  The evidence from HMP Canterbury indicates, in my opinion,  that
    the appellant was in much better physical condition than he  claims  to
    have been.  It is evidence which further undermines his credibility  as
    a witness.

21. I find that the appellant is an Angolan citizen who has fabricated  his
    account of having been a member of the Rapid Response Force in  Angola.
    I find that he has not been imprisoned  or  ill-treated  in  Angola  as
    claimed.  I find that he has come to the  United  Kingdom  for  reasons
    wholly unconnected with the fear of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  in
    Angola.

22. I have to consider whether this appellant, bearing the  characteristics
    which I find that he possesses, can be safely returned to Angola at the
    present time.  In order to address that question I have had  regard  to
    the background evidence relating to the country.  This  appellant  will
    present to the authorities and, indeed, any other group  or  individual
    within Angola as nothing more or less than a failed asylum seeker.   He
    has no political or criminal profile.  I can find no evidence  to  show
    that he would be at risk either at the point of his arrival  in  Angola
    or subsequently living in his home area of that country.  Consequently,
    his Articles 2/3 ECHR and Refugee  Convention  appeals  are  dismissed.
    Having regard to the same factual matrix, I find that the appellant  is
    not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

23. I have also considered Article 8 ECHR.  The  appellant's  circumstances
    have changed since the date  of  his  last  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I accept (as did Mr Diwnycz on  behalf  of  the  respondent)
    that the appellant is in a  genuine  subsisting  relationship  with  Ms
    Jorge, that he is the father of Victoria (who is now aged 8 months) and
    the stepfather of Ms Jorge's son, Emanuel.  Ms Jorge and  Victoria  are
    British citizens.  The outcome of  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    depends upon the Tribunal's assessment of the  proportionality  of  the
    immigration decision to remove the appellant.  Mr Diwnycz did not argue
    that it would be reasonable for Ms Jorge or the children  to  accompany
    the appellant to Angola (see  ZH  (Tanzania)  2011  UKSC  4).   Indeed,
    having regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
    Act 2009 and considering the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
    primary consideration, I find that the appellant is  an  active  father
    and stepfather and that his presence in the lives of the children is of
    considerable benefit to them.  It is not in the best interests  of  any
    of the children (including Emanuel) to be separated from the appellant.
     His removal to Angola would, in my opinion, constitute a very  serious
    interference with the enjoyment of family life of  the  appellant,  his
    wife and the children.

24. It is also important, however, that  I  seek  to  identify  the  public
    interest concerned with the appellant's removal.  The respondent  seeks
    to remove the appellant for the legitimate  aim  of  preserving  public
    order and preventing crime and  maintaining  a  system  of  immigration
    control.  I do not seek to diminish the seriousness of the  appellant's
    offence but it was not an offence of violence or of a sexual nature nor
    did it involve the sale  or  use  of  drugs.   The  appellant  has  not
    committed any further offence since he was  released  from  prison.   I
    find that the appellant is likely to have  used  a  false  passport  to
    facilitate his entry to the United Kingdom because he had come to  seek
    work here and was aware that  he  did  not  have  a  legitimate  reason
    (including that of seeking asylum) to enter.  I am aware  that  he  may
    now and only by virtue of  his  relationship  with  Ms  Jorge  and  the
    children gain the right to remain here.   However,  if  he  is  granted
    leave to remain and work in this country, then equally any incentive to
    commit a similar would be removed entirely.  Consequently, I find  that
    his risk of re-offending is low.  I find it is likely that,  if  he  is
    granted permission to remain in the United Kingdom, the appellant  will
    seek legitimate work with a view to supporting his family.  On balance,
    therefore, I find that the interference which would be  caused  by  the
    appellant's removal to Angola to the private and family  lives  of  the
    appellant   himself   and   his   other   family   members   would   be
    disproportionate.  Consequently, I allow the appeal on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

DECISION

25. This appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

26. This appeal is dismissed on Article 2/3 ECHR grounds.

27. This appellant is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

28. This appellant's appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed                              Date 2 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

