
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
DA/00372/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 May 2017                         |       On 25 May 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                      EM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Brown, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to EM as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal came before me following remittal from the Court of  Appeal.
    The Court of Appeal made an Order on 4 February 2017 in  the  following
    terms:

         "1.  The appeal be allowed  for  the  reasons  identified  by  Lord
             Justice Lloyd Jones in his  Order  granting  permission  of  2
             December 2016;

         2.   The matter be remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a Substantive
             Hearing on the earliest date available and if possible  within
             three months of the date this Order is  sealed  and  that  the
             Upper Tribunal's decision of 1 March 2016 be set aside ..."

 4. The Upper Tribunal decision dated 1 March  2016,  referred  to  in  the
    Order, was made by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson which found an error of
    law in the decision of Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shaerf dated 27 October 2015.

 5. There was agreement between the parties that the terms of the Order  of
    the Court of Appeal meant that I was in the position of Judge  Gleeson.
    I therefore had  to  decide,  whether  the  decision  of  Judge  Shaerf
    disclosed an error on a point of law.  The  respondent's  grounds  were
    those dated 30 November 2015. Permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Eshun on 14 December 2015.

 6. The appeal concerns Article 8 ECHR in the context of  deportation.  The
    appellant is from Kosovo. It is not disputed that he left as a minor in
    1998 after the war broke out there and after he witnessed  the  violent
    murder of his parents.  After coming to the UK, he was recognised as  a
    refugee and granted indefinite leave to remain  on  5  June  1999.  The
    appellant's refugee status does not feature further in this decision as
    the respondent's decision to revoke that status under paragraph 339A of
    the Immigration Rules has been upheld and is no longer in issue.

 7. The respondent considered  deporting  the  appellant  in  2008  due  to
    convictions for wounding and failing to surrender to bail. He was  sent
    a warning letter on 27 October 2010 setting out the consequences of re-
    offending.

 8. On 17 September 2010 the appellant was convicted of robbery  for  which
    he received a sentence of 40 months. The respondent made a  deportation
    order against him on 5 February 2013.

 9. The appellant appealed the deportation order. In a decision promulgated
    on 29 August 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boardman  and  Mr  F  T
    Jamieson JP allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The  panel  found
    that it would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's Portuguese  partner
    and their three children if the appellant were  to  be  deported.  That
    conclusion was reached  as  part  of  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
    assessment provided for by paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.

10. The respondent  challenged  the  decision  of  Judge  Boardman  and  Mr
    Jamieson. In an error of law  decision  dated  17  August  2015,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey found an error of law and remitted the appeal for
    rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In  his  reasons,  Judge  Storey  confirmed  that  notwithstanding  the
    reference at [37d] of the First-tier Tribunal decision  to  a  decision
    being made "outside the Rules" panel had made  a  correct  "exceptional
    circumstances" assessment under paragraph 398, applying the  provisions
    of Section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.



12. At [13] of his decision, Judge Storey found no error in the  conclusion
    made under paragraph 117C(5) that the partner  and  children  would  be
    "unduly harsh". The error which led to the decision being set aside was
    that the First-tier Tribunal panel did not properly  weigh  the  public
    interest.  At [14] - [17], Judge Storey set out:

         "14. However I do consider that the SSHD's second  ground  is  made
             out.  Despite stating that it found the public interest in the
             deportation of  the  claimant  "justifiably  high"  ([73]  and
             despite stating that this reflected the consideration set  out
             in Section 117C(1) [72]), the panel's  actual  proportionality
             assessment,  which  commences  at  [75]  under   the   heading
             "Balancing the factors" fails to demonstrate that this  public
             interest was properly weighed in the balance.   Indeed  it  is
             not even clear it was weighed at all since the only factor  at
             all relevant to it was  set  out  at  [75(b)],  but  this  was
             confined to (i) acceptance of is (sic) expression of  remorse;
             (ii) acceptance that  he  would  not  reoffend  (and  had  not
             committed any further offences since release).

         15.  In so limiting assessment of  the  importance  of  the  public
             interest the panel committed the classic error of treating the
             public interest as merely one dimensional, concerned only with
             whether the individual claimant's deportation is in the public
             interest, e.g. because (as here) there is a low - or  no  risk
             of reoffending: see e.g. AM [2012] EWCA Civ 1634 at  [42]  per
             Elias J.

         16.  Since this legal error had a material impact on the outcome of
             the appeal, I hereby set aside the FtT decision.

         17.  I consider that because the judge's decision is now a year old
             and there are children involved who are now British  citizens,
             it would be appropriate for the remaking of this  decision  to
             be remade at a hearing in  advance  of  which  the  claimant's
             representatives have had fuller opportunity to produce updated
             evidence."

13. Thus the appeal came before Judge Shaerf.  His  decision  indicates  at
    [23] that:

         "Initially there was a discussion about the scope of  the  remittal
         to the First-tier Tribunal from the Upper Tribunal.   Both  parties
         agreed the sole issue was the "public interest" point."

14. By the time  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Shaerf,  however,  as  he
    identified at [55], the provisions of paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A  had
    changed substantively and he had to  apply  the  new  law.  Instead  of
    assessing whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances",  the  new
    provisions required an assessment of whether, over and  above  the  new
    provisions of paragraphs 399 and  399A,  there  were  "very  compelling
    circumstances".

15. Judge Shaerf went on to  allow  the  appeal  under  paragraphs  399(a),
    399(b), 399A and outside the Immigration Rules. There  has  never  been
    any  objection  to  his   approaching   the   appeal   in   this   way,
    notwithstanding the limited remittal on the "public interest" point  by
    Judge Storey. It was not suggested before Judge Gleeson or the Court of
    Appeal that Judge Shaerf was incorrect to carry out an assessment under
    the new provisions.

16. The respondent's grounds do not challenge the correctness of the  legal
    matrix applied, therefore, but go to the findings made under paragraphs
    399(a),  399(b)  and  399A,  and,  thus,  the  assessment  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

17. The core of the respondent's challenge before me is that  Judge  Shaerf
    did not give adequate or rational reasons for finding that it would  be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and children to remain in  the
    UK without him and that he could not be expected to return to Kosovo.

18. In my judgment, Ms Brown's defence to these challenges, set out in  her
    skeleton argument, has force. As set out above, the remittal  to  Judge
    Shaerf expressly upheld a finding that it would be unduly harsh for the
    children and the partner if the appellant were to  be  deported.  Judge
    Shaerf only had to consider the proper role of the public interest. The
    decision at [13] and [23] shows that Judge Shaerf clarified  this  with
    the parties. In any event, Judge Shaerf correctly  directs  himself  at
    [61], to the "very high standard" for an "unduly harsh" assessment,  as
    found by the Court of Appeal in KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015]
    UKUT 543 and nothing in his consideration  suggests  that  he  did  not
    follow this self-direction in substance when making his decision.

19. If more is needed, read fairly, Judge Shaerf's finding at  [58]  is  to
    the effect that it was  his  view,  with  a  proper  direction  to  the
    stringency of the "unduly harsh"  test  and  the  role  of  the  public
    interest at [61], that it would be unduly harsh for the children if the
    appellant were deported. At [61], Judge Shaerf indicates  that  he  has
    applied the correct test from KMO to "these conclusions" which must  be
    a reference to not only the 399A finding in  [60]  but  to  the  399(a)
    finding in [58] that it would be unduly harsh for the children  if  the
    appellant were deported. When making those assessments, the  First-tier
    Tribunal had the benefit of oral evidence from the  appellant  and  his
    wife. The evidence was that the appellant was  a  particularly  devoted
    parent. That was also the view of the sentencing judge; see  [58].  The
    evidence of the appellant's wife referred to  there  being  a  "special
    bond" between him and the children and that they would be "lost" if  he
    was deported. The appellant's mother-in-law gave evidence to  the  same
    effect.

20. It is also my view that it was unarguable before Judge Shaerf, as  now,
    that the children could be expected  to  go  to  live  in  Kosovo.  The
    children were all born here. Their dates of birth are 24 April 2001, 28
    February 2003 and 12 April 2013. The youngest was born British. The two
    older children had lived here for 16 years and 12 years respectively as
    of the date of the decision of Judge Shaerf. They had  never  left  the
    UK.

21. It is also my judgment that, at [60] and [63], the First-tier  Tribunal
    made a lawful decision in finding that paragraph 399A was met as  there
    were "very significant obstacles" to  re-integration  in  Kosovo.   The
    factors set out by the judge at [60] appear to  be  undisputed,  namely
    that the applicant experienced significant trauma because of the murder
    of his parents in Kosovo in front of him, that he only  began  to  deal
    with that trauma after being on remand for the index  offence  in  2013
    and that his previous strategies for avoiding the trauma  included  the
    alcohol problem, addressed whilst in prison, which led to his offending
    behaviour. He had been in the UK lawfully for 17 years at the  time  of
    the hearing.  Judge Shaerf sets out as follows in the  second  half  of
    [60]:

         "The evidence is that subsequent  to  bereavement  counselling  and
         release from prison he has made progress in coming  to  terms  with
         his  past  and  has  been  able  to  involve  P  in  that  process.
         Notwithstanding that his sister and her family  remain  there,  and
         incidentally of whose circumstances there were  no  details  before
         the Tribunal, I find that  his  return  to  the  country  where  he
         witnessed the murder  of  his  parents  would  inevitably  stir  up
         memories which he has only recently started to  face  and  come  to
         terms with and then only in the context of his life in  the  United
         Kingdom with his family.  Without the security of  his  family  and
         the safety of his  pattern  of  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
         appellant  is  unlikely  to  be  able  even  to  cope,  never  mind
         reintegrate."

22. The bereavement counsellor referred to the appellant's  experiences  as
    "particularly harrowing" and that was clearly something upon which  the
    judge was entitled to  place  weight.  The  assessment  was  made  with
    explicit consideration given  to  the  appellant  having  a  sister  in
    Kosovo. It was open to the First-tier Tribunal to make the decision  it
    did on the materials provided.

23. The respondent's fourth ground argues  that  where  the  finding  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules relies on  the  findings  under
    the Immigration Rules it was unsound,  the  proportionality  assessment
    having to be conducted through the "lens of the  Rules".  This  is,  in
    fact, the approach taken  by  the  judge.   Findings  were  made  under
    paragraphs 399 and 399A. Those provisions were found  to  be  met.  The
    assessment outside the Immigration  Rules  included  the  following  at
    [66]:

         "Taking these findings into account with the rest of  the  evidence
         and balancing the weight of the public interest and the public good
         requirements in the proposed deportation of the  Appellant  against
         the personal integrity as well as the private and  family  life  of
         the Appellant and taking into account the latest  letter  from  the
         Probation Service, dated as long ago as 18 March 2013  I  find  for
         the reasons already given that his deportation  would  in  all  the
         circumstances be disproportionate to the  legitimate  need  of  the
         state to prevent disorder and crime.   The  appeal  therefore  also
         succeeds on human rights grounds outside the Immigration Rules."

24. That assessment is made "through the lens of the Rules" and with proper
    reference to the role of the public interest.

25. Where I have found that the appeal allowing the claim under  paragraphs
    399(a) and 399A and outside the Immigration Rules is not in error,  any
    challenge  to  the  findings  concerning  the  appellant's  wife  under
    paragraph 399(b) cannot be material and does not need to  be  addressed
    further.

26. For all of these reasons, it is my  conclusion  that  the  decision  of
    Designated Judge Shaerf does not disclose a material error on  a  point
    of law.

27. I should perhaps also highlight the long history of the appeal in which
    two Tribunals  have  found  that  because  of  the  relatively  unusual
    circumstances of this appellant he should not  be  deported.  Two  more
    years have elapsed since  the  hearing  before  Judge  Shaerf.  Nothing
    before me suggested other than that during that  time  the  appellant's
    family and private life claim has strengthened.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose error on  a  point
of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                        Dated: 15 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
