
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA002842016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2017                       |On 8 May 2017                        |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                 arben qema
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania who  was  born  on  30  September
    1984.  He appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State on 25
    May  2016  to  deport  him  pursuant  to  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer in a  decision  of
    14 September 2016 following a hearing at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 2
    September 2016.  Permission was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Symes on 13 March 2017.  Thus the matter came before me.

2.   It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant was in  a  genuine
    and subsisting marriage with Lithuanian  national,  Ms  Vaiciuyete  and
    that she was a qualified person.   Judge  Metzer  heard  evidence  from
    both.

3.       I have adopted the appellants' immigration history as  set  out  by
    Judge Metzer, but it  is  not  entirely  clear  to  me  and  should  be
    clarified and agreed by the parties at a future hearing.  It seems that
    he entered the UK unlawfully in October 2001.  He claimed asylum  using
    an alias and claiming that he was a Macedonian national or  a  Moldovan
    national.  In any event, this application was refused  on  20  February
    2002 and on 27 September 2004 the  appellant  voluntarily  departed  to
    Albania.  It seems that he had been granted discretionary leave here in
    the UK until he turned 18. He returned to the UK  on  12  January  2005
    with entry clearance for two years as the spouse of a  British  citizen
    and on 5 January 2007 he made an  application  for  ILR  but  this  was
    refused because his marriage had broken down and on 17  April  2007  he
    was detained and removed to Albania.  On 2 March 2007 he was  convicted
    of  harassment  and  sentenced  to  five  months'  imprisonment  and  a
    restraining order was imposed for a period of twelve months.  It  seems
    that a deportation order was made against him and he  appealed  against
    this, his appeal was dismissed  and  he  was  subsequently  removed  to
    Albania on 25 February 2008.  He then made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance which was refused.  He entered the UK illegally on 6  January
    2010 in breach  of  the  deportation  order  and  using  his  brother's
    passport which contained a UK residence permit.  This led to a  further
    conviction  and  the  appellant  was  sentenced   to   twelve   months'
    imprisonment.  On 22 February 2010  the  appellant  applied  under  the
    Facilitated Return Scheme and he was removed to  Albania  on  26  April
    2010.  In January 2011 the appellant was apprehended attempting to gain
    entry to the UK in breach of  a  deportation  order  and  removed.   He
    returned to the UK illegally in 2011.

4.   The judge's salient findings are at paragraphs 22  to  28  and  are  as
    follows:

         "22. In the Appellant's favour, I find that he is in a genuine  and
             loving relationship with his wife and was also  close  to  his
             mother-in-law and to his family in the United Kingdom.   There
             are only two convictions recorded  against  him  in  2007  and
             2010.   I  note  that  he  describes  himself  as  a  reformed
             character and is remorseful for his offending.


         23.  However, it is necessary to set  against  the  points  in  the
             Appellant's favour the fact that for the considerable majority
             of his time in the United Kingdom he has entered and  remained
             unlawfully.  The only period where he had lawful status in the
             United Kingdom was in 2005 to 2007.  The  Appellant  regularly
             attempted to gain entry to the United Kingdom in breach  of  a
             Deportation Order.  In January 2010, he  did  so  by  using  a
             passport  belonging  to  his  brother  which  contained  a  UK
             Residence Permit which resulted in  the  criminal  conviction.
             He then sought re-entry to the United Kingdom illegally  on  a
             number of occasions in 2011.


         24.  In February 2012, a telephone call was received to the  police
             to advise that  he  had  re-entered  the  United  Kingdom.   A
             document provided to me by Mr Bose on behalf of the Respondent
             confirms the content of that telephone  call.   The  Appellant
             denied that he sought to harass his ex-partner and there is no
             other evidence to support the allegation which was  not  taken
             further.  However, the Appellant was  not  in  a  position  to
             explain how his ex-partner could possibly have known he had re-
             entered the United  Kingdom  had  he  not  contacted  her  and
             although I do not  make  any  finding  that  he  breached  the
             harassment order or committed any further criminal offence,  I
             do consider that it is unlikely that his ex-partner would have
             known about his return had he not contacted her.  Between 2011
             and 2015, the Appellant  remained  unlawfully  in  the  United
             Kingdom before he sought to regularise his position in  August
             2015.


         25.  In  summary,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  two  serious
             offences, one of harassment and  one  of  possessing  a  false
             instrument, both of which resulted  in  periods  of  immediate
             custody.  The Appellant's immigration history is an  extremely
             poor one given the numerous times the Appellant either entered
             unlawfully or sought to do so on  occasions  in  breach  of  a
             signed Deportation Order.  On other  occasions  the  Appellant
             remained unlawfully in the  United  Kingdom  for  considerable
             periods without seeking to regularise his status.


         26.  Having taken into account the  Appellant's  relationship  with
             his wife who is a Lithuanian national  who  has  come  to  the
             United Kingdom to work and clearly  has  done  so  and  speaks
             impressive English,  recognising  that  for  her  to  move  to
             Albania would be difficult for  her,  I  nonetheless  consider
             that the Respondent  has  established  that  the  decision  to
             remove complies with the principle  of  proportionality  under
             Regulation 21(5)(a) of the 2006 Regulations.  In reaching that
             decision, I take into account that the Appellant  is  still  a
             relatively young man in good health, how long he has spent  in
             the United Kingdom which amounts to a period  off  and  on  of
             some eleven years but also taking into account the  fact  that
             he did not tell  his  wife  initially  about  his  immigration
             history and that once he did, and his immigration  status  was
             uncertain, they chose to marry with the  position  unresolved.
             I also consider that the Appellant was  not  open  as  to  the
             extent of his family in Albania making reference only  to  one
             brother with whom he had resided but failing to mention  until
             it came out in cross-examination of his wife  that  he  has  a
             mother, sister and other family in Albania too.  I  find  that
             he sought to play down the extent of his  links  with  Albania
             which I find are fairly large although I accept that he has  a
             brother and family in the United Kingdom too.


         27.  It is open to the Appellant's wife as  to  whether  she  would
             wish to  relocate  to  Albania  with  the  Appellant.   I  was
             unimpressed with her answer when she said she really had never
             discussed it with the Appellant as to what would happen if  he
             was returned to Albania and maintained that she did  not  know
             what to do.  I find that she  gave  that  answer  because  she
             didn't wish to state openly what she would do if the Appellant
             were returned to Albania and that's  he  must  have  had  some
             discussions with him about that eventuality.  Whether she were
             to choose to relocate to Albania and continue  life  with  him
             there or not and wait for the Appellant to  make  any  further
             applications from Albania  is  not  directly  material  to  my
             decision.


         28.  In all the circumstances, I find that despite the  Appellant's
             relationship with his wife and to a lesser extent  those  with
             other members of his and her family  and  other  friends,  the
             Respondent has established to the relevant standard  that  the
             decision to remove the Appellant complies with  the  principle
             of proportionality."

5.   At paragraph 1 the judge identified the sole issue  to  be  whether  or
    not removal of  the  appellant  is  proportionate  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 21(5)(a)  of  the  2006  Regulations.  At  paragraph  21  he
    directed himself that the burden of  proof  is  on  the  respondent  to
    establish that the decision is proportionate.

6.   The first ground argues that the judge erred in applying Regulation  21
    by focusing solely on proportionality.  I am wholly persuaded that  the
    judge materially erred in this respect. The issue was not simply one of
    proportionality.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  consider  the
    decision in accordance  with  the  principles  set  out  at  Regulation
    21(5)(a)-(e) and (6) and it is clear from the decision that  the  judge
    did not have regard to the factors contained therein.  In particular in
    order for the decision to comply  with  the  Regulations  the  personal
    conduct  of  the  appellant  must  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society and there is no attempt by the judge to address this.  There
    are no credibility findings  made  by  the  judge  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's evidence about his conduct.  The appellant's propensity  to
    re-offend is clearly an issue taken by the respondent in  the  decision
    letter which needed to be addressed by the judge.  The  judge  recorded
    the appellant's evidence about this, but failed to make clear  findings
    on the matter.

7.   The error is material and the decision is set aside.   The  judge  made
    very limited, if any, findings in relation to the appellant's  conduct.
    There is a need for a re-hearing in order for a judge to make clear and
    comprehensive credibility  findings  particularly  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's conduct and future risk and to properly consider the appeal
    under Reg 21.   I accepted Mr Muquit's submissions that the  FtT  would
    be the appropriate venue.

8.   Mr Muquit urged me to maintain the judge's findings in relation to  the
    appellant's relationship with his wife.  At present I can see no reason
    to go behind those findings but I am not prepared to tie the hands of a
    future judge who will need to make an assessment of the evidence at the
    date of the hearing and there is  no  guarantee  that  the  appellant's
    position will remain the same as it  was  in  September  2016.   It  is
    expected that the parties are clear as to the  appellant's  immigration
    history and it is agreed if possible prior to the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal is  set  aside
and the matter is remitted to the First-tier for a fresh hearing.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 3 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
