
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  DA/00312/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2014                |On  17th November 2014               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                       mr saade jamel mohammed awawdah
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter (Richmond Chambers LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a Determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Lobo) promulgated on 15th August 2014.
 2.  In  his  Determination  Judge  Lobo  found  that  as  the  Appellant's
    relationship with an EEA national had not been properly  considered  by
    the Secretary of State when she refused his  application  to  revoke  a
    deportation order, the decision was not in accordance with the law.  He
    allowed the appeal to the limited extent that the matter  was  remitted
    to the Secretary of State for her to make a lawful decision.

 3. Unusually, it is the Appellant who challenges that decision. It is  the
    Appellant's case, as argued before me, that Judge  Lobo  did  not  have
    jurisdiction  to  decide  as  he  did  because  the  question  of   the
    relationship with the EEA national was raised in response to a  Section
    120 notice and thus there was no obligation on the Secretary  of  State
    to consider the matter as decided in Patel [2013] UKSC 72. The decision
    was therefore not unlawful and the Judge ought to have  considered  the
    appeal substantively on all the grounds as he was  required  to  do  by
    S.85 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not make an error of law. It is
    quite clear from the refusal letter accompanying the decision that  the
    Secretary of State had been made aware that  the  Appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with a Lithuanian National in the  UK.  Having  been  made
    aware that that was the claim, the Secretary of State should  therefore
    have firstly considered whether that position was accepted  and  if  so
    the decision should have been made under the EEA  Regulations  and  not
    under the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State did not do that and
    therefore I agree with the First-tier Tribunal Judge that her  decision
    was unlawful. The question of his relationship with an EEA national was
    not, contrary to the arguments before me, first  raised  in  the  S.120
    notice. Had it been there would have  been  force  in  the  Appellant's
    argument. As it is I can find no error of law in the Judge's  decision.
    Having  decided  that  the  decision  was  unlawful  there  can  be  no
    consequences for  the  Appellant  that  flow  from  that  decision  and
    therefore there are no substantive matters to be considered.

 5. The situation  is  that  the  matter  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State to make a decision on the application  to  revoke  a
    deportation order. If the Secretary of State  accepts  the  Appellant's
    claim to be in a durable relationship with a  qualifying  EEA  national
    then her decision falls to be made under the  EEA  Regulations  and  of
    course under Regulation 27 the  refusal would not carry an  in  country
    right of appeal. If the Appellant 's case falls to be considered  under
    the EEA Regulations  then  the  Immigration  Rules  have  no  relevance
    (para5). He will retain the right to argue  Article  8.  Those  matters
    however are not before me and will properly fall to  be  decided  after
    the Secretary of State has reached a lawful decision.

 6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is dismissed



Signed                              Date 17th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
