
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00029/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                    |On 17 November 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                                FORTUNATA [P]


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Hassan, Counsel, instructed by The AIRE
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Poland born on 14 December 1983.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in November 1996  with  her
    mother. Following her mother's unsuccessful asylum claim  she  remained
    in the United Kingdom without leave.  She returned to Poland  but  came
    back to the United Kingdom where once again her mother's asylum  appeal
    was unsuccessful.  She remained without leave after 18 May.   She  was,
    however, part of her  mother's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain made in March 2004 and was granted indefinite leave to remain on
    1 April 2004 prior to Poland acceding to the European Union  on  1  May
    2004.

3.   The appellant was convicted of a number of offences. She was  cautioned
    for two thefts by way of shoplifting in January 1997.   In  March  2010
    she was convicted of pick-pocketing on a bus as part of  a  team.   She
    was convicted of shoplifting in April 2011 and was  sentenced  in  2014
    for two counts of burglary, she having entered sheltered  accommodation
    with an accomplice on two occasions to take  money  and  property  from
    vulnerable elderly victims.  She was sentenced on 5 June 2014 to a five
    year term of imprisonment. On 4 December 2015 a decision was made  that
    she be deported in accordance with the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley on 9  May  2016  and  18
    July 2016.  The appeal was dismissed.

5.   Subsequently the appellant was removed to Poland on 20  September  2016
    where she currently remains.

6.   Criticism has been made of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. Such, it is contended, amount to an error of law.  Permission to
    appeal against that decision was granted on one ground. Thus the matter
    comes before me to determine whether or not there was a material  error
    of law.

7.   Removal  was  to  be  implemented  under  Regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   Such  required
    at the very least that her removal was  justified  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy, public security or public health. It  was  contended  in
    this case that as the appellant had resided in the United Kingdom for a
    continuous period of at  least  ten  years  prior  to  the  deportation
    decision, she may only be deported  on  imperative  grounds  of  public
    security.

8.   The Judge did not accept that the appellant met  that  requirement.  Of
    course it is  important  to  remember  that  "residence"  means  lawful
    residence in accordance with the 2006  Regulations  for  the  ten  year
    period calculated back from the date of decision.  From that period  is
    to be excluded periods of imprisonment. The Judge noted in  the  course
    of the determination that the appellant had worked for about a year  in
    2005 and  therefore  she  had  not.   The  Judge  did  not  uphold  the
    suggestions that she had been a job seeker finding that there  were  no
    documents to support such a claim.  Indeed as the Judge  made  comment,
    there was not enough evidence to support the contention  that  she  was
    even in  the  United  Kingdom  for  five  years'  residence  under  the
    Regulations.

9.   The Judge noted the addiction of the appellant to  drugs  and  accepted
    her evidence that that addiction began at the age of 23 which was in or
    around 2006.  She was not working or job seeking during the  period  of
    time when she was addicted and was only claiming benefits sporadically.
     Indeed she committed the offences in order to earn some money. Thus it
    was that the Judge concluded that there was  no  continuous  period  of
    five years under which she could have obtained  a  permanent  right  of
    residence in the United Kingdom let alone a period of ten years.

10.  In summary, the Judge found that the matter should be  determined  upon
    the lower risk that applies.  I can find no error in that assessment.

11.  At paragraph 90, applying the case of Warsame v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    16 and LG and CC (EEA Regs: residence: imprisonment:  removal)  (Italy)
    [2009] UKAIT 00024, the  Judge  concluded  at  paragraph  90  that  the
    appellant did not have ten years' legal residence in the United Kingdom
    at the date of the decision and cannot rely on the protection  afforded
    for the "imperative" grounds under Regulation 21(4)(a).

12.  It is contended that the Judge erred  in  that  assessment  and  should
    have, in any event,  regarded  the  whole  period  of  the  appellant's
    residence as showing the requisite ten year period.  Alternatively,  to
    have considered her case on the basis that if not strictly the ten year
    period under the Regulations, it was to be treated to all  intents  and
    purposes as being so.

13.  In that connection reliance is placed upon the cases of Warsame and  LG
    and CC.  In that later case the court  stated  that  the  length  of  a
    person's residence is relevant in determining  the  proportionality  of
    the  decision  and  that  the  period  of  residence  may  justify  the
    application  of  the  "imperative  grounds  test".   In  particular  at
    paragraph 82 of  that  judgment,"  where  a  person  has  become  fully
    integrated into  this  country  by  more  than  ten  years'  residence,
    particularly if he has severed any links with his country of origin, it
    would be consistent for the purpose of  the Directive(as stated in  the
    Preamble) to apply  a  stringent  test,  which  may  be  equivalent  in
    practice to the "imperative grounds" test."

14.  The Court went on in paragraph 116 of LG and CC to  indicate  that  the
    Tribunal  fell  into  error  in  failing  to  consider  long  residence
    including more than ten  years'  residence  before  any  offences  were
    committed and the lack of links with Italy.  It is  said  at  paragraph
    117:-

         "In our view, even acknowledging the seriousness of the offence  in
         2000, and the possible risk of reoffending, we do  not  think  that
         expulsion is a proportionate response for someone who came here  as
         a child, has acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence  in  this
         country, has lived here for some fifteen years before the crime was
         committed, and has no significant links with Italy. In such a  case
         we think that public  policy  considerations  should  carry  little
         weight."

15.  It is contended that a similar reasoning was adopted  in  the  case  of
    Warsame. Rather than counting back from the  date  of  the  deportation
    decision, the Court went on to consider whether there was a  period  of
    ten years' continuous residence.  The court in Warsame at paragraph  36
    of the judgment stressed that an overall assessment must be made of the
    person's situation on each occasion of the relevant consideration being
    determined whether the integrating links previously  forged  with  host
    member state had been broken. Thus it  was  to  determine  whether  the
    enhanced protection provided in that provision should be granted.

16.  In the current case of course the offending behaviour has spanned  most
    of the time of lawful residence under ILR, having with it a  particular
    anti social characteristic,  namely  preying  upon  the  vulnerable  in
    society for the financial advancement of the appellant. Such was  noted
    in particular at paragraph 100 of the determination. The conduct of the
    appellant is long-standing criminality relating to drugs  and  offences
    directed against vulnerable individuals,  the  elderly,  infirm  and  a
    pregnant woman. Such offences arising directly from addition  and  from
    drink.

17.  At paragraph 109 of  the  determination  it  was  recognised  that  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom since 1999 with her family and
    therefore there  may  be  some  familiarity  with  and  integration  in
    society. The Judge recognised, however, that although  there  was  time
    spent  with  the  family  there  was  little  evidence  of  significant
    integration into the community, there being no evidence  of  attendance
    at school or college and only one brief experience of work more than  a
    decade ago, with rather  a  self  centred  focus  on  drug  taking  and
    criminality to the detriment of Society.

18.  The Judge noted that the finding in  the  OASys  Report  was  that  the
    appellant was "leading a manipulate and predatory life  style".   There
    was nothing of the nature of integration within any period as  to  meet
    the situations dealt with in the authorities that have been cited.

19.  I find that the Judge has made a proper overall assessment  as  to  the
    nature of the offending and of the integration over the relevant period
    and has taken into account and specifically recognised  the  length  of
    residence. The Judge, for the reasons as set out  in  those  paragraphs
    and others did not consider that that matter should  give  rise  to  an
    enhanced protection. She was not someone that had lived for many  years
    before committing crime but someone who was a constant  prey  upon  the
    vulnerable over a number of years.  I find little reason to doubt  that
    a proper assessment was made.

20.  It is also contended that  Regulation  21(6)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    requires that before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy or public security the decision maker must  take  account
    of considerations such as age, state of  health,  family  and  economic
    situation of the person, the person's length of residence in the United
    Kingdom, the person's social and cultural  integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the extent of  the  person's  links  with  his  country  of
    origin.

21.  In the course of a detailed determination the  immigration  history  of
    the appellant was considered as was her drug taking and drinking.   Her
    schooling  was  considered  as  was  also  her  medical  condition,  in
    particular her backache, self-harm and drugs. It was her case that  she
    was a primary carer of her mother and that was also considered, as  was
    her family situation in the United Kingdom.

22.  The aspect of return to Poland and connections  with  Poland  was  also
    considered. It is said that  the  family  had  originally  left  Poland
    because of being bullied and harassed on account of their gypsy origin.
     With no family in Poland there was a need for her family  in  the  UK.
    The Judge noted however that there was family in Poland particularly an
    elder sister although there had been no contact.

23.  In addition to those matters  the  issue  of  rehabilitation  was  also
    considered. It was considered that  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    obtain appropriate treatment for her diabetes and other  conditions  in
    Poland.

24.  It would  seem  therefore  that  over  what  was  a  significantly  and
    substantial determination the matters required to  be  considered  were
    indeed considered.

25.  The certification applied to the  decision  was  also  the  subject  of
    criticism, it being said that the findings of the Judge at paragraph 85
    that the appellant would not face a real risk of  serious  irreversible
    harm if removed to Poland was not adequately  reasoned.  Reasons  were,
    however, given particularly that Poland had health services which would
    allow the appellant to manage her condition appropriately.   There  are
    clearly family members as identified and the fact that no  contact  had
    been made did not prevent that contact being made. The Judge  found  at
    paragraph 62 of the determination that the appellant was  playing  down
    her family links in Poland to bolster her claim.   In  practical  terms
    the claim to have been ill-treated was one made many year ago  and  the
    subject matter of two asylum claims both of which were rejected.

26.  In those circumstances I find little merit in the contention  that  the
    Judge failed to approach the certification in the correct way or indeed
    failed to apply the correct test.

27.  It is also contended that the Judge failed to give due  weight  to  the
    OASys Report which spoke of a low risk of reoffending, particularly  if
    the drinking could be under control.  It is said that it was wrong  for
    the Judge not to have given the appellant time out in the community  to
    demonstrate that she could control her drinking.  It seems to  me  that
    that is an unrealistically high burden to be placed upon the Judge. The
    whole pattern of the appellant's offending leading to her then  current
    imprisonment was precisely drugs and alcohol.

28.   The  issue  of  rehabilitation  was  carefully   considered   in   the
    determination particularly the minimisation of the offending  behaviour
    is recorded in the OASys Report itself. The finding of the  report  was
    that the appellant was leading a manipulative and predatory  lifestyle.
    When taking into account the report the Judge did not consider that the
    risk to the public was in any way diminished.

29.  The Judge in paragraph 115 of the determination did not find  there  to
    be  sufficient  evidence  of   rehabilitation   beyond   her   untested
    assurances. In particular it was  noted  that  the  appellant  did  not
    engage with any established programme to assess and support her efforts
    to deal with the reasons why she took illegal drugs.  Although  it  was
    recognised that in prison she was not taking drugs, the Judge  was  not
    satisfied that such would be long lived on release.

30.  Overall I am satisfied that the Judge has  made  a  holistic  and  fair
    consideration both of the matters that can be taken in  favour  of  the
    appellant  and  those  that  can  be  taken  against,  particularly  in
    assessing the justification for removal under the 2006 Regulations.   I
    find the determination to be well reasoned and  I  do  not  uphold  the
    challenges which have been made.

31.  The length of residence  was  carefully  considered  as  was  also  the
    failure to integrate into society.

32.  Although it may be correct to note that the Judge did not consider  the
    cases of Wasarne and LG and CC in those precise terms, the  authorities
    were before her and I find the proper  principles  applied.  Given  the
    findings of the Judge it is also abundantly clear  that  even  if  that
    specific challenge had been raised the  outcome  would  have  been  the
    same.

33.  I therefore do not find any material error of law. The  appeal  of  the
    appellant before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal upheld namely to  dismiss  her  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the EEA regulations and under Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 16 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
