

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00267/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 20 December 2016                           |On 22 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 L M ZYGMUNT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Zygmunt is a citizen of Poland, born on 17 November 1984.  The  SSHD
    advised him on 2 March 2016 of her  intention  to  make  a  deportation
    order against him under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  on
    grounds  of  his   criminal   convictions.    He   did   not   respond.
    Unsurprisingly, under the circumstances, the SSHD proceeded to  make  a
    deportation order, dated 12 April and served on 3 June 2016.

 2. Mr Zygmunt appealed to the FtT.  At the hearing of  his  appeal  before
    Judge Frankish on 30 August 2016, his representative  led  evidence  of
    his family and other circumstances, of most of which the SSHD  was  not
    aware, and had no reason to be aware, when making her order.

 3. The appeal was allowed by decision promulgated on 8 September 2016.

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the UT, on grounds which insist
    that Mr Zygmunt presents "a remaining risk of recidivism";  that  there
    is "no evidence" that he has "addressed his offending behaviour in  any
    way"; that there is  nothing  in  his  relationship  with  his  current
    partner or with his mother, who could accompany him to Poland, to  tilt
    the balance over the public interest in his deportation; and nothing to
    show that there would be an effect on the two children of his  previous
    relationship  such  that  removal  would  "cause   a   disproportionate
    response" to his offending.

 5. On 27 September 2016 FtT Judge Kimnell refused permission, on the  view
    that the grounds were "really no more than submissions on the  merits".
    On renewal of the  same  grounds,  however,  UT  Judge  Chalkley  on  9
    November 2016 granted permission.

 6. Notice of the hearing on 20 December was issued on 29 November.   By  a
    letter which appears  to  be  undated,  received  on  12  December,  Mr
    Zygmunt's representative sought an adjournment, based on another  court
    engagement and being unable to instruct anyone  else  "due  to  festive
    Xmas time".  The  UT  refused  that  application  by  letter  dated  16
    December.  It was renewed by letter received on 19 December  and  again
    refused on that date.

 7. There was no appearance by or  for  Mr  Zygmunt  on  20  December.   No
    further communication had been received.

 8. Under those circumstances, there was no reason  for  the  case  not  to
    proceed in absence of Mr Zygmunt or any representative on his behalf.

 9. Apart from any other considerations, I note that there is  on  file  no
    rule 24 or other response to the SSHD's grounds.  The time  and  effort
    put into poorly justified applications for adjournment might have  been
    better applied to presenting a written submission.

10. Mrs O'Brien made submissions in support of the grounds.

11. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal would be dismissed.

12. The decision of the SSHD is exactly as might have been expected, on the
    information (or lack  of  information)  before  her,  after  giving  Mr
    Zygmunt the chance to explain his position.

13. On the evidence as it emerged before the FtT, the case was perhaps  one
    which might reasonably have  been  decided  ether  way.   Some  of  the
    judge's findings are perhaps more generous, or at least more generously
    worded, than other judges might have found.  However, there is  nothing
    in the grounds to undermine the judge's crucial finding at paragraph 20
    that the requirement of a  continuing  threat  is  not  made  out,  and
    nothing to show that his conclusion  on  proportionality  is  not  well
    within his reasonable scope.  The grounds are in essence no  more  than
    reassertion of one side of the case, without showing that resolution of
    the case in favour of the other side involved the making of  any  error
    on a point of law.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            20 December 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

