
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal given as long ago as 12 September 2014 by which
    it allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision to deport  him;
    and that decision followed his conviction  for  a  serious  offence  of
    causing grievous bodily harm for which he received a  sentence  of  two
    years and three months' imprisonment.

2.   The respondent had, he said, come to this country in 2006  from  Poland
    and had been here ever since.  He had produced evidence in the form  of
    various  payslips  and  other  documentation  from   his   bank   which
    established that at least since November 2007 he must  have  been  here
    working full-time. Before the First-tier Tribunal evidence was given by
    the respondent and his brother, which the Tribunal say was able to fill
    in the details in respect of the period  2006  to  2008.  The  Tribunal
    accepted this witness evidence and also that there  were  good  reasons
    why the respondent had been unable to produce evidence in the  form  of
    any documentation that might have established this  earlier  period  of
    residence and work because bank records for example, did  not  go  back
    more than five years.

3.   It was suggested in the grounds of appeal that  the  reasoning  by  the
    Tribunal was insufficient to justify the conclusion that the respondent
    had been here for that period. The importance of that is that if he had
    been here for five years then he had within the relevant EU Directive a
    right of permanent residence and that meant that the standard that  had
    to be applied in deportation was one which required  the  Secretary  of
    State to show serious grounds of public policy or  public  security  to
    justify his exclusion or removal from  the  UK.   It  talks  about  the
    security of the state in the Regulation but that includes the  security
    of individuals to be protected from those who might commit crimes,  and
    so if there is a serious criminal  offence  then  that  is  capable  of
    meaning that an individual can be  removed  albeit  he  has  the  added
    protection for having been here for more than five years.

4.   We find  that  there  are  no  proper  grounds  for  challenge  to  the
    Tribunal's assessment that the  appellant  had  a  permanent  right  of
    residence. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is evidenced as  set
    out above, and gives adequate reasons for the conclusion.

5.   The question remaining is whether on the facts of this  case  as  found
    by this Tribunal that its decision was wrong  in  law  in  relation  to
    whether the  respondent  poses  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society in
    accordance with Regulation 21  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.

6.   Clearly the Tribunal formed a very favourable view  of  the  respondent
    when he gave evidence before it.  The offence in question  was  a  very
    nasty one. The circumstances briefly were that he and a  colleague  had
    gone out drinking together, and had had on the face of it  an  enormous
    amount to drink.  When they returned home it seemed that they were  for
    whatever reason unable to get in and so they knocked on  a  neighbour's
    door and got him to let them in there.  There then took place this very
    serious assault on the unfortunate man, no doubt because of  the  drink
    that they had consumed.

7.   The respondent asserted that the neighbour  had  started  any  violence
    but the response of the pair of them was to attack him in such a way as
    caused  him  very  serious  head  injuries,  facial   cuts,   fractured
    cheekbone, broken nose, loss of consciousness and  the  requirement  of
    surgery under general anaesthetic.  The  respondent  was  charged  with
    causing grievous bodily harm with intent but for reasons  which  seemed
    good to the CPS and which were accepted by the trial judge the plea was
    accepted to grievous bodily harm contrary to section  20  of  the  1861
    Act. This meant that there was  no  question  of  an  intent  to  cause
    grievous bodily harm, merely that this incident occurred, as  it  were,
    on the spur of the moment resulting  from  the  drunken  state  of  the
    respondent  and  his  colleague.  This  lack   of   pre-meditation   is
    appreciated by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 43 of the decision.



8.   Before the First-tier Tribunal the  respondent  expressed  remorse  and
    asserted that he had not drunk alcohol since release from prison.  That
    the Tribunal accepted.  So  far  as  risk  of  harm  is  concerned  the
    Secretary of State has relied particularly on  the  NOMS  report  which
    indicated that in the view of the author there was  a  medium  risk  of
    harm to known adults and public in the community but a low risk of harm
    to children, staff and prisoners, and a low risk of re-offending.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal is criticised in the grounds of appeal for  not
    giving proper reasons, and for not relying on the medium risk of  harm.
    However it is clear that consideration  was  given  explicitly  to  the
    matter of medium risk of harm to known adults and public  at  paragraph
    25 of the decision.  The Tribunal  stated  however,  that  in  all  the
    circumstances and no doubt having regard to  the  view  that  they  had
    formed of the respondent combined with the  evidence  of  the  low  re-
    offending risk as set out in the NOMS report before  them,  that  there
    was a low risk of reoffending and there was nothing to suggest that the
    respondent's  personal  conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, thus applying the correct test under Regulation 21  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

10.  It seems to us that whether or not  we  would  have  reached  the  same
    decision it cannot conceivably be said that there was any error of  law
    in the approach adopted by the First-tier Tribunal.  They made a proper
    and balance evaluation of the respondent's criminal record  which  they
    noted as consisting of an extremely serious but unpremeditated offence;
    they indicate that they accepted the evidence they found credible given
    by the respondent both as to his remorse and  intention  to  avoid  any
    further offending; they gave proper consideration to the  NOMS  report;
    and concluded in those circumstances he would not be a sufficient  risk
    to justify his deportation following the relevant Regulations.

11.  In those circumstances this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

      1. The appeal is dismissed as the grounds do not  disclose  errors  of
         law by the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  is
         upheld.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date 21st July 2015

[pic]

pp Mr Justice Collins

