
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00400/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd February 2020                 |On 16 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                    T A M
                          (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Nyawanza instructed by Axiom Stone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because there are minors involved.




 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 1st March 1980  and  she
    appeals against the  decision  to  deport  her  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016 EEA Regulations').



 2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed her  appeal,  on  4th  February  2019
    under the 2016 Regulations but owing to a material  error  of  law,  in
    particular the failure to assess adequately the best interests  of  the
    children under section 55 of the Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 and a failure to have regard to  Ayinde  and  Thinjom  (Carers
    -Reg.15A - Zambrano [2015] UKUT 00560 (which held the best interests of
    the children were not necessarily adequately protected  by  them  being
    taken into care) that determination  was  set  aside.   There  were  no
    findings preserved.

 3. The key issues in  the  resumed  hearing  were  whether  the  appellant
    presented a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    fundamental interests of society and thus the decision  to  deport  was
    taken on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health, in accordance with the 2016 Regulations  and  if  so,  secondly
    whether  the decision to deport the appellant would force her  children
    to leave the UK to accompany their mother and would  be  in  breach  of
    their fundamental rights as citizens of the EU and the  decision  would
    be proportionate in all the circumstances.

 4. The Secretary of State had signed a Deportation Order on 6th June  2018
    following the appellant's conviction and sentence on 23rd January  2014
    at  Birmingham  Crown  Court,  for  conspiracy  to  supply  a  Class  A
    controlled drug, namely heroin, and conspiracy  to  supply  a  Class  A
    controlled drug, namely Crack Cocaine.  The appellant received a prison
    sentence of 8 � years.

 5. The applicant had entered the UK as a  visitor  (although  the  precise
    date was unknown) having  applied  for  entry  clearance  in  Kingston,
    Jamaica in 2002.  After arrival her leave was  extended  as  a  student
    until 30th September 2007.  She was then encountered on  19th  December
    2007 and served with papers as an overstayer.  On 23rd  November  2009,
    however, she  was  granted  3  years  discretionary  leave  until  22nd
    November 2012, owing to the length of her residency and family life  in
    the UK. Her application in 2012 for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    long residency (14 years) was placed on hold  pending  her  prosecution
    which led to her conviction  referenced  above.  She  was  served  with
    notice of her liability to deportation on 16th May 2014 and submissions
    invited. On 20th July 2016 she was served with a notice of  a  decision
    to make a deportation order under the UK Border Act 2007.  In the light
    of her response and implied asylum claim,  the  appellant  was  sent  a
    Preliminary Information Form ICD 4940  and  ASL  4941  (asylum  support
    application), to which she failed to respond. On 13th December 2017 she
    was served with a notice of liability to deportation under the 2016 EEA
    regulations because of her claim that she had  a  British  child.   The
    Deportation Order was then signed.

 6. It was acknowledged by the Secretary of State on 21st  June  2018  that
    she had a derivative right of residence under regulation 16 of the  EEA
    Regulations because of her relationship with her two children  born  in
    the United Kingdom on 8th March 2006 (TRLN)  and  26th  September  2009
    (RPWM).  Both children were said to be British  citizens  and  she  the
    primary carer. It was not accepted that the appellant had  a  permanent
    right of residence owing to her failure to have  lived  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the 2016 Regulations, her immigration history  detailed
    above and that she had been in prison (see Regulation 3(3) of the  2016
    Regulations).  She was thus entitled to the lowest level of  protection
    under  the  2016  Regulations.  Nonetheless,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the appellant represented a sufficiently serious threat
    to the fundamental  interests  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  her
    deportation would be proportionate.

 7. The appellant challenged her deportation under  regulation  36  of  the
    2016 EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds under  Section  82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. With regard the appellant's criminality,  the  sentencing  judge  found
    that the conspiracy had lasted 4 months, there were 9 test purchases by
    police officers and the appellant always answered the phone, which  was
    used 100,000 times with an average of 22 dealings a day.  The appellant
    had denied the offences, said nothing at her trial until the day of her
    sentence and suggested  to  the  Probation  Officer  she  was  entirely
    innocent.  The sentencing judge found  she  had  sole  control  of  the
    phone, was obtaining the supply and was involved in the packaging.  The
    appellant set up the supply business using her occupation as carer as a
    sort of disguise, was directing or organising, buying and selling on  a
    commercial scale and must have had substantial links to others  further
    up the chain. It was also identified that the appellant had induced the
    involvement of, and exploited, a vulnerable co-defendant.

    Discussion

 9. The appeal was filed under both Regulation 36 of the  2016  Regulations
    and under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.   It  is  necessary  to  consider  the  matter  under  the   2016
    Regulations and where  relevant,  with  reference  to  Article  8,  the
    Secretary of State's position is set out in the Immigration  Rules  and
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    In
    both cases we are required to make a current  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the children, Section 55 of the  Borders  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

10. Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 established  that  member  states  cannot
    refuse a person the right to reside and work in the host member  state,
    where that person is the primary  carer  of  a  Union  citizen  who  is
    residing in their member state of nationality and  refusal of  a  right
    of residence to that primary carer would deprive the Union  citizen  of
    the substance of their European citizenship rights by forcing  them  to
    leave the EEA. The decision in Zambrano was given  effect  in  domestic
    law by amending the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 and in the 2016 Regulations by Regulation 16(5) (previously  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  15A(4A)).
    However, Regulation 16(12) (previously 15A (9) provides that  a  person
    who is otherwise entitled to a derivative right to reside shall not  be
    so entitled where the Secretary of State has made, as here, a  decision
    under Regulation 23(6)(b).

11. Regulation 23 of the 2016 EEA regulations sets out the provisions  with
    regard  the  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  for  those  with  a
    derivative right of residence (by virtue of regulation 28) as follows:

     Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         23.-

         ...

         (6) Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8), an EEA national who has
         entered the United Kingdom or the family member of such a national
         who has entered the United Kingdom may be removed if-

             (a)that person does not have or ceases to have a right to
             reside under these Regulations;

             (b)the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
             removal is justified on grounds of public policy, public
             security or public health in accordance with regulation 27; or



             (c)the Secretary of State has decided that the person's
             removal is justified on grounds of misuse of rights under
             regulation 26(3).

         (7) A person must not be removed under paragraph (6)-

             (a)as the automatic consequence of having recourse to the
             social assistance system of the United Kingdom; or

             (b)if that person has leave to remain in the United Kingdom
             under the 1971 Act unless that person's removal is justified
             on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
             health in accordance with regulation 27.

         (8) A decision under paragraph (6)(b) must state that upon
         execution of any deportation order arising from that decision, the
         person against whom the order was made is prohibited from entering
         the United Kingdom-

             (a)until the order is revoked; or

             (b)for the period specified in the order.

         (9) A decision taken under paragraph (6)(b) or (c) has the effect
         of terminating any right to reside otherwise enjoyed by the
         individual concerned.

12. Any such deportation is required to be in accordance with regulation 27
    of the 2016 regulations as follows:

    Decisions taken on grounds of public policy, public security and public
    health


         27.-

         (1) In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an EEA decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public security or public
         health.

         (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a person
         with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15 except on
         serious grounds of public policy and public security.

         (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is in
             the best interests of the person concerned, as provided for in
             the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the
             General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th November 1989.

         (5) The public policy and public security requirements of the
         United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
         these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental interests of
         society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
         public policy or public security it must also be taken in
         accordance with the following principles-

             (a)the decision must comply with the principle of
             proportionality;

             (b)the decision must be based exclusively on the personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)the personal conduct of the person must represent a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society, taking into account
             past conduct of the person and that the threat does not need
             to be imminent;

             (d)matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify
             the decision;

             (e)a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
             themselves justify the decision;

             (f)the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even in
             the absence of a previous criminal conviction, provided the
             grounds are specific to the person.

         (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public
         policy and public security in relation to a person ("P") who is
         resident in the United Kingdom, the decision maker must take
         account of considerations such as the age, state of health, family
         and economic situation of P, P's length of residence in the United
         Kingdom, P's social and cultural integration into the United
         Kingdom and the extent of P's links with P's country of origin

13. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations sets out at paragraph 3 that where a
    family member of an EEA national has received a custodial sentence  the
    longer the sentence the greater the likelihood  that  the  individual's
    continued presence in the United Kingdom represents a genuine,  present
    and sufficiently serious threat affecting of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  Schedule 1 paragraph 5 provides that removal of  a  family
    member of an EEA national who is able to provide  substantive  evidence
    of  not  demonstrating  a  threat  (i.e.   successfully   reformed   or
    rehabilitated) is less likely to be proportionate.

14. The fundamental interests of society are at Schedule 1 paragraph  7  as
    follows

    The fundamental interests of society


         7.  For the purposes of these Regulations, the fundamental
         interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

             (a)preventing unlawful immigration and abuse of the
             immigration laws, and maintaining the integrity and
             effectiveness of the immigration control system (including
             under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

             (b)maintaining public order;

             (c)preventing social harm;

             (d)preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

             (e)protecting public services;

             (f)excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of
             an EEA national with a conviction (including where the conduct
             of that person is likely to cause, or has in fact caused,
             public offence) and maintaining public confidence in the
             ability of the relevant authorities to take such action;

             (g)tackling offences likely to cause harm to society where an
             immediate or direct victim may be difficult to identify but
             where there is wider societal harm (such as offences related
             to the misuse of drugs or crime with a cross-border dimension
             as mentioned in Article 83(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
             of the European Union);

             (h)combating the effects of persistent offending (particularly
             in relation to offences, which if taken in isolation, may
             otherwise be unlikely to meet the requirements of regulation
             27);

             (i)protecting the rights and freedoms of others, particularly
             from exploitation and trafficking;

             (j)protecting the public;

             (k)acting in the best interests of a child (including where
             doing so entails refusing a child admission to the United
             Kingdom, or otherwise taking an EEA decision against a child);



             (l)countering terrorism and extremism and protecting shared
             values.

15. We have also had regard to the Secretary of  State's  Guidance  on  EEA
    decisions on grounds of public policy and  public  security  Version  3
    published in December 2017 and Free movement rights:  derivative  right
    of residence Version 5 published on 2nd May 2019.

16. We accept owing to the appellant's immigration history that she did not
    have permanent residence under the 2016 Regulations  and  no  case  was
    made otherwise.  She entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa in 2002
    and remained under the immigration rules until she  was  imprisoned  in
    2012.  She cannot comply  with  the  requirements  of  paragraph  8  of
    Schedule 6 to the 2016 EEA Regulations in  order  to  secure  permanent
    residence under the 2016 Regulations.  She was not an EEA  national  or
    family member of an EEA national prior to her  incarceration  in  2012.
    Her derivative right of residence was acknowledged by the Secretary  of
    State only in 2016. Further to  Regulation  28  (1)  (b)  of  the  2016
    Regulations, the appellant  holds  a  derivative  residence  card,  and
    regulation 28 (2) determines that only the lowest level  of  protection
    will apply and sets out as follows:

         28 ...

         (2) Where this regulation applies, this Part of these Regulations
         applies as though-

             (a)references to "the family member of an EEA national"
             referred instead to "a person with a derivative right to
             reside";

             (b)references to a registration certificate, a residence card,
             a document certifying permanent residence or a permanent
             residence card referred instead to a "derivative residence
             card";

             (c)regulation 24(5) instead conferred on an immigration
             officer the power to revoke a derivative residence card where
             the holder is not at that time a person with a derivative
             right to reside; and

             (d)regulations 24(4) and 27(3) and (4) were omitted

17. Although  at  a  previous  case  management  hearing  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer confirmed that the Secretary of State relied on  the
    exception principle in R v  Bouchereau [1978] QB 732  at  p  742,  that
    past conduct 'alone' may constitute a threat  to  the  requirements  of
    public policy, Ms Cunha did not pursue that submission and we were  not
    persuaded that principle should apply in  any  event.  As  set  out  in
    Robinson (Jamaica) v Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 85 at [69]  and
    citing from R v Bouchereau [1978] QB 732 at p 742

           'Although therefore in the nature of things, the  conduct  of  a
           person relevant for the purposes of article 3 will generally  be
           conduct that shows him  to  have  a  particular  propensity,  it
           cannot be said that that must necessarily be so'.

    At [71] Singh LJ in Robinson stated that it was important to 'recognise
    that what the ECJ was there talking about was  not  a  threat  to  'the
    public' but a threat to 'the requirements of  public  policy'  and  the
    latter was a broader concept and 'that past conduct can only  be  taken
    into account in so far as it  provides  evidence  of  personal  conduct
    constituting  a  'present  threat  to  the   requirements   of   public
    policy'...'"in general" that will imply that the person concerned has a
    "propensity to act in the same way in the future" but that need not  be
    so in every case'.  Singh LJ considered that it  was  helpful  to  have
    regard to the opinion of the Advocate General  in  Bouchereau  when  he
    referred  to  the  type  of  case  which  might  attract  "deep  public
    revulsion" as being 'the kind  of extreme case in  which  past  conduct
    alone may suffice as constituting a present threat to the  requirements
    of public policy'.

18. We do not wish to undermine the nature and seriousness of  the  offence
    committed by this appellant, as witnessed by  the  length  of  sentence
    that she has received and we accept that the Bouchereau  exception  may
    apply to the case of a person with  a  derivative  right  of  residence
    owing to the care of a child, but we are not  persuaded  that  this  is
    such an extreme case which  involves  such  'public  revulsion'  as  to
    warrant application.

19. General considerations of deterrence and public revulsion normally have
    no part to play, albeit the appellant does not have permanent right  of
    residence.  As held by Singh LJ at paragraph 84

           'what one is looking for is a present threat to the requirements
           of public policy; but it also recognised  that,  in  an  extreme
           case, that threat might be evidenced by past conduct  which  has
           caused deep revulsion'

    and he proceeded at paragraph 85

           'I am also of the view that the sort of case that the ECJ had in
           mind in Bouchereau, when it referred to past  conduct  alone  as
           potentially being sufficient was not the present  sort  of  case
           but one whose facts are very extreme.  It is  neither  necessary
           nor helpful to attempt an exhaustive definition but the sort  of
           case that the court was thinking of was where,  for  example,  a
           person has committed grave offences of sexual abuse or  violence
           against young children'.

20. This is not such an extreme case. Although it is the type  of  offence,
    supplying of drugs, in which public revulsion at a past  offence  alone
    might be sufficient, we do not find the  particular  circumstances  can
    characterise the offence as 'the most  heinous  of  crimes'.   In  R  v
    Secretary of State ex p Marchon [1993] Imm AR 384, the offence of  drug
    importation was  committed  by  a  doctor  and  was  described  in  the
    subsequent judgment of Straszweski  [2016]  1  WLR  1173as  'especially
    horrifying'.   Although a care worker, the appellant in  this  instance
    had no prominent position of public importance and it is  difficult  to
    characterise the offence as the 'most heinous  of  crimes',  where  the
    adjectival superlative 'most' is applied to 'heinous' which is  defined
    in the dictionary as 'evil' 'monstrous' and 'reprehensible'.  Nor  does
    the appellant's recruitment of a vulnerable individual suffice, in  our
    judgment, to tip her offending into the very extreme category  of  case
    described in the authorities.

21. We therefore do not  accept  that  the  appellant  falls  foul  of  the
    Bouchereau exception whereby past  conduct  'alone'  may  constitute  a
    threat to the requirements of public policy, when concluding  that  the
    appellant presented a sufficiently serious threat  to  the  fundamental
    interests of the United Kingdom.

22. Robinson (Jamaica) v Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 85 specifically
    considered  the  question  of  the  principles   to   be   applied   in
    circumstances where a third country national  was  to  be  deported  to
    Jamaica but prior to her deportation gave birth  and  was  subsequently
    found to be the sole carer  of  an  EU  citizen  child.   The  question
    examined was the approach to be applied in such circumstances.  The  EU
    did not preclude expulsion, where there  was  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to public policy or public security in view
    of the criminal offences committed  by  that  third  country  national,
    provided the  principle  of  proportionality  was  observed.  Singh  LJ
    provided guidance as follows from paragraph 56 onwards:
       "...I will seek to summarise what the  CJEU  said  with  a  view  to
       providing guidance to the UT when issues of this  kind  have  to  be
       considered both in the present case and in future cases.
    1. First, account must be taken of the right to respect for private and
       family life, as laid down in Article 7 of the EU Charter of
       Fundamental Rights, and also the obligation to take into
       consideration a child's best interests, which is recognised in
       Article 24(2) of the Charter.
    1. In principle, the concepts of "public policy" and "public security"
       provide legitimate aims which can justify an interference with those
       fundamental rights. For example, "the fight against crime in
       connection with drug trafficking as part of an organised group" will
       be included within the concept of "public security", as will the
       fight against terrorism.
    1. Thirdly, the expulsion decision must be founded on the existence of
       a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the
       requirements of public policy or of public security, in view of the
       criminal offences committed by a third-country national who is the
       sole carer of children who are EU citizens.
    1. That conclusion cannot be drawn automatically on the basis solely of
       the criminal record of the person concerned. It can only result,
       where appropriate, from a specific assessment by the national court
       of all the current and relevant circumstances of the case, in the
       light of the principle of proportionality, of the child's best
       interests and of the fundamental rights whose observance the courts
       ensure.
    1. That assessment must therefore take account in particular of:
       (1) the personal conduct of the individual concerned;
       (2) the length and legality of his residence on the territory of the
       member state concerned;
       (3) the nature and gravity of the offence committed;
       (4) the extent to which the person concerned is currently a danger
       to society;
       (5) the age of the child at issue and his state of health;
       (6) his economic and family situation.
    1. In carrying out the balancing exercise required by that assessment,
       the court must take account of the fundamental rights at stake, in
       particular the right to respect for private and family life, and
       ensure that the principle of proportionality is observed.
    1. Furthermore, account must be taken of the child's best interests
       when weighing up the interests involved. Particular attention must
       be paid to his age, his situation in the member state concerned and
       the extent to which he is dependent on the parent who is to be
       deported".

23. We turn to an overall consideration of whether the appellant's personal
    conduct represents a genuine present and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society.  The  appellant
    received a lengthy sentence of 8  �   years  which  represents  a  very
    serious sentence for a serious offence.  By paragraph 3 of  schedule  1
    to the 2016 Regulations, it is more likely that the appellant  poses  a
    threat to the fundamental interests of the UK as a  result  of  such  a
    sentence. The appellant was imprisoned in 2012  and  released  on  29th
    December  2017.    We  have  taken  into  account  the  factors   under
    Regulation 27(5) when assessing whether the threat posed to the  public
    policy and public security requirements.  The nature and extent of  the
    harm inflicted on society and the wider community  is  demonstrated  by
    the description by the sentencing judge of those who were convicted and
    sentenced with the appellant, drug abusers  with  longstanding  habits,
    used to supply drugs, who also had children  but  were  imprisoned  for
    periods of years. The impact on, for example, the children,  let  alone
    the even wider community, is evident.

24. As the Secretary  of  State  set  out  in  the  decision  to  make  the
    deportation order, the appellant denied the offence  in  which  a  jury
    convicted her of supplying Class A drugs.  These drugs are  categorised
    as such because, as set  out  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter, they have the most serious detrimental impact on the health and
    well being of those who become addicted and  the  harmful  consequences
    for society as a whole includes destroying lives and creating havoc and
    insecurity in communities in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  offence  was
    serious and the sentence the appellant received reflected this.

25. The appellant was criticised by the Secretary of State for  failure  to
    complete programmes such  as  the  Enhanced  Thinking  Skills  and  for
    receiving two adjudications whilst imprisoned at Drake Hall.  The OASys
    report confirmed, however, that whilst the  appellant  was  in  custody
    there were no issues with staff and she was motivated to comply  whilst
    in prison and on Licence.  There was reference to the use of changing a
    mobile phone without permission and bringing back money from home leave
    but she subsequently gained back her outwork. The report confirmed that
    it was part of her Licence conditions to complete the MARIPOSA  Women's
    Programme designed to support women in their  thinking  and  behaviour.
    That Licence is ongoing and thus the possibility to complete the course
    remains and is not necessarily outstanding.  The probation officer  who
    compiled the OASys report confirmed that TAM had attended  to  see  the
    officer when requested whilst on home leave and kept in  regular  phone
    contact to keep him/her updated on her progress and concerns.

26. Although the appellant was rearrested  in  2019  following  a  domestic
    dispute  with  her  ex-partner  and  was  said  to  have  breached  the
    conditions of her licence, she was acquitted and no further action  has
    been taken against her.  She has  not  been  convicted  of  reoffending
    since her release just over two years ago.  We take  into  account  the
    fact that the threat does not need to be imminent and as set out in the
    Guidance on "EEA decisions on  grounds  of  public  policy  and  public
    security" (2017), even a low  risk  can  constitute  a  present  threat
    especially where the consequences of any offence could be  serious  and
    we accept that if there were reoffending of a similar nature this would
    be serious enough  to  affect  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society.  We do accept that she has been released under licence with an
    expiry date of 30th March 2022 which suggests a possible ongoing threat
    of reoffending but we also acknowledge that she has secured a  post  of
    employment as a care assistant and her  employer  although  not  giving
    evidence before us, did so before the First-tier Tribunal and submitted
    a statement to testify that she employed  the  appellant  and  we  also
    understand that the appellant has now been promoted  during  her  full-
    time employment. This suggests an element  of  rehabilitation.   We  do
    acknowledge that the appellant was in work  prior  to  and  during  her
    offending.   She was described by the judge as 'orchestrating' the drug
    dealing which was extensive over a short  period  of  time.   The  drug
    offences took place between November 2012 and February 2013.

27. We turn to a detailed consideration of  the  OASys  report  dated  23rd
    January 2018.  This  suggested,  two  years  ago,  a  risk  of  general
    reoffending of 10% within the forthcoming  two  years.   That  has  not
    occurred.  Although the appellant claimed she was not  supplying  drugs
    the report confirms that she accepts she was guilty  of  answering  the
    telephone and allowed her premises to be used, she  knew  that  it  was
    connected with the supply of drugs and that she  should  have  informed
    someone. The OASys report confirmed that the appellant  now  recognised
    the impact and consequences of her offending on the community and wider
    society.  This was her first conviction at the age of 27 years and  her
    only  other  offence  was  a  driving  offence  in  2007;  she  had  no
    established pattern of similar offending.  The OASys report  confirmed,
    at that time, that her  ex-partner,  RW,  had  lived  at  her  previous
    address with her children and she would have to move  on  her  release.
    His, RW's, partner lived at the address caring for the children when he
    was taken into custody.

28. During her  time  in  prison  the  appellant  undertook  outwork  doing
    voluntary work at Kathryn House and Drake  Hall  as  a  Listener.   She
    completed  various  courses  in  prison  including  those  related   to
    counselling, health and beauty. She was not herself a drug user and the
    OASys report identified, although the Secretary of State criticised the
    appellant for not taking a  ETS  course,   no  thinking  and  behaviour
    issues linked to a risk of serious harm (OASys page 21) and  identified
    that she was very motivated to  address  her  offending  behaviour  and
    comply with her licence.  She had  not  (and  to  date  has  not)  been
    convicted of any offence of violence, possession of  weapons,  burglary
    or robbery.   Her OVP risk of reoffending was categorised as 'low'  and
    she was categorised as a low risk of serious harm in the community. She
    was described as being 'very capable' of having capacity to change  and
    reduce offending.

29. The appellant gave evidence before us and confirmed  that  she  was  in
    full time employment and cared for her older child and  was  intent  on
    recovering the care of her son.  Bearing in mind  the  Social  Services
    Report which we address below we found her evidence to be credible.

30. Following Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation  -  test)  [2017]  UKUT
    00294 (IAC)) the burden of proof of showing that  the  appellant  falls
    fouls of Regulation 21(5)(c), rests with the  Secretary  of  State.  We
    take into account the considerations under Schedule 1 with  regard  the
    fundamental interests of society, particularly the prevention of social
    harm and the reference to wider societal  harm  and  we  conclude  that
    although the appellant has been convicted of a very serious offence, in
    all the circumstances, particularly when studying the OASys  report  in
    detail we do not find that Secretary of State has shown the  appellant,
    albeit having the lowest level of protection, on balance, is a genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.  We  have  paid  particular  regard  to  Schedule
    1(7)(c) and (g), and Ms Cunha's submissions that the appellant remained
    a threat to the fundamental interests of society, but  from  the  OASys
    assessment,  her  current  employment,  lifestyle  and  care  for   her
    children, we conclude, on balance, that there is a low and  diminishing
    risk of her reoffending.

31. When assessing whether the appellant  remains  a  sufficiently  serious
    threat  to  public  security,  we  identified  that  the  OASys  report
    identified a low  risk  of  re-offending.  In  our  assessment  we  are
    persuaded by the OASys report and her likelihood  of  re-offending  not
    least because the appellant has not only resumed her previous role as a
    carer but also had risen to a leadership position within  the  company.
    At the date of hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant  had
    maintained her employment.  This is her only offence (albeit a  serious
    one) in relation to drugs and there were no  reports  of  significantly
    poor  behaviour  in  prison.   Whilst   there   she   used   her   time
    constructively.  She has evidenced that she wishes to take care of  her
    children by providing them with a home and caring for them.  We  accept
    that the appellant had  children  before  being  incarcerated  but  the
    realisation of the effects of imprisonment have been  brought  home  to
    her.

32. Having considered the evidence as a whole, including the length of  the
    appellant's sentence and the nature of her offending (the  significance
    of which is underlined by schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations), we  come
    to the clear conclusion that she does not presently represent a genuine
    and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of the UK.
     Bearing schedule 1 firmly in mind, we find  that  the  respondent  has
    failed to discharge the burden  upon  her  of  demonstrating  that  the
    appellant  represents  such  a  threat.   That  finding  of   fact   is
    determinative of the appeal, as is clear from MC (Portugal) [2015]  520
    (IAC).

33. Even if we are wrong  in  concluding  that  she  no  longer  remains  a
    sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of society, we
    turn to a consideration of the proportionality of the decision  and  in
    particular consider the relevant factors under regulation 27 (6) of the
    2016 Regulations such as  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  age,
    state of health, family and economic situation, her length of residence
    here, and her social and cultural integration into the  United  Kingdom
    and the extent of her  links  with  Jamaica.   In  particular,  and  as
    encouraged by Mr Nyawanza, we have considered the best interests of the
    children as a primary consideration.  We note their interests are not a
    'trump' card but the best interests of the children  are  an  axiomatic
    consideration given in the proportionality assessment required.

34. Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74 explains that

           (1) The best interests of a child are an integral  part  of  the
           proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           (2) In making that assessment, the best  interests  of  a  child
           must be a primary consideration, although not  always  the  only
           primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not  of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

           (3) Although the best interests of a child can be outweighed  by
           the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,   no   other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4) While different judges might approach the  question  of  the
           best interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to
           ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

           (5)  It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
           circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests  before
           one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed  by  the
           force of other considerations;

           (6) To that end there is no substitute for a careful examination
           of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a  child  are
           involved in an article 8 assessment; and

           (7) A child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she
           is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.



35. The children are aged 13 years and 11 years.  They were  both  born  in
    the United Kingdom, have lived here all their  lives  and  are  British
    citizens.  They are settled at school with the  older  child  being  at
    secondary school and having entered her formal GCSE studies.   We  were
    provided with the private Social Circumstances Report (SCR) dated  20th
    October 2018 by a qualified social worker who confirmed  that  she  had
    contacted both schools.  The school Pastoral Care Manager of the school
    reported she was concerned for both children if there were any  further
    changes in their lives.  That report confirmed that the  appellant  was
    the primary and sole carer for both children and that it was  in  their
    interests that the position continued to be stable for their  education
    and emotional wellbeing.

36. When sentenced the appellant arranged for her children to be cared  for
    by RW, RPWM's  father  and  his  partner.  She  maintained  contact  by
    telephone calls and prison visits and home leave. RPWM was described as
    settled and doing well at school.   Both parents are recorded by school
    as having parental responsibility for RPWM,  but  the  SCR  author  was
    advised by a Birmingham Senior  Social  worker  that  only  the  mother
    (appellant) had parental responsibility.  During  the  imprisonment  of
    the  appellant  the  children  were  subject  to  a  private  fostering
    arrangement.  After a gradual transition the children were restored  to
    the appellant's care on her release.  A  senior  social  worker  raised
    concerns with the author of the SCR if the children were to relocate to
    Jamaica or remain in the United Kingdom without their mother.

37. We accept that CN, the father of the  first  child  TRLN,  was  removed
    (possibly deported)  from  the  United  Kingdom  sometime  after  being
    granted Indefinite Leave to Remain and that the family have no  further
    contact with him since his  removal.   As  neither  child  has  visited
    Jamaica since their birth and  the  relationship  between  CN  and  the
    appellant had broken down by at least 2009 (when  RPWM  was  born)  the
    lack of contact between TRLN and her father is more likely than not.

38. Initially,  there  was  no  direct  statement  from  Birmingham  Social
    Services. That position had been criticised by the First-tier  Tribunal
    and we ordered Birmingham Social Services to compile a  report  on  the
    current position of the care of the children.  No  statement  from  the
    previous partner RW was produced.

39. A social worker Ms RM from Birmingham Children's  Services  compiled  a
    report on 20th January 2020 and she confirmed that RW was RPWM's father
    and that during part of the time of  the  appellant's  imprisonment  he
    entered a private fostering arrangement in  respect  of  both  children
    (the older not being his child). On 21st April 2017  RW,  himself,  was
    incarcerated for drug offences and the children lived with RW's partner
    Ms B, who was also the mother of  two  of  RW's  other  children.   She
    became the primary carer at this point.  Ms  RM  confirmed  the  direct
    contact between the appellant and her children when she was on day  and
    weekend release  from  prison.  No  formal  assessment  was  apparently
    completed but on 10th September 2018 by which  time  the  children  had
    presumably been returned to the appellant's care after her  release,  a
    letter was forwarded to the appellant confirming  no  further  concerns
    were identified.

40. A Section 47 Children Act 1989 assessment (investigation where there is
    reasonable  cause  to  believe  children  may  be  likely   to   suffer
    significant harm) was initiated in 2019 following a  domestic  incident
    between the appellant and the father RW. The appellant was recalled but
    later acquitted by the court on 16th July 2019.  TRLN returned  to  her
    mother's care on her release, but the son was left in the care  of  his
    father RW.  The social worker confirmed a Section 37 Children Act  1989
    (investigation into the welfare of a child) assessment  had  been  made
    and stated at paragraph 17 of the report

           'The Section 37 assessment has  been  completed  and  makes  the
           recommendation that RN [RPWM] is to be in the care of his mother
           and to have frequent contact with his father.  There  have  been
           no present  safeguarding  concerns  identified  in  relation  to
           mother and her  parenting.   There  have  been  concerns  around
           father's possible gang affiliation and  criminal  lifestyle  and
           how this could impact on RN [RPWM].  Private law proceedings are
           currently ongoing'.

41. It would appear currently that RPWM continues to reside with his father
    and TRLN resides with her mother who supports RPWM's contact  with  his
    father.  The  Birmingham Children's Services report noted that  it  was
    agreed by all parties that contact should be  increased  carefully  and
    rapidly between the mother and son but owing  to  the  dispute  between
    mother and father there needed to be third party support. Since October
    2018 RPWM has seen  his  mother  every  weekend  and  stayed  with  her
    overnight.  There had been no  concerns  regarding  his  emotional  and
    physical presentation at school. Ms RM, the social worker stated at the
    end of 2019,

           'it has been recommended by Birmingham Children's Trust that  Ms
           TAM has RM [RPWM] in her fulltime care.  Support will be offered
           in regards to any transitions if it is ordered that RN [RPWM] is
           in his mother's care'...'meeting their needs is her  main  focus
           in  life...Ms  TAM  has  engaged  with  Social  Worker[s]   been
           available for all meetings...'.

42. There was some confusion as to whether RW had  parental  responsibility
    for RPWM and the appellant maintained that he was not recorded on  RM's
    birth certificate.  It is clear, however, that there is no one else  in
    the United Kingdom with parental responsibility for RPWM and  no  other
    direct relative and thus no feasible alternative arrangements  possible
    for him.  The father of TRLN is residing  outside  the  UK.   The  Home
    Office Guidance on Free Movement Rights, May 2019, suggests at page  55
    that even if there is another parent, where there are child  protection
    issues related to that parent, that would be considered an  'unsuitable
    care arrangement'.

43. Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A  -  Zambrano)  [2015]  UKUT  00560
    (IAC) with reference to the 2006 Regulations held

        a) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the
           rights attaching  to  the  status  of  European  Union  citizens
           identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ  C-34/09  is
           limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights as defined
           in Article 20.

        b) The provisions of reg. 15A of the Immigration (European Economic
           Area) Regulations 2006 as  amended  apply  when  the  effect  of
           removal of the carer of a British citizen  renders  the  British
           citizen no longer able to reside in the  United  Kingdom  or  in
           another EEA state.  This requires the carer to  establish  as  a
           fact that the British  citizen  will  be  forced  to  leave  the
           territory of the Union.

44. Although made in relation to the 2006 Regulations, we conclude that the
    decision in Ayinde also has bearing on the 2016 Regulations, not  least
    because of the following decisions which  related   to  the  underlying
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU"),  Rendon Marin
    (Judgment: Citizenship of the Union [2016] EUECJ C-165/14 and Secretary
    of State v CS  [2016] C-304/14.  Those authorities held that Article 20
    of the TFEU should be interpreted as precluding legislation of a Member
    State, which required a third-country national, who has been  convicted
    of a criminal offence, to be expelled from the territory of that Member
    State when the national is the primary carer of a young child who is  a
    national of that Member State, in which  he  has  been  residing  since
    birth and without having exercised his right of  freedom  of  movement,
    when the expulsion of the person concerned would require the  child  to
    leave the territory of the European Union thereby depriving him of  the
    genuine enjoyment of the substance of rights  as  an  EU  citizen.   We
    refer to Robinson above and emphasise that those judgements ruled  that
    in exceptional circumstances a Member  State  may  adopt  an  expulsion
    measure, provided that it is founded on the personal  conduct  of  that
    third country national, which must constitute  a  genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat adversely affecting one of the  fundamental
    interests of society and that it is  based  on  considerations  of  the
    various interests involved matters which are for the national court  to
    determine.   As found above, the best interests of the  children  would
    be one of  the  factors  which  need  to  be  carefully  considered  in
    decisions  made  with  reference  to  both  the  EU  law  and  domestic
    legislation.  For all the reasons given above we do not  conclude  that
    exceptional circumstances exist in this matter such that the  appellant
    should be expelled.

45. The principles established by Zambrano, Rendon Marin  and  CS  and  the
    effect of those principles on deportation were explored in VM (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 255 and the concept of 'entire dependency' examined. At
    paragraphs 60 and 61 Lord Justice Sales said this:
           "60. On this reasoning, VM has no claim to remain in the UK as a
           result of the citizenship rights in  EU  law  of  his  wife  and
           children. If he is deported to  Jamaica,  KB  and  the  children
           (with KB deciding for them) will face a difficult choice whether
           to relocate there with him or remain in the UK without him.  But
           the fact that they will be  confronted  with  that  choice,  and
           might in practice feel compelled to go with him, does not engage
           EU rights in a way which creates a right under EU law for VM  to
           remain in the UK. As this court held in FZ (China)  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 550,  following
           Dereci and the decision in O, S and L (at  paras.  [42]-[44]  of
           the Advocate General's Opinion and para. [56] of the  judgment),
           "the critical question is whether there is an entire  dependency
           of the relevant child on the person who is refused  a  residence
           permit or who is  being  deported"  (see  paras.  [14]-[19],  in
           particular at [19]). In the present case  there  is  no  "entire
           dependency" of AB, KSM and KDM on VM, in  the  requisite  sense,
           because they could remain in the UK with their mother,  KB,  who
           as a British citizen herself has a right to be here.
           61. The analysis in FZ (China) is consistent with  the  guidance
           given by the Supreme Court in  respect  of  the  application  of
           Dereci in  R  (Agyarko)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2017] UKSC  11,  at  [61]-[67].  The  Supreme  Court
           distinguished the situation in Ruiz Zambrano -  which  concerned
           the refusal of a right of residence  and  a  work  permit  in  a
           member state to the third-country  parents  of  dependent  minor
           children who  were  citizens  of  that  state,  which  had  "the
           inevitable consequence" that the parents would have to leave the
           EU and the children would have to accompany their parents - from
           that in Dereci, in which  "the  same  relationship  of  complete
           dependence" between the EU citizen (the wife and children in the
           Dereci case) and the third country national (Mr Dereci) was  not
           present, where the argument based on Article 20 TFEU and the  EU
           citizenship rights of the wife and children  was  rejected:  see
           [64]-[67] (emphasis added)".

46. We accept on the facts as now presented by  the  latest  social  worker
    report that the appellant's daughter lives  with  her  and  has  entire
    dependence on the appellant.

47. Additionally, as pointed out by the Upper Tribunal at paragraph  54  of
    Ayinde

           'Whilst a minor child can survive without his  parents  in  that
           adoption, foster-care or a children's home may provide a  proper
           and adequate level of care, such alternative care is only likely
           to be contemplated if there are serious reasons for breaking the
           relationship between a child and one or  both  of  his  parents.
           Serious wrong doing on the part of both parents (or, more often,
           of one of the parents) may justify the separation.  ...   It  is
           beyond the range of proportionate responses that a minor  should
           be required to go into some form  of  alternative  care  (be  it
           adoption, foster-care or residential care) in order to enjoy his
           EU rights were both his parents required to leave'.

48. That conclusion chimes with the approach of the Court of Appeal at [11]
    of Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014]1 WLR 4112, in which Vos  LJ
    (with whom Patten and Sullivan LJJ agreed), proceeded on the basis that
    'adequate arrangements' for a minor's care could not  include  adoption
    or foster care: [11].

49. The father of TRLN has been deported to Jamaica and there is no contact
    between them and RW, the father of the second minor child has also been
    in custody.  We take very seriously the  recommendation  by  Birmingham
    Children's Trust that both children  should  be  in  the  care  of  the
    appellant. Even if RPWM returns to his father's  care  full  time,  and
    against the recommendation of Birmingham Social Services, the  daughter
    is in the full-time care of the mother and would have to be subject  to
    a private fostering agreement contrary to Ayinde and Hines.   It is  in
    the best interests of  the  children  to  retain  stability  after  the
    chaotic lives they must have endured with their  parents  either  being
    incarcerated or deported.  It is also in the children's best  interests
    to retain contact with each other and even if the  mother  returned  to
    Jamaica with TRLN that would leave the prospect of a sibling separation
    and diminished contact between them.  Despite the  recommendation  that
    both children are in the care of the mother RPWM would wish  and  need,
    no doubt to retain contact with  his  father  and  half  siblings  (the
    children of RW and his partner).

50. Indeed, although Ayinde does not appear wholly to rule out the children
    going into care, there is no indication in either of the social  worker
    reports of the prospect of the care of  the  daughter  being  with  any
    other person than the appellant.  Further, there  is  a  recommendation
    that the son also reside with the mother as  the  primary  carer.   The
    removal of the mother would in effect  force  the  daughter  either  to
    leave the United Kingdom which we consider to be unreasonable,  because
    she is settled at secondary school, has only known the  United  Kingdom
    and is a British citizen  or be placed into  care.   As  drawn  sharply
    into focus by  Ayinde  that  latter  course  is  beyond  the  range  of
    proportionate responses.

51. We also consider that a ruling which  forces  the  children  into  care
    raises the spectre of the sins of  the  parent  being  visited  on  the
    child's best interests' assessment, contrary to  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and Zoumbas, although we accept these decisions were not made in
    the context of European law.

52. The last question is whether the children's  interests  are  in  effect
    outweighed in the balancing exercise we are obliged to undertake.

53. The appellant is now 39 years old and came  to  the  UK  in  2002.  Her
    immigration history is chequered.  She entered legally as a visitor  in
    2002 and her leave was extended as a student until  2007  but  she  was
    then served with papers as an overstayer.  She was then granted 3 years
    discretionary leave owing to her family life  but  her  application  to
    remain on the grounds of long residency was put on hold.  Her leave has
    always been precarious and her imprisonment undermines her integration.



54. We accept, however, that she has resumed her work as a  care  assistant
    and was subsequently promoted.  She  has  received  glowing  references
    from her employer who confirmed  that  she  was  'highly  reliable  and
    committed to her clients and new and incoming care  assistants  in  her
    area' and her promotion was owed to  her 'dedication  to  high  quality
    care delivery, her  reliability  and  her  punctuality'  and  that  she
    'continues to be well-loved by  our  clients  as  indicated  by  recent
    telephone surveys and service user reviews and  client  visits  by  our
    management team'.  Her employer referenced her  remorse  and  that  she
    demonstrated commitment to her family and was  'continuously  committed
    to be[ing] a resourceful and a responsible contributing citizen'.

55. We do appreciate that she has secure employment in the  United  Kingdom
    and forged a settled home for herself and her children  (she  has  been
    renting with a friend).  Re-establishment would be much more  difficult
    in Jamaica, where she states she has no family,  her  relatives  having
    moved to the USA or Aruba (where her eldest daughter lives), and  where
    the appellant has not lived since 2002.  Evidently, she has not visited
    since at least  2012  (her  imprisonment).  Clearly  deportation  would
    involve disruption , but the appellant is in good health she  lived  in
    Jamaica until the age of 22 years and we conclude would be able to  re-
    establish her life there.   More importantly, however,  the  impact  on
    the children's school and connections in the United  Kingdom  would  be
    highly disruptive.

56. Of importance, although not a trump  card,  is  the  interests  of  the
    children. We have explained our reasoning above and find that we do not
    accept that the Secretary of State  has  shown  the  appellant  remains
    genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  of  the
    fundamental interests of society but even if she did  represent  a  low
    level  risk,  the  response  overall  to  deport  her  under  the   EEA
    regulations is disproportionate bearing in mind the 'entire dependence'
    of the daughter on the appellant  and  the  subsequent  effect  on  the
    children.

57. We recognise that the Zambrano principle is not an absolute.  We  weigh
    the criminality on the part  of  TAM  which  involved  a  very  serious
    offence of the supply of drugs for which she  received  8  �  years  in
    prison and our findings in respect of her previous offence against  the
    harm which will be inflicted upon the British citizen children.  As  we
    have indicated the children, in  particular  the  daughter,  has  never
    visited Jamaica and she is in her teenage  years  and  settled  in  her
    secondary education.  We do consider further to Patel  v  Secretary  of
    State [2019] UKSC 59 that the requisite element of compulsion  for  the
    children to leave to United Kingdom and the EU is present.  Further  to
    Section 6(4)(c)  of  the  European  Union  (Withdrawal)  Act  2018  (as
    amended) and the  European  Union  (Withdrawal)  Act  2018  (Exit  Day)
    (Amendment) (No 3) Regulations 2019, no court or tribunal is  bound  by
    any retained domestic case law that it would not otherwise be bound  by
    but the principle of 'stare decisis' still applies.

58. On the strength of the evidence as analysed by  us  we  find  that  the
    appellant is not a "genuine present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society" but even  if  we
    are wrong on that  basis  we  find  the  decision  is  disproportionate
    particularly in the light  of  the  best  interests  of  the  children.
    Drawing together the various strands analysed  above and balancing  the
    weight in each factor we weigh the criminality and the requirements  of
    public security and public policy against the conduct of the  appellant
    since released from prison, her co-operation  with  the  probation  and
    social services and  the  realisation  of  her  responsibility  to  her
    children and her commitment to  her  work  and  the  interests  of  her
    children, and on balance we find the decision not remove her  would  at
    this time be disproportionate.

59. We enlist our findings  above  where  relevant  to  Article  8  in  the
    alternative when applying the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  398  and
    Section 117C of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  We  find
    that the removal of the two British  Citizen  children  to  Jamaica  in
    these particular circumstances, conjure very  compelling  circumstances
    because they would either be removed from their, finally, settled lives
    in the United Kingdom or be relocated into care, which in view  of  the
    findings of Social Services is highly likely.  That would separate  the
    children from the parent and very possibly  from  each  other  and  any
    other siblings.

60. In the circumstances and on the basis of our reasoning above  we  allow
    the appeal under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 and under the Immigration Rules.




    Order

    Appeal Allowed.



    Signed       Helen Rimington             Date 12th March 2020
        Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

