

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court  |Decision & Reasons promulgated      |
|on 25 October 2017                     |on 26 October 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               JANIS KUZNECOVS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: In person
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge E.M M Smith promulgated on 25 July 2017 in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  order  for   his
        deportation from the United Kingdom in accordance  with  Regulation
        19(3)(b)  and  21  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
        Regulations 2006, dated 14 September 2016.




Error of law finding


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Latvia born on 5 March 1952.
     3. The Judge records that the appellant is separated from his wife who
        it is believed lives in Latvia and has a daughter who  he  believes
        resides in the United Kingdom having attended University here.
     4. The Judge records that the appellant arrived in the UK in May  2007
        and has lived in Scotland since. He has  had  another  relationship
        whilst in the UK but is currently single.
     5. In Latvia, the appellant committed criminal offences  including  on
        14 January 2003 a firearms offence for which the appellant  claimed
        to  have  received  a  suspended  sentence  which  he  breached  by
        committing  further  firearms  offences,  resulting  in  14  months
        imprisonment on 16 December 2003. On 8 August 2007, for an  offence
        of  affray  and  further  firearms  offences,  the  appellant   was
        sentenced to two years imprisonment conditional with probation  for
        two years.
     6. It is not disputed the appellant has worked in the United Kingdom
     7. On 6  October  2009,  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  9  months
        imprisonment in the UK for assault  and  other  breaches  of  court
        orders. In April 2012, the appellant was fined  for  a  shoplifting
        offence.
     8. The Judge noted the Presenting Officer accepted that the  appellant
        had acquired five years residence in the United  Kingdom  and  that
        the  decision  to  deport  must  be  assessed  in  accordance  with
        Regulation 21(3) on serious grounds of public policy and security.
     9. In [29] the Judge finds:


             29.  There  is  an  absence  of  any  detail  provided  by  the
                  respondent in relation to the offences in Latvia and  very
                  limited  detail  of  the  offences  in  the  UK  but   the
                  respondent asserts it is the combination of the  two  sets
                  of offences that causes deportation to be considered. As I
                  have indicated Mr Malcolm accepts  that  the  UK  offences
                  taken on their own do not represent conduct that justifies
                  deportation  but  assessed  against  prior   and   serious
                  offending with firearms, regardless of how  the  appellant
                  paints it,  does  represent  a  serious  risk  of  further
                  offending and over the past 14  years  he  has  not  shown
                  himself  to  be  rehabilitated  so  there  is  a  risk  of
                  continuing reoffending. The appellant's history presents a
                  bleak future. It is, therefore,  proportionate  to  remove
                  this appellant.


    10. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  is  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal; the operative part of the
        grant been in the following terms:


             4.   The appellant is underrepresented and  I  have  read  the
                  decision carefully for any  obvious  arguable  error.  The
                  Judge accepted that the  appellant  had  established  five
                  years residence as a worker. The Judges  further  findings
                  are limited to one paragraph, paragraph 29,  in  which  it
                  accepted that there  is  little  detail  of  the  offences
                  before the Tribunal. The Judge  gives  little  reason  for
                  finding that the appellant presents a risk of reoffending,
                  save for his previous convictions, and failed to  consider
                  that a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify expulsion.  I  find  an  obvious  error
                  arising on the face of  the  decision  and  permission  is
                  granted on these grounds.


    11. The respondent opposes the appellant's application  in  a  Rule  24
        response of the 13 September 2017 on the basis  the  alleged  error
        identified in the grant of permission, that previous convictions do
        not  justify  expulsion,  is  not  made  out.  The  core   of   the
        respondent's position is set out in  the  reply  in  the  following
        terms:


             4.   At paragraph 28 the FTIJ correctly notes the requirements
                  under regulation 21(6) that the appellant  is  a  genuine,
                  present and sufficiently serious threat to  a  fundamental
                  interest of society. At paragraph 29 the FTIJ  takes  into
                  account the entire history of offending over 14 years  and
                  fines in the absence of  any  evidence  of  rehabilitation
                  there is a continuing risk of offending. It is  submitted,
                  in light of the period over which the  offending  occurred
                  and the absence of evidence of rehabilitation it was  open
                  to the FTIJ to find that the risk of offending continued.


Error of law



        In BF (Portugal) v SSHD  (2009)  EWCA  Civ  923  the  appellant,  a
        citizen of Portugal, arrived in the UK  in  199  and  had  acquired
        permanent residence.  He  was  convicted  of  battery  against  his
        partner and sentenced to 42 months imprisonment.  He could only  be
        removed on serious grounds of public  policy  or  public  security.
        The  Tribunal  first  had  to  determine  the  claimant's  relevant
        personal  conduct;  secondly  whether  the  conduct  represented  a
        genuine present and sufficiently serious  threat;  thirdly  whether
        that threat affected one of the fundamental interests  of  society;
        and fourthly whether deportation would be disproportionate  in  all
        the circumstances.   The  Tribunal  noted  the  evidence  that  the
        claimant had a high propensity to re-offend against the same victim
        and any new partner, but went on to find that the SSHD  had  failed
        to prove that there  were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
        security which made deportation proportionate.   In  remitting  the
        appeal, the Court of Appeal said the Tribunal should have reached a
        conclusion as to whether the threat, which was clearly  present  at
        the time of the offence, was still present  at  the  hearing.   The
        Tribunal had to decide whether there was a present  serious  threat
        and if so the extent of that threat.

    12. The Judge identifies the applicant's personal conduct by  reference
        to his offending, both in Latvia and in the United Kingdom.
    13. In relation to whether the conduct represents a genuine present and
        sufficiently serious threat; the Judge was required to identify the
        nature of that threat and  to  make  clear  findings  supported  by
        adequate reasons upon whether such established serious  grounds  of
        public  policy  or   public   security   which   made   deportation
        proportionate, and whether the threat which was clearly present  at
        the time of the previous offending was still present at the date of
        hearing. The Judge fails to deal with this issue on the face of the
        determination. The offences committed in Latvia are dated 2003  and
        2006. The offences in the UK 2009 and 2012. Date of hearing was  21
        July 2017.
    14. A person cannot be deported under EU  law  on  the  basis  of  past
        convictions. In this way deporting  an  EU  national  differs  from
        domestic arrangements.
    15. It is accepted that a pattern of behaviour may warrant  refusal  as
        illustrated in the case of Batista v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  896  in
        which the issue was whether there were serious  grounds  of  public
        policy for  expulsion.   The  appellant  had  numerous  convictions
        culminating in a sentence of 8 years for GBH.  The Court of  Appeal
        held  that  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude   that   the
        appellant's record showed a propensity to renewed violence such  as
        to satisfy the relevant test.
    16. The current version of the Regulations reflects this proposition in
        that 2016 regulations schedule 1 paragraph 3 state  that  where  an
        EEA national/family member has received a custodial sentence or  is
        a persistent  offender,  the  longer  the  sentence,  or  the  more
        numerous the convictions,  the  greater  the  likelihood  that  the
        individual's continued presence in the  UK  represents  a  genuine,
        present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  the  fundamental
        interests of society.
    17. The public policy  ground  for  removal  is  an  exception  to  the
        fundamental principle of the free exercise of  EU  rights  and,  as
        such, has to be construed restrictively. In R v Bouchereau 1978  QB
        732 (ECJ) 760 it was said that  the  presence  or  conduct  of  the
        individual should constitute a  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
        threat to public policy.
    18. In SSHD v Straszewski; and Kersys [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 the Court of
        Appeal noted that Regulation 21(5)  provided  that  a  decision  to
        remove an EEA national with a permanent right of residence must  be
        based exclusively on the personal conduct of the  person  concerned
        and matters that did not directly relate to the particular case  or
        which related to  considerations  of  general  prevention  did  not
        justify a removal decision.
    19. The Judge arguably fails  to  provide  adequate  reasoning  in  the
        decision by reference to a properly structured factual analysis  of
        how the requirements of the regulations are met. The  determination
        under challenge is full of law but arguably fails to  properly  set
        out the facts  against  which  the  proper  legal  test  should  be
        determined, supported by adequate reasons.
    20. The Judge at [28]  refers  to  regulation  21[6]  setting  out  the
        requirements to be taken into account. This  is  factually  correct
        but it is not clear in the decision  and  reasons  section  of  the
        decision as to how the Judge undertook this exercise  and  how  the
        factual findings made in relation to the  items  to  be  considered
        under regulation 21[6] have been factored into the  proportionality
        assessment. Rehabilitation is one aspect  of  the  matter  and  the
        statement at [28] that the regulation 21[6] factors have been taken
        into account, and then  setting  out  the  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in MC (Essa principles recast) Portugal [2015] UKUT  00520
        does not enable a reader of the determination to establish how  the
        issue  of  proportionality  or   rehabilitation   arose   and   the
        relationship between that and the requirement for there  to  be  an
        evaluation of the likelihood that the person concerned will  offend
        again and what the consequences are likely to be if he does,  which
        was arguably not undertaken.
    21. The Judge in [29] notes the respondents asserts it is a combination
        of  the  two  sets  of  offences  that  caused  deportation  to  be
        considered. Mr Mills indicated the appellant had been arrested  and
        charged with further offending, which may have involved the use  of
        violence, but the evidence provided indicates the  verdict  of  the
        court in Scotland was that of 'not proven'  in  relation  to  these
        aspects meaning the appellant has no  conviction  for  any  further
        offences.  The  Judge's  opinion  that  previous  offending  itself
        illustrates serious risk of further  offending  is  not  adequately
        reasoned in the determination under challenge.
    22. It is also of note that the respondent's decision, relied  upon  by
        the Presenting Officer before the Judge, refers to the  reason  for
        deportation being that as a result of  the  appellants  criminality
        his deportation is considered to be  justified  on  grounds  public
        policy and/or public security. The finding of the  Judge  that  the
        appellant had acquired a right of permanent residence  indicated  a
        higher threshold is applicable, that of serious grounds  of  public
        policy and/or public security. The decision  must  be  assessed  in
        relation to the proper applicable test.
    23. Whatever may have been in the Judge's mind  the  difficulty  within
        this decision is that a person reading it cannot be satisfied  that
        the Judge has addressed the proper issues or, if they did, adequate
        reasoning has been given to informed the  writer  of  the  material
        findings on key points.
    24. The determination shall be set aside and remitted to the First-tier
        Tribunal initially sitting at Stoke/Nottingham for that Tribunal to
        determine the secure court available to rehear the appeal in  light
        of the fact the  appellant  remains  in  immigration  detention  at
        Morton Hall  IRC.  Extensive  fact-finding  exercise  needs  to  be
        conducted during the approach relevant for assessing the  merits  a
        deportation appeal.
    25. It was not possible to go on a remake the decision before the Upper
        Tribunal for the appellant, despite  having  lived  in  the  United
        Kingdom since 2007 and  to  have  formed  a  life  for  himself  in
        Scotland, claimed not to be able to understand English and what was
        being said to him in court. A Latvian  interpreter  booked  by  the
        Upper Tribunal appears to have experienced difficulties as a result
        of an issue surrounding paperwork in his  or  her  possession  when
        arriving at the court and was not available. As any Resumed hearing
        would require the presence of an interpreter  no  further  progress
        could be made.
    26. The Upper Tribunal made the decision to set aside the determination
        without the appellant having the benefit of the interpreter present
        as the decision is wholly in the appellant's favour as  it  is  his
        challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. No procedural
        irregularity sufficient to amount to an error of law or  unfairness
        therefore exists in proceeding in the above scenario and in setting
        aside the decision.
    27. Mr Mills  also  indicated  there  was  further  evidence  that  the
        respondent wished to put before the tribunal on the  next  occasion
        relating to  the  appellant's  behaviour  demonstrating  is  not  a
        reformed character as he alleges. This information  may  relate  to
        the Scottish  proceedings  but  also,  more  recently,  to  reports
        regarding the appellant's conduct whilst in immigration detention.






Decision

    28. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original First-tier Tribunal  Judge.  I  remit  the
        decision to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke/Nottingham  to
        be  heard  by  another  judge  nominated  by  the  Resident   Judge
        responsible for this hearing centre other than Judge E.M.M.  Smith.
        Further case management directions shall also be given by the First-
        tier Tribunal once the secure venue has been identified.




   Anonymity.


    29. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 25 October 2017












