

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00435/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st October 2017                          |On 1st November 2017         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SILVIA KAMILLA SILVA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M S Jaufurally of Callistes Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Portugal born on 8th October 1979.  She
       has thirteen convictions for a number of counts of  shoplifting  and
       theft, and one count of failing to attend for tests for  a  class  A
       drug,  threatening  with  an  offensive  weapon  and  battery.   The
       Secretary of State made a  deportation  order  against  her  on  5th
       September 2016 pursuant to s.5 of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   Her
       appeal against the decision was allowed under the Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 (henceforth  the  EEA  Regulations)  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Munonyedi in a determination promulgated on  the  7th
       August 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
        I D Boyes on 25th August 2017 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
       claimant had permanent residence.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal and oral  submissions  for  the  Secretary  of
       State contend, in summary, that the First-tier Tribunal  misdirected
       itself in law or provided inadequate reasoning  for  the  conclusion
       that the claimant had permanent  residence  and  thus  a  heightened
       level of protection against deportation.

    5. It is argued for the Secretary of State that the conclusion  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal was that she had this  entitlement  because  she
       had lived in the UK for more than five years, see  paragraph  39  of
       the decision, whereas in fact what needed to be shown was  that  the
       claimant had resided in accordance with the EEA  Regulations  for  a
       continuous period of five years and so inadequate reasons are  given
       for this conclusion.

    6. The claimant had shown 5 P60 documents for the period April 2011  to
       April 2016. Whilst it is accepted that the P60s for  April  2012  to
       April 2016 show an amount which suggests regular employment the  one
       for April 2011 to April 2012 is for a significantly  lesser  amount,
       and in any case during this time the claimant was imprisoned  for  a
       number of weeks and so her continuity was broken,  see  Onuekwere  v
       SSHD (Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C- 378/12. As such she  should  not
       acquire the "serious grounds" level protection which would accompany
       permanent residence.

    7. It is said that the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did  not
       show that the claimant had lived in the UK for more than  ten  years
       because there is only a vaccination certificate from 2004 which does
       not show residence, and in any case her GP  records  show  that  she
       came to the UK on 28th May 2005.  The  claimant's  own  evidence  is
       vague and uncertain on the issue of her arrival in the  UK,  varying
       from 2004 to 2007. Further she could not be seen as integrated  from
       2013 when she started her period of offending, and  also  could  not
       acquire the high level of "imperative  grounds"  protection  against
       deportation unless she had first obtained  permanent  residence,  in
       accordance with a recent opinion of the Advocate General.

    8. It was further argued that the decision  was  very  poorly  drafted,
       making it uncertain what test had been applied for the  claimant  to
       satisfy that she should not be deported, and as result leading to  a
       conclusion that these errors were material. It could not be  certain
       the correct test  had  been  applied  because  there  were  numerous
       errors, and overall the decision  was  not  sufficiently  accurately
       made. There was an irrelevant reference  to  the  case  of  Uner  at
       paragraph 17 of the decision; there was an irrelevant  reference  to
       Regulation 11(1) of the EEA  Regulations  at  paragraph  21  of  the
       decision;  there  were  computation  errors  with  regards  to   the
       claimant's period of stay at paragraphs 33 and 35 of  the  decision;
       and at paragraph 38  of  the  decision  there  was  a  reference  to
       Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations which clearly should  have  been
       to regulation 21(6) of the EEA Regulations.

    9. In the Rule 24 notice and oral submissions Mr Jaufurally argues  for
       the claimant that the First-tier Tribunal does not err as  contended
       as in fact the First-tier Tribunal considered the oral  evidence  of
       the claimant and found that it had the "ring of truth about it", and
       found that she had been living and working in the  UK  in  low  paid
       work since 2004, working in restaurants, shops and as a cleaner.  It
       was open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  conclude  that  she  had  a
       permanent right of residence as it was  open  to  that  Tribunal  to
       decide to give weight to the oral evidence which  was  supported  by
       the medical notes and other evidence. The conclusion at paragraph 23
       about permanent residence should be seen in the light of  the  later
       findings at paragraph 32  and  thus  to  include  reference  to  the
       claimant's work as well as her period of residence  in  finding  she
       had  permanent  residence.  The  Secretary   of   State   makes   no
       irrationality challenge in the  grounds,  and  there  is  sufficient
       reasoning in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the
       alternative,  it  was  argued  that   any   errors   regarding   the
       determination of the issue of permanent residence were not  relevant
       as ultimately the test for deportation  was  not  that  of  "serious
       grounds".

Conclusions - Error of Law

   10. Mr Tufan makes some valid criticisms of the drafting of the decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal. There are materials which  are  included
       that are not relevant, and there are computation errors.  It  is  my
       task however to make a decision as to whether the key issue  of  the
       appeal is determined lawfully.

   11. Regulation 15(1)(a) of the EEA Regulations is set out  correctly  at
       paragraph 22 of the decision, recording that permanent residence  is
       acquired by  residing  for  5  years  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
       Regulations.

   12. It was rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal to  conclude  that
       the claimant had been physically in the UK for a period of more than
       10 years, and on the balance of probabilities for 13  years  between
       2004 and 2017, as is done at paragraphs 32  -  33  of  the  decision
       based on the claimant's own evidence combined with that  of  her  GP
       notes and other documentary evidence. The First-tier  Tribunal  does
       not however take this issue further to conclude  that  the  claimant
       can only be deported from the UK on  imperative  grounds  of  public
       security on the basis of a period of ten years continuous  residence
       prior to the deportation  decision  in  accordance  with  Regulation
       21(4) of the EEA Regulations, so I find that no error of law  arises
       out of this finding.

   13. At paragraph 39 of the decision it is stated that the  claimant  has
       acquired permanent residence "having lived here for five  years".  I
       find that this statement is insufficiently reasoned,  and  does  not
       correctly  apply  the  test  in  Regulation  15(1)(a)  of  the   EEA
       Regulations. Further this paragraph cannot be seen  as  supplemented
       by what is said at paragraph 32  of  the  decision  to  remedy  this
       defect as this also  does  not  address  whether  the  claimant  had
       resided continuously for a period of five years in  accordance  with
       the EEA Regulations. Whilst she might have lived and worked  in  the
       UK over the period 2004 to 2017, and not claimed benefits, this does
       not  necessarily  mean  she  resided  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
       Regulations for a continuous five year period.

   14. I clarify therefore that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal may
       only be seen,  with  respect  to  the  claimant's  residence,  as  a
       decision by the First-tier Tribunal that the claimant has resided in
       the UK from 2004 to June 2017, and  not  a  decision  that  she  has
       permanent residence in accordance with  Regulation  15  of  the  EEA
       Regulations or is  entitled  to  either  of  the  higher  levels  of
       protection against deportation at Regulation 21(3) or 21(4)  of  the
       EEA Regulations.

   15. However, I find that no material error is  made  because  ultimately
       the test for whether the claimant's deportation is lawful is  simply
       whether she poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
       affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, see paragraph
       47 of the decision. I find that this was based on a proper direction
       as to the relevant factors as set out in Regulation 21(6) of the EEA
       Regulations, as set out at paragraph 38 of the decision. There is no
       evidence  whatsoever  the  higher  "permanent  residence"  test  for
       deportation of "serious grounds of public policy or public security"
       was applied.  The conclusion the claimant does not pose  a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
       fundamental interests of society is supported  by  relevant  factual
       findings at paragraphs 40 to 45 of the decision  based  particularly
       on a report from her "Recovery Worker" which leads to  a  conclusion
       that the claimant is free of drugs and highly motivated to remain so
       due to the support of her husband and the desire to be reunited with
       her son, and so, in the  context  of  her  criminality  having  been
       caused by drug addiction, she does not pose a genuine,  present  and
       sufficiently serious threat of reoffending.  No challenge is made to
       the reasoning of the decision on this point, that the claimant  does
       not represent such a threat, and so I find that there is no material
       error of law.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of a material error on a point of law.

   2. I do not set aside the decision, although I have clarified some of the
      findings regarding her  period  of  residence  as  set  out  above  at
      paragraph 14.

   3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal under  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 is upheld.


   4. If there is no onward appeal to the Court of Appeal by  the  Secretary
      of State, and this decision is the final determination of this appeal,
      the Claimant shall appear before an Immigration Officer  to  discharge
      her bail when and if required by the Immigration Service in writing to
      do so.







Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date: 31st October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







