
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00652/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 October 2013                              |On 25 October 2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    H O K
                           (anonymity order made)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs K Heath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, H O K is a citizen of Iraq.  I shall refer hereafter to
    the respondent as "the appellant"  as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the
    respondent.

 2. On 14 March 2013, a decision was made to make a  deportation  order  in
    respect of the appellant.  The appellant appealed against that decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Frankish) which, in  a  determination
    promulgated on 23 May 2013, allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds
    (Article 3 ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on asylum grounds
    and also on Article 3/8 ECHR grounds.  The appellant  claimed  to  fear
    persecution and ill-treatment in Iraq  because  he  had  worked  as  an
    alcohol and pornography importer and a fatwa had  been  issued  against
    him by his local mosque.  The First-tier Tribunal recorded the evidence
    which had been submitted to it  [8]  and  noted  also  the  immigration
    history of the appellant [3] and the litigation history of his  appeals
    [11-12].  The Tribunal made no findings of fact on  the  evidence.   At
    [13], the Tribunal wrote:

         "At the outset of  the  hearing,  we  enquired  of  Mr  Evans  [the
         Presenting Officer] whether the situation  had  changed  since  the
         hearing of 5 September 2012.  He said not and  the  respondent  was
         still not effecting enforced returns to Iraq, just as she does  not
         do to Zimbabwe.  We acceded to his proposal that  he  take  further
         advice from a senior officer as to whether further information  was
         available as to the respondent's position.  On resuming,  Mr  Evans
         indicated there no further information  was  forthcoming.   Further
         inquiry elicited a response but it was a matter  of  difficulty  in
         obtaining paperwork and nothing to do with the respondent  agreeing
         that it was dangerous to return.  He accepted the appellant had  no
         travel document such as a passport of his own."

 4. The Tribunal then went on to set out a lengthy quotation  from  HM  and
    Others (Article 15(c)) [2012] Iraq  CG  UKUT  409  (hereafter  HM2)  In
    particular, the following passage was highlighted [head note, v]:

         Regarding the issue of whether there would be a risk  of  treatment
        contrary to Article 3 ECHR arising from  returns  from  the  UK  to
        Baghdad International Airport (BIAP):

      a.      If a national  of  Iraq  who  has  failed  to  establish  that
        conditions inside Iraq  are  unsafe  is  compulsorily  returned  to
        Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) on either a current or expired
        Iraqi passport, there is no real risk of detention in the course of
        BIAP procedures (except possibly in respect of those  who  are  the
        subject of a judicial order or arrest warrant). Nor is there such a
        risk if such a person chooses to make a  voluntary  return  with  a
        laissez passer document which can be issued by the Iraqi embassy in
        the UK.


      b.      If, however,  such a person is compulsorily returned  to  BIAP
        without either a current or expired Iraqi passport, he  may  be  at
        risk of detention in the course of BIAP procedures and it cannot be
        excluded that the detention conditions might give rise  to  a  real
        risk of treatment contrary to  Article  3  ECHR.  Such  a  risk  is
        however, purely academic  in  the  UK  context  because  under  the
        current UK returns policy there will be  no  compulsory  return  of
        persons lacking such documents.







 5. The Tribunal went on to say at [16]:

         In the light ... of HM above,  we  indicated  to  [the  appellant's
         counsel] that, without hearing evidence, we were of the  view  that
         Article 3 is engaged and there was  no  purpose  to  be  served  in
         proceeding  further  in  respect  of  asylum  and  Article  8.   He
         confirmed that he was content with such an approach.  Mr Evans made
         no representations  that  the  matter  should  proceed  to  a  full
         hearing.  Accordingly, we find that deportation would amount  to  a
         breach of Article 3 in the light of the  generalised  risk  in  the
         country situation as it is accepted to be at present.  Irrespective
         of our finding, a renewed decision to remove would have given  rise
         to renewed right of appeal in any event.   Anonymity  is  obviously
         appropriate.

 6. The grounds of appeal complain that the Tribunal  failed  to  determine
    the appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds.   The  grounds  at  [5]
    submit:

         It is submitted the panel have erred in relating  this  appellant's
         risk top the general country situation (sic).  The  Upper  Tribunal
         have found in the latest CG case that currently there was  no  risk
         of ill-treatment or the need of humanitarian protection because  of
         the current country situation.   The  failure  to  acknowledge  the
         country's situation brings the panel into material error.

 7. The grounds of appeal go on to quote HM2 [325]:

    But all this is, and is likely to continue to be,  academic  since,  in
    light of the evidence from the respondent relating to new procedures in
    force since October  2011  regarding  minimum  acceptable  documents  -
     there is no real risk (except possibly in respect of those who are the
    subject of  a judicial order or arrest warrant) that an Iraqi  national
    who has failed to show he is in need of  international  protection  and
    who faces compulsory return would face  detention either at the  police
    station used by BIAP or anywhere else, since in effect they would  have
    been pre-cleared and/or because they are in possession of a current  or
    expired Iraqi passport or (if a voluntary returnee)  a  laissez  passer
    document and so  would be allowed to proceed from the  airport  without
    any detention. Of course, it is implicit in the  Secretary  of  State's
    position that for so long as  Iraqi asylum seekers who have  failed  in
    their international protection claims lack relevant documentation  they
    will not be the subject of any attempts to enforce their  removal;  but
    we remind ourselves that such a scenario does not  make  their  removal
    contrary  to  either  the  Refugee  Convention  or  the  Human   Rights
    Convention: see e.g. MS (Palestinian Territories) [2009] EWCA  Civ  17,
    [30]; CG (suspension  of  removal-lawfulness-proportionality)  Zimbabwe
    [2010] UKUT 272, SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the  law)  Zimbabwe
    [2012] 00056 (IAC). Whilst our Article 3 ECHR assessment must  consider
    the consequences of removal on a hypothetical  basis,  that  must  have
    regard to the realities of the procedures relating to documentation.

 8. I do not consider that Mr Evans,  the  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, can be said to  have  actively  consented  to  the
    course of action proposed by the Tribunal.  I accept that he  may  have
    made "no representations" but I do not consider that  he  conceded  the
    appeal or any part of it.  I accept that it  may  be  difficult  for  a
    Presenting Officer, faced with  a  Tribunal  which  announces  that  it
    intends to allow an appeal, to challenge that decision and insist  that
    all the grounds of appeal should  be  addressed.   Further,  I  am  not
    persuaded that Mr Howard's agreement to the course of  action  proposed
    necessarily removed from the Tribunal the obligation to determine  "any
    matter raised as a ground of  appeal"  (see  Section  86,  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  In any event, the Tribunal  did  not
    record that the appeal on asylum Article 8 grounds had  been  withdrawn
    and it did not determine the appeal on those grounds.

 9. Mrs Heath accepted that, if the Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal
    on Article 3 ECHR grounds were not disturbed, then  any  error  of  law
    perpetrated by the Tribunal in failing to determine the appeal  on  all
    grounds was unlikely to be so serious as to justify the  setting  aside
    of the determination.  The problem, however, is that I do not find  the
    Tribunal's determination of the appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds to  be
    sound in law.  I make that finding  for  the  following  reasons.   The
    Tribunal has focused upon the position  of  Iraqi  nationals  returning
    without relevant documentation and the risk which they might  encounter
    as a consequence.  What the Tribunal has completely failed to do is  to
    engage with the last sentence of the country guidance provided  by  HM2
    at B(v)(b) ("Such a risk is however, purely academic in the UK  context
    because under the current UK returns policy there will be no compulsory
    return of persons lacking such documents").  I find that  the  Tribunal
    has failed to engage with HM2 with what it says at [325]) (see  above).
    The position of an appellant facing practical admission problems to his
    home country was also stated in MS Palestinian territories  [2009] EWCA
    Civ 17 at [27-30]:
   1. This is a formidable argument, but in my judgment it fails  for  three
      basic reasons. The first, is the absence of  removal  directions  from
      being included in immigration decisions. That much is  common  ground,
      even if the reason for that exclusion is not. Since removal directions
      are not themselves an immigration decision subject to appeal, it would
      be in principle anomalous to allow  future  removal  directions  which
      have not even yet been made to be challenged as part of the  statutory
      appeal scheme under the 2002 Act: and to do  so  not  for  any  reason
      which relates to the immigration decision itself, or its consequences,
      but for an entirely  separate  reason  which  relates  solely  to  the
      lawfulness of the removal directions themselves.
   1. Secondly,  that  is  what  the  jurisprudence  on  the  2002  Act  has
      consistently said, and in GH and MA  that  jurisprudence  is  of  this
      court and binds us. The reasoning of those cases is that the  proposed
      country of destination is needed in order to focus  the  issues  which
      might arise for the purpose of an applicant's asylum and human  rights
      claims. Those claims have to be examined  against  the  background  of
      return to a particular  country  or  territory.  It  is  because  such
      proposed destinations  relate  to  "removal...in  consequence  of  the
      immigration decision" (ground (g)), that  the  proposals  have  to  be
      examined as part of the appeal process to such  immigration  decisions
      themselves. Beyond  that,  however,  the  jurisprudence  accepts  that
      removal directions cannot by themselves be challenged by appeal  under
      the 2002 Act.
   1. Thirdly, the 2003 Regulations, which are the linchpin of  Mr  Seddon's
      argument, only speak of a  "proposed"  destination  ("the  country  or
      territory to which it is proposed to remove the person"). That is  the
      sense in which the notice of decision  to  remove  specifies  a  named
      country against the rubric "Removal directions". However,  a  proposed
      destination is not the same as a destination to which the Secretary of
      State has decided to remove the applicant, and may not even amount  to
      a destination to which the Secretary of State intends  to  remove  the
      applicant. The  word  "proposed"  seems  to  me  well  suited  to  the
      situation being contemplated, whereby  a  destination  for  return  is
      proposed to provide a focus for an applicant's asylum or human  rights
      claims, but in circumstances where, as some cases  have  demonstrated,
      the Secretary  of  States  specifies  a  country  which  reflects  the
      applicant's case about his origins even when that case is disputed and
      has been rejected by the Secretary of State: see this  court's  recent
      decision in MA (Somalia) v. Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ  4  (15
      January 2009). It follows, in my judgment, that  the  (in  any  event)
      future  removal  directions  cannot  be  an  inherent  part   of   the
      immigration decision in question.
   1. Moreover, these conclusions are to my mind  all  consistent  with  the
      nature of removal  directions  themselves.  They  are  very  much  the
      creature of the time  when  they  are  given.  They  may  change  with
      changing circumstances and of course with findings which  emerge  from
      the appeal process itself. The Secretary of State may  have  to  think
      again about a destination for removal. In this case, the Secretary  of
      State may consider whether he should  seek  removal  to  France,  from
      where MS came illegally to this country (being within Schedule 2's  "a
      country or territory in which he embarked for  the  United  Kingdom").
      The essential decision, meanwhile,  is  the  immigration  decision  or
      decisions pursuant to which an  applicant's  asylum  or  human  rights
      claims (or other  claims  within  the  immigration  rules)  have  been
      adjudicated, and by which, where entry has been illegal, the Secretary
      of State must be entitled to decide to remove the illegal entrant.  If
      that removal thereafter turns out to be, for other  reasons,  lawfully
      and practically impossible, that is another question which has  to  be
      dealt with at that time




10. The failure of  the  Tribunal  to  engage  with  the  elements  of  the
    jurisprudence to which I have referred before  it  allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 3 ECHR amounts, in my opinion, to an error  of  law  such
    that the determination falls to be set aside. The  next  Tribunal  will
    need to determine the appeal on asylum and Article 8  ECHR  grounds  in
    addition to Article 3. In so far as it made any, the findings  of  fact
    of the First-tier Tribunal are not preserved. At the next  hearing,  it
    is may be necessary to hear  oral  evidence  and  to  consider  updated
    country evidence. That is a task which it is more appropriate  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to undertake and consequently  I  direct  that  the
    decision be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

    DECISION

11. This appeal is allowed.  The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated  on  23  May  2013  is  set  aside  and  no  part  of  that
    determination is preserved.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Frankish) to remake the decision on  asylum,  human
    rights and humanitarian protection grounds.






Signed                              Date 23 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
