
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00600/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 28 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE FREEDMAN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ENTRI [K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr J. Collins, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, we shall refer  to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the  Secretary
    of State is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  10  October
    2017 to remove him  under  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations  2016")  on  grounds  of  public
    policy and public security.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  George  ("the
    judge") allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 21 March  2019.
    References to a number in brackets are to  paragraph  numbers  of  that
    decision.

3.    The judge began her decision  by  summarising  the  appellant's  brief
    immigration history [1].  The appellant entered the  UK  in  or  around
    October 2015 and there was some evidence  to  show  that  he  had  been
    exercising  his  treaty  rights  as  a  European  citizen  working   in
    construction.

4.    At [2], the judge noted that on 19 June  2017  the  appellant  pleaded
    guilty to the production of cannabis for which he was  sentenced  to  a
    term of  eight  months'  imprisonment.   She  noted  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision and that it was certified under regulation 33  of
    the EEA Regulations 2016.  The appellant was not removed but decided to
    leave the UK voluntarily.  The judge noted correctly that the appellant
    had not acquired a right of  permanent  residence  and  that  the  case
    therefore needed to be considered under the lowest threshold  contained
    in regulation 27 [5].

5.    She summarised the decision  letter  and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent for making the decision [7-10].  She set out the documentary
    evidence which was fairly limited on both  sides  [11-13].   The  judge
    then went on to summarise the relevant  legal  framework.   It  is  not
    suggested that anything in that summary is incorrect or that she failed
    to apply the correct test.

6.    The judge  identified  the  main  legal  issue  she  was  required  to
    determine, which was  whether  the  appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society [28].  She summarised what happened at
    the hearing.  The hearing proceeded in the  absence  of  the  appellant
    because he was not produced from detention, but those representing  him
    took the view that it was in his interest to proceed given that further
    delay would lead to his continued detention.  The judge noted that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer on the day accepted that the case was on
    a "low-level" on grounds of public policy and security [34].

7.    Her main findings are at [43-45].

         "43.     The offence is of producing cannabis. This is not the same
             as simple possession but it is not  in  the  league  of  'hard
             drugs'. If I had not known what the  offence  was  and  simply
             read the respondent's  deportation  decision  from  paragraphs
             [20] to [21], I would have thought that the appellant had been
             convicted of an offence involving Class A drugs. He  has  not.
             It seems to me that the respondent's decision seems  to  be  a
             standard  paragraph.  It  talks  about  hard  drugs  and  drug
             addiction. I do not have  evidence  that  cannabis  (even  the
             production of it) leads to addiction and that this would drive
             someone to commit crimes. Paragraph [20]  talks  about  "those
             involved in supplying drugs". There is no  evidence  that  the
             appellant has been involved in the supply of drugs.  It  is  a
             different offence from production.  The  letter  at  paragraph
             [21]  talks  about  users  becoming  addicted  and  developing
             serious mental and physical health problems.  This  refers  to
             hard drugs. I do not have any evidence before me to state that
             the use of cannabis does cause  serious  mental  and  physical
             health problems. I have already identified that  there  is  no
             evidence before me to suggest that the use of  cannabis  leads
             to addiction.


         44.      The appellant has only committed the one  offence  and  he
             accepted  responsibility  for  it.  Although  he  offered   an
             explanation of being in the wrong place at the wrong time,  he
             did accept full responsibility. He entered a guilty plea.


         45.      The appellant has had no further convictions so that there
             can be no present  threat.  In  the  overall  scheme  of  drug
             offences, the  appellant's  offence  falls  within  the  lower
             range. I find that there is no sufficiently serious  threat  -
             particularly in the light of the fact that there has  been  no
             other offending."

8.    At [48-49] the judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  there  was  any
    evidence to suggest that the appellant might reoffend.   She  concluded
    that the assertion made by the Secretary of State  that  the  appellant
    posed a significant threat to the safety and security of the public was
    simply  not  borne  out  by  the  limited  evidence  produced.   Having
    considered the evidence,  she  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that the appellant's presence in the UK was likely to cause any
    difficulties at all [52].  She noted that there was only evidence of  a
    single offence and that there was no other evidence to suggest that the
    appellant had committed offences here or elsewhere such that  he  would
    pose a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat.   For  those
    reasons the appeal was allowed.

9.    At [55] the judge  correctly  stated  that  the  deportation  decision
    interfered with the appellant's rights of free movement and his  rights
    under the EU treaties. However, she went on to state  that  the  appeal
    was allowed "on human rights grounds" which is an obvious error of  law
    that needs to be corrected.  For that reason, the decision must be  set
    aside. In assessing the extent to which the decision needs to be remade
    we have considered whether there are any errors in the substance of the
    judge's decision. We conclude that Secretary of State's grounds do  not
    disclose any material errors of law in the judge's findings.

10.   The first point made in the grounds is a general submission  that  the
    appellant's immigration history in leaving the UK and then  re-entering
    without making a formal application under regulation 41 was a  relevant
    consideration.  Whilst it is the case that the judge  perhaps  did  not
    recognise that no formal application was made under regulation  41  for
    temporary admission, it is difficult to see how this point taken  alone
    could have made any material difference to the overall outcome  of  the
    appeal  given  the  dearth  of  evidence  relating  to  the   risk   of
    reoffending.

11.   The appellant left the UK and only  returned  in  December  2018.  The
    Tribunal records show that this was after the First-tier Tribunal  held
    a case management hearing in September  2018  and  indicated  that  the
    appeal would shortly be listed for hearing.  It seems that the progress
    of the appeal may have been the prompt for  the  appellant  to  return,
    albeit he did not do so through the correct channels  outlined  in  the
    EEA Regulations 2016.  Whilst this is a matter  that  the  judge  could
    have taken some account of, as we have already said, we  do  not  think
    this  is  a  significantly  strong  point  to  undermine  the   overall
    conclusion that  the  appellant  did  not  pose  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat.

12.   The second ground asserts that the judge made  contradictory  findings
    as to whether the appellant was involved in the supply of drugs or took
    drugs himself.  This ground amounts to  nothing  more  than  a  general
    assertion.  The burden  was  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  produce
    evidence to show the extent and the nature of the offence, but none was
    provided.  Production of cannabis is not the same offence as supply  of
    class B drugs.  It was open to the judge to take into account the  fact
    that the sentence was at the  lower  end  of  the  scale  for  a  drugs
    offence.  It was unlikely that  the  appellant  would  have  undertaken
    rehabilitation courses during such a short sentence. He would only have
    been in prison for around four months.  In the  absence  of  any  other
    information about the offence it was open to her to conclude  that  the
    fact that he had not undertaken rehabilitation courses  in  prison  was
    not a factor that had much bearing on  the  risk  of  reoffending.   We
    conclude that those findings were open to her to make on the  evidence.



13.   Mr Tarlow did not make any  submissions,  and  did  not  rely  in  any
    meaningful way, on the third point, which amounts to  no  more  than  a
    general assertion  that  the  family  members  had  not  prevented  him
    committing an offence previously. Again, even if it had been argued, we
    find that this is a fairly minor point that would not make any material
    difference to the outcome.

14.   The final point related to the judge's findings at [44-45]. She  noted
    that the evidence showed that the appellant had committed  one  offence
    and that he accepted responsibility for it.  She noted that  there  was
    no evidence of further convictions to indicate that he may  be  someone
    who constituted a present  threat.   The  respondent  points  out  that
    shortly after his conviction and release from  prison  a  decision  was
    made to remove the appellant. He left voluntarily and spent most of the
    time after that outside the UK.  Whilst that is the case, we note  that
    the Secretary of State often produces evidence of offences committed in
    other EU countries if he considers it relevant. The burden was  on  the
    Secretary of State to show that the appellant presented a  sufficiently
    serious threat. We conclude that it was open to the judge  to  conclude
    that there was no evidence to indicate  that  he  committed  any  other
    offences and to proceed to determine the appeal on that basis.

15.   The decision must be set aside on the technical point relating to  the
    ground of appeal. However, we conclude that  the  substantive  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of errors of
    law. We remake the decision and allow the  appeal  on  EU  law  grounds
    based on the substantive findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   We conclude that the respondent's decision  breaches  the  appellant's
    rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry into or  residence  in
    the United Kingdom.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on EU law grounds



Signed   [pic]   Date 26 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








