
   [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA 00466 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 March 2014                              |On 11 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE K B PARKER
                  (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    M A C
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Trott &
                    Gentry Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Much of this determination concerns  the  appellant's  child,  now  aged
    almost 5 years, whose anonymity needs to be preserved. Pursuant to  rule
    14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the Tribunal
    makes  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  of  publication  of  any
    information likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the
    appellant's child and any breach of the order shall be punishable  as  a
    contempt of court.

 2. The appellant is an Italian national and therefore a national of an  EEA
    state. He was born on 14 May 1982 and so is now  almost  32  years  old.
    Pursuant  to  rule  26  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 he  appeals  the  decision  of  the  respondent  on  19
    December 2012 to make him  the  subject  of  a  deportation  order.  The
    respondent was satisfied that the appellant posed "a  genuine,  present,
    and sufficiently serious threat to the interests of public policy" if he
    was allowed to remain so that his deportation was justified.  The notice
    of decision was sent to the appellant under cover of a letter  dated  19
    February 2013.

 3. His grounds of appeal, dated 4 March 2013, assert that the appellant  is
    an EEA national who has resided continuously in the United Kingdom since
    1992 and has therefore acquired a permanent right of  residence  because
    he has resided in the United Kingdom for more than ten years.  According
    to the grounds the decision to deport the appellant could only  be  made
    on "imperative grounds of public security" and no such grounds exist  in
    this case.  The grounds further assert that removing the appellant would
    interfere disproportionately with his private and family life given  the
    amount of time that he has spent in the United Kingdom and also that  it
    would not be in the best interests of his  3  year  old  daughter  whose
    relationship with her father, the appellant, would be marred  by  reason
    of his being deported.

 4. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal and was  dismissed  in  a
    determination dated 23 August 2013.  That determination was wrong in law
    and was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun. She said:

         "1.  The appellant, whose mother is British and father is  Italian,
         most recently  arrived  in  the  UK  in  1995.   According  to  the
         respondent,  the  fact  that  his  mother  is  British   does   not
         automatically entitled the appellant to British  citizenship.   The
         appellant has not provided any evidence that he has been registered
         as a British citizen since  his  arrival  here.   He  is  therefore
         considered to be an Italian national.

         2.   On 24 December 2012, the respondent made a decision to  deport
         the appellant in light of his conviction at Guildford  Crown  Court
         on three counts  of  burglary  and  theft,  theft  of  vehicle  and
         handling  stolen  goods  for  which  he  sentenced  to  18   months
         imprisonment.  The appellant has 35 convictions for 79 offences  in
         the UK.

         3.   The appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  was
         dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on grounds of deportation  and
         Article 8 of the ECHR.   Permission to appeal the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal has been granted principally on the basis  that
         the First-tier Tribunal did not properly consider  the  deportation
         of  the  appellant  within  the  context   of   Immigration   (EEA)
         Regulations 2006 and, in particular, had not correctly applied  the
         test of "imperative grounds of public security".  The second ground
         argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  rejecting   the
         appellant's account largely due to his acquisitive  nature  of  his
         convictions and  erred  in  their  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         contact with his daughter.

         4.   The FtT accepted that the appellant was  born  in  1982.   His
         period of residence on a continuous basis in the UK began in  1995.
         He has exceeded a period of 10 years in the UK on this basis.   His
         offending now comprising 79 offences began in 1998.  The  level  of
         offending was relatively low before the appellant became an  adult.
         The range and breadth of his offending has only become  established
         after he became an adult with the  level  of  intensity  increasing
         after 2003.  He has been given every opportunity by the  courts  to
         reform and he has rejected them all.

         5.   Both     parties agreed that the test for the consideration of
         "imperative grounds of public security" is  high.   In  FV  (Italy)
         EWCA Civ 1199, the Court of Appeal at [89] relied on  PI  where  it
         was recognised that the concept of "imperative  grounds  of  public
         security" presupposes "not only the existence of a threat to public
         security, but also that such a threat is  of  a  particularly  high
         degree of seriousness, as is reflected by  the  use  of  the  words
         "imperative grounds."

         6.   At [88] the Court of Appeal said the test to  be  applied  was
         stated by the Grand Chamber in Tsakouridis - in the application  of
         Directive  2004/38,  a   balance  must  be   struck   between   the
         exceptional nature of the threat to the public security as a result
         of the personal conduct of the concerned, assessed if necessary  at
         the time when the expulsion decision is to be made on the one hand;
         and on  the  other  hand,  the  risk  of  compromising  the  social
         rehabilitation of the Union citizen in the State in  which  he  has
         become a genuinely integrated...

         7.   With this test mind, I find that the FtT erred in law for  the
         following reasons.

              (i) The FtT considered "imperative grounds of public security"
                  through the prism of the appellant's criminal conduct.

               (ii)      The  appellant's  level  of  integration  was  also
                  considered through the prism of his criminal conduct.

              (iii)    The FtT's finding at  [48]  that  the  appellant  had
                  persisted in conduct which represented a genuine, present
                  and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
                  fundamental interests of society was in consideration  of
                  Reg 21(5).  However, having found that the appellant  has
                  resided in the UK continuously for 10 years, the decision
                  to deport could only be considered on "imperative grounds
                  of public security".  Therefore the FtT  erred  in  their
                  finding at [48].

              (iv)     The FtT failed to carry out the balance  set  out  in
         Tsakouridis.

         8.   In respect of the appellant's appeal under Article  8  of  the
         ECHR, I find that the FtT could only consider the evidence that was
         before them  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  contact  with  his
         daughter.  However, bearing in mind what is recorded  in  paras  24
         and 25, and 37 and in the light of confidentiality, I consider that
         it would have been difficult for the HOPO to obtain from the Family
         Court material regarding the state of the family proceedings and/or
         evidence in them.  The  appellant  should  have  been  directed  to
         produce the material himself if he wished to rely on  it.   In  the
         absence of such evidence, I find that the FtT erred in its  finding
         at para 46 that in light of the appellant's conduct  and  the  NOMS
         report, it would be antithetical to the child's best interests  for
         the appellant to have contact with her; and that his  prospects  of
         obtaining direct contact are not realistic in view of his offending
         and behaviour.

         9.   For these reasons the FtT's decision cannot stand.  It is  set
         aside in order to be remade.

         10.  The FtT's finding that the appellant has been in the UK  since
         1995 and has exceeded a period of 10 years, taking into account the
         periods of time he has spent in custody, is to stand."

 5. The appeal came before Mitting  J  sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman on  17  December  2013.   They
    were not able to determine the appeal on that occasion.  No  doubt  they
    had  in  mind  the   decision   of   this   Tribunal   in   Essa   (EEA:
    rehabilitation/integration) [2013] UKUT 00316 (IAC) when  Judge  Freeman
    gave directions. He said:

         "The issues to be decided are:
         1. has the appellant acquired  the  right  of  permanent  residence
         under reg.  21(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006?
         2 has the appellant acquired and retained  the  right  of  enhanced
         protection under reg. 21(4)(a)?
         3. if the answer to (1) is yes, but the answer to (2) is  no,  have
         serious grounds of public security been established?
         4. if the answer to 2. is yes, have imperative  grounds  of  public
         security been established?
         5. in either event, having regard to the factors identified in reg.
         21(6), and the best interests of the appellant's daughter, are  the
         requirements of reg. 21(5) satisfied?"

 6. Since then there has been  clarification  from  the  European  Court  of
    Justice in Onuekwere v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-378/12 and Secretary of State for the Home
    Department v M.G. (Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-400/12 which  were  each
    promulgated on 16 January 2014. This jurisprudence  clarifies  our  task
    but gives no reason for us to change  the  approach  required  by  Judge
    Freeman's directions.

 7. The decision in Case  C-145/09  Tsakouridis  [2010]  ECR  I-11979  gives
    reasons for the European Court of Justice to rule that protection  based
    on 10 years residence, unlike protection based on 5 years residence, can
    be lost by reason of subsequent  imprisonment.  Although  the  case  was
    mentioned in Judge Eshun's decision  we  see  no  need  to  consider  it
    further now.

 8. Following Onuekwere it  is,  we  find,  beyond  doubt  that  periods  of
    imprisonment served as a punishment by order of the criminal  courts  do
    not count towards five years residence and  do  interrupt  a  period  of
    continuous residence (see paragraph 33(1) and (2)).  However,  following
    M.G. an EEA national who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  many
    years, even if that residence is not  continuous  because  it  has  been
    interrupted by periods  of  imprisonment,  cannot  be  deported  without
    regard to his integration in the United Kingdom. At paragraph 39(2)  the
    court said:

         Article 28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that a period of imprisonment  is,  in  principle,  capable
         both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence  for
         the purposes of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the  decision
         regarding the grant of the enhanced protection provided  for  there
           under, even where the person concerned resided in the host Member
         State for the 10 years prior to  imprisonment.  However,  the  fact
         that that person resided in the host Member State for the 10  years
         prior to imprisonment may be taken into consideration  as  part  of
         the overall assessment required in order to determine  whether  the
         integrating links previously forged with the host Member State have
         been broken."

 9. We set out below  the  relevant  parts  of  the  regulation  21  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         "5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality

         ...

         6)   Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as age, state of health, family
             and economic situation of the person, the person's  length  of
             residence in the  United  Kingdom,  the  person's  social  and
             cultural integration into the United Kingdom and the extent of
             the links with his country of origin."

10. It follows (and the plain meaning  of  the  Regulations  requires)  that
    although imprisonment will in principle interrupt a period of  10  years
    continuous residence a person who has more than 10  years  residence  in
    the United Kingdom cannot be deported without full consideration of  his
    circumstances and in particular if he has broken the "integrating  links
    previously forged"  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  if  his  removal  is
    proportionate.

11. We have the benefit of the bundle and a skeleton argument  prepared  for
    the hearing before us by Miss Nnamani  and  a  bundle  prepared  for  an
    earlier hearing.

12. Before us it is  for  the  respondent  to  show  that  her  decision  is
    justified under the rules and on human rights grounds. Facts relied upon
    must be proved on the balance of probabilities.

13. For reasons that we explain below we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has acquired the right of permanent residence under reg.  21(2)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  but  not  a  right  to
    enhanced protection under reg. 21(4)(a)  and  that  serious  grounds  of
    public security have been established. In short he resided in the United
    Kingdom continuously as the family member of an EEA national  exercising
    treaty rights from sometime in 1995 when his father arrived and  started
    work. However he has not earned the enhanced protection arising from ten
    years continuous residence because his residence was interrupted when he
    was sent to custody in 2001 and has been  further  interrupted  for  the
    same reason many times since.

14. We heard oral evidence from the appellant and his parents  and  we  read
    supporting statements from friends and other family members. We  see  no
    point in  setting  out  the  evidence  in  detail  as  very  little  was
    controversial. We also received evidence after the hearing  (as  we  had
    arranged to do) supporting the appellant's father's claim to have worked
    for many years in the United Kingdom.

15. We were particularly assisted by  a  letter  served  shortly  after  the
    hearing, dated 14 September 2013 from HM  Revenue  and  Customs  to  the
    appellant's father and referring to his having "19 qualifying  years  of
    NICs". This is independent evidence that  enhances  the  oral  testimony
    claiming the appellant's father has a long history  of  working  in  the
    United Kingdom. There is also a  letter  from  HM  Revenue  and  Customs
    confirming that the appellant's father paid national  insurance  in  the
    tax year 1995/96. This supports his oral evidence that he got work  soon
    after he arrived in the United Kingdom.

16. We acknowledge that the supporting letters asserted that  the  appellant
    was settled in the United Kingdom.

17. Although we made no findings without first considering the  evidence  as
    a whole it is convenient to set out at the beginning findings that  were
    easy to make on the evidence.

18. We accept that the appellant was born in Italy in 1982 and came to  live
    in the United Kingdom in 1984. In about  1986  the  family  returned  to
    Italy and stayed there until moving to the United States of  America  in
    1993 for about 18 months when the family returned to the United  Kingdom
    in 1995. The appellant's father arrived in the  United  Kingdom  shortly
    after the appellant and his mother but his father started to  work  soon
    after his arrival, still in 1995 and has been  working  (or,  for  short
    periods, looking for work) in the United Kingdom since then.

19. The appellant was first sent to custody in 2001. By then  he  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom lawfully as the dependant child of an EEA national
    who had been exercising treaty rights for more than 5 years and  so  the
    appellant has obtained a permanent right  of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under regulation 15(1)(d) of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006. He cannot be removed "except on serious  grounds
    of  public  policy  or  public  security"  (Regulation  21(iii)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006).

20. There is documentary evidence showing that the appellant has  been  very
    obese and that his physical maturity was delayed a  little.  Whether  or
    not his troubled adolescence contributed to his offending we do not know
    but the evidence was in the papers before us and we have read it. It  is
    not, and was not said to  be,  any  kind  of  excuse  for  his  criminal
    offences.

21. His first recorded conviction was in 1998  for  offences  of  dishonesty
    for which he was fined. He had been in trouble with  the  police  before
    then but he was not prosecuted.

22. He first lost his liberty in April 2001 as a consequence  of  his  being
    convicted after a trial at the Crown Court for "shop  lifting".  He  was
    sentenced to further terms of custody in May, August  and  October  2001
    and in July and August 2002.  He  was  sentenced  to  short  periods  of
    imprisonment in November  2002  and  February  2003  and  to  two  years
    imprisonment in December 2004 for conspiracy to steal. In September 2005
    he was sentenced to periods of imprisonment  for  an  offence  committed
    whilst on licence from prison and in February 2006 he was  sentenced  to
    two months imprisonment for an offence of dishonesty. In August 2006  he
    was sentenced to a further term of imprisonment for several offences. It
    seems that he had to serve a total of 11 months. On October 2007 he  was
    sentenced to eight weeks imprisonment  at  the  Magistrates'  Court.  In
    February 2008 he was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months  imprisonment  for
    possessing cocaine with intent to supply. He was next before the  courts
    in May  2011  when  he  was  sentenced  to  20  weeks  imprisonment  for
    residential burglary. On 6 February 2012  he  was  remanded  in  custody
    having been caught driving whilst disqualified and on 27  February  2012
    he was made the subject of a suspended sentence of imprisonment for  the
    offence of driving whilst disqualified but he did not keep to the  terms
    of his order. He was most recently in trouble in July 2012 when  he  was
    sentenced to a total of two years imprisonment for offence including two
    counts of residential burglary.

23. We cannot deduce from his record just how much  time  he  has  spent  in
    custody. Some of the sentences were imposed when he was in  custody  and
    the records do not show how much time was served. Nevertheless,  without
    counting concurrent sentences he appears to have been ordered  to  spend
    nearly 7 years in prison. He was clearly before the courts at least once
    in every year from 2001 to February 2008 when he was sent to prison  for
    18 months. Even so, he pleaded guilty to an offence  of  burglary  of  a
    dwelling on 4 March 2010, just over two years after the start of his  18
    months sentence.

24. We accept that he has not been convicted of any offence since July  2012
    but his behaviour is under such intense scrutiny that this is  not  good
    evidence of a change of attitude and even whilst in prison  police  were
    involved because of approaches he made to his former partner.

25. This summary does not give details of non-custodial sentences but  other
    sentences have been imposed.  He  has,  at  different  times,  been  the
    subject of a probation order, a community rehabilitation  order  and  an
    order requiring him to attend an enhanced thinking skills programme  but
    these did not bring about a fundamental,  or  any,  improvement  in  the
    appellant's behaviour.

26. We accept that the  appellant  has  passed  GCSE  examinations  and  has
    obtained NVQs in industrial cleaning. He has secured a variety of  jobs,
    mainly in the catering industry. Not all of his jobs have been known  to
    HM Revenue and Customs.

27. We accept too that the appellant lived  with  his  "fianc�e/partner"  at
    various addresses in Sussex, Hampshire and Surrey from  2008,  and  with
    their daughter who was born on 28 May 2009, until about the time that he
    was arrested in 2012 although we also find that their  relationship  had
    deteriorated in the months before his arrest and he was in prison for  a
    time after their child was born and before they separated.

28. We considered the appellant's relationship with his former  partner  and
    child below.

29. He wrote to her in prison letters that he described as  "emotional"  and
    she described as "threatening". Some, perhaps all, of these letters  are
    in the bundle before us. Both descriptions are justified but incomplete.
    Some of the things the appellant wrote  were  quite  benign  and  others
    suggested a genuine concern  for  his  daughter  but  other  parts  were
    threatening. The appellant was subject to a non molestation  order  made
    at Guilford County Court on 27 February 2013 and the  police  asked  the
    prison authorities to prevent the appellant making further contact  with
    his former partner by letter. She did nothing to support this appeal and
    the appellant has had no contact with his daughter since March 2012.

30. The appellant said that for  a  time  contact  was  facilitated  by  his
    former partner's father, Mr B. He insisted that  his  relationship  with
    his partner was subsisting until after his arrest and in a statement  he
    described his relationship with  his  daughter  as  "fully  subsisting".
    However there is also a statement made to the police by Mr  B,  included
    in the respondent's bundle.  It is dated 5  March  2014  but  as  it  is
    appended to an index dated 19 February 2013 we are  not  confident  that
    the date is correct. In it Mr B asserts that he has  "never  facilitated
    any contact between the appellant and S".   He said that he had sent "M--
    -" some money when he was in prison because he was sorry for him  having
    no money for toiletries and was "aghast" when  that  money  appeared  to
    have been used to finance telephone calls to his daughter.  He  did  not
    want there to be contact  between  the  appellant  and  the  appellant's
    daughter.

31. We have not been able to resolve the conflict  between  the  appellant's
    claim that his former partner's father facilitated contact  for  a  time
    and Mr B's evidence that he never did such a thing.  Perhaps  there  was
    some assistance for a short  time  that  Mr  B  has  forgotten  and  the
    appellant has exaggerated. However it is quite clear that Mr  B  is  not
    offering to assist any future contact.

32. Mr B's statement also said that his daughter has  now  married  and  the
    appellant's daughter is happy in her new family.

33. We find that there is no prospect  of  the  appellant  being  reconciled
    with his former partner.

34. The appellant asserted a right to maintain  parental  contact  with  his
    daughter and said it would be in her best interests to have contact with
    him. He has commenced proceedings to try to achieve this end.

35. The appellant's daughter, herein identified as  "S",  was  born  in  May
    2009. The appellant says he has not seen her since March 2012. He served
    a prison sentence of 20 weeks in 2011. He was  remanded  in  custody  in
    February 2012. Whilst  he  may  have  had  some  happy  times  with  his
    daughter, and there is certainly no evidence that he was overtly  unkind
    to her, and he has expressed  great  interest  in  the  child  there  is
    nothing to suggest  that  he  has  ever  been  a  stable  and  important
    influence in her life. It is unlikely that she  can  now  remember  much
    about him.

36. We are obliged to consider the best interests of his daughter.   In  the
    ordinary course of events it must be the case that it would  be  in  her
    best interests to have a meaningful relationship with both her  parents.
    The ideal arrangement is that she lives with both parents together in  a
    committed and contented relationship.  She has  been  deprived  of  that
    benefit because they were  unable  to  live  together.   She  is  wholly
    innocent of her father's many deficiencies.  If this  had  been  a  case
    where there was  an  established  meaningful  relationship  between  the
    little girl and her father we would have had to give considerable weight
    to her right to nurture and develop that relationship but  this  is  not
    such a case.

37. A small child in the care of its  mother  can  only  have  a  meaningful
    relationship with the father if the mother is prepared to  cooperate  to
    that end and there is no reason to think that she is.  We recognise that
    men whose conduct is deplorable in many respects can,  sometimes,  still
    have something useful to offer  their  own  children  and  that  such  a
    father's relationship with his  child  is  still  potentially  valuable.
    This is not such a case, at least not  presently.  It  is  not  a  close
    relationship.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter   was
    frustrated by reason of his being justly imprisoned because of  his  own
    misconduct. It has not developed further because his  daughter's  mother
    does not want a closer relationship to grow.

38. We are aware that the appellant has made an application  to  the  Family
    Court and we do not want to frustrate  or  presumptuously  predict  that
    court's work. In some circumstances (for example where a mother  appears
    to be frustrating the continuation of  established  contact)  there  are
    excellent reasons to delay  a  deportation  decision  until  the  family
    courts have  indicated  how  the  best  interests  of  children  can  be
    advanced. This is not such a case. The appellant has  little  chance  of
    playing a significant part in  the  child's  life  for  the  foreseeable
    future. We see no point in delaying the appellant's  removal  while  his
    child's best interests, and how they can be advanced, are considered  by
    family courts.

39. We find that  however  strong  his  feelings  might  be,  in  truth  the
    appellant does  not  have  a  strong  relationship  with  his  daughter.
    Further, his selfish and unpleasant letters to his  former  partner  and
    the non-molestation order show that however genuine he  may  be  in  his
    feelings towards his daughter he does not have any  insight  that  would
    enable him to build a relationship with his former  partner  that  would
    make meaningful contact with his daughter practicable.

40. For our purposes we find that the appellant's daughter's best  interests
    are in her staying with her mother and not  seeing  her  father  in  the
    immediate future. The appellant's removal  would  not  stop  his  making
    occasional contact in writing and of more meaningful contact  developing
    if that was best for the child. Her best interests do  not  now  require
    him to be in the United Kingdom.

41. We accept that the appellant has frequent contact with and support  from
    his family in Shrewsbury and that his father is likely  to  be  able  to
    help him find work. However relationships between adults other than life
    partners, are not usually weighty in an article 8 balancing exercise and
    there is nothing to suggest that they should have great weight here.

42. We also accept that  the  appellant  has  often  been  employed  in  the
    catering industry although not all of his jobs have been known to HMR&C.

43. The appellant  insisted  that  the  prospect  of  deportation  had  been
    "extremely frightening" and  he  realised  how  much  he  had  to  lose,
    including contact with his daughter, his parents and his brother and  he
    was "resolved not to reoffend".

44. Both of his parents  said  that  they  had  detected  a  change  in  his
    attitude since he was faced with the prospect of  deportation  but  were
    not able to point to much in support these opinions. On  this  point  we
    found their evidence honest but their opinions were unjustified.

45. It was pointed out to the appellant that in 2007 after he  had  been  in
    trouble he received a letter from the Secretary  of  State  warning  him
    that he could be deported.  He  was  asked  why  that  did  not  have  a
    salutary effect on him.  He indicated that he did not realise it  was  a
    serious threat. He thought that he was a dual national.   He  was  asked
    directly, and perfectly fairly, why  the  Tribunal  should  believe  his
    claim to have changed.  He referred to the  "hell"  of  not  seeing  his
    daughter.

46. We accept that the appellant's mother is  a  British  national  and  his
    father an Italian national and his mother did not realise that in  order
    for him to obtain British nationality she need  to  register  him  as  a
    British national.  He could  not  obtain  British  nationality  when  he
    realised that he was not a British national  because  he  had  committed
    criminal offences.

47. According to the National Offender Manager Service (NOMS)  report  (page
    7) the appellant described himself as a career criminal.  He admitted to
    a certain amount of drug dealing but denied any personal use of cocaine.
     The likelihood of reoffending was assessed to be 90% in the  first  two
    years after release.  We note that this is an exceptionally high  figure
    and although the NOMS report is perhaps not as accurate a  predictor  of
    the likelihood of reoffending as the use of a precise  percentage  might
    suggest the report clearly shows that when the report was  prepared  the
    appellant had shown little remorse or little sign of rebuilding his life
    and living down his criminal past. In contrast  he  seemed  resigned  to
    getting into further trouble.

48. The report was requested on 14 December 2012 and served on 1 July  2013.
     It says on page 9 "Full review - 10/09/ 2012 Fast review due to  change
    in risk of serious harm to partner and children 24/04/2013".  Whilst  it
    is probably right that the opinions in  the  report  are  not  based  on
    interviews conducted after he received the most  recent  notice  of  the
    intention to deport him they were based on his  conduct  in  prison  and
    therefore after the prospect of deportation and on  different  occasions
    the implementation of a suspended prison sentence, had not  stopped  him
    reoffending.

49. We find it relevant that the appellant has offered  no  explanation  for
    his offending.  We find the appellant's criminal record very depressing.
     He cannot be presented as a young man whose criminality was confined to
    his having trouble establishing himself in adult life.  Rather he  is  a
    person who has repeatedly committed offences from a young  age  and  the
    offences have tended to become more rather than less  serious  with  the
    passage of time.  He has shown himself to be dishonest and on  occasions
    incapable of accepting his  own  guilt.  He  has  also  been  thoroughly
    irresponsible in his dealings with the courts and  contemptuous  of  the
    need to obey the law.

50. We know the appellant says that he has had a change of heart.   We  know
    that this claim has been supported by his parents whom  we  find  to  be
    honest people, if not objective.  However we cannot see anything in  the
    evidence that gives us any good reason to accept this assurance even  if
    the appellant means it when he says it.

51. We appreciate that the appellant claims to fear losing contact with  his
    daughter but the fact is he has already lost contact with his  daughter.
     That may be a terrible blow to him but it is what has happened.  It  is
    a matter of record that he was warned on an earlier occasion  about  his
    behaviour by the Secretary of State and that he risked  deportation.  He
    did not believe the warning given.  Only an arrogant disregard  for  the
    law could have caused him to ignore this warning.   He certainly  cannot
    claim to have been unaware of  the  potential  consequences  of  further
    offending and it did not stop him.

52. Sometimes a person commits criminal offences,  perhaps  particularly  of
    the kind of dishonest offence this appellant has committed, to satisfy a
    drug or other addiction.  Without it in any way being an excuse,  it  is
    possible to see in such circumstances a reason for a  person  succumbing
    to the temptation to break the law. Such a person who faces  up  to  his
    problems and resolves to put them behind him can, sometimes, be believed
    when he says that he has turned over a new leaf.  Such  claims  will  be
    looked at with great care, not to say  cynicism  but  can  sometimes  be
    persuasive. This appellant has not identified himself as such a person.

53. We have reminded  ourselves  that  even  young  men  with  an  appalling
    criminal history do, sometimes, start to  live  industriously  and  live
    down their past when they meet  a  suitable  partner.  This  appellant's
    criminal conduct has escalated since he became a father.

54. This appellant  has  given  no  explanation  at  all  for  his  criminal
    behaviour. Neither has he advanced any plausible reason for us  to  find
    that he will not continue to commit criminal offences. He just does  not
    like the consequences of being caught. The consequences of being  caught
    have already included prison sentences and, whilst  we  recognise  there
    are elements of a deportation order that are in some ways  more  onerous
    than a prison sentence, he is not a man who can be believed when he says
    that adverse consequences have frightened him into proper behaviour.

55.  His  convictions  for  failing  to  answer  bail  and  driving   whilst
    disqualified  show  an  inability,  or   disinclination,   to   exercise
    elementary self discipline.

56. We do not believe him when he says that he has changed his ways  and  we
    cannot accept his parents' assurance to the contrary.

57. We find that if he remains in the United Kingdom  he  is  likely  to  go
    back to his dishonest and other reprehensible behaviour. His past crimes
    are not the most serious but they  are  far  from  minor.  They  include
    disturbing public order, possessing drugs  with  intent  to  supply  and
    dwelling house burglary. We remind ourselves that his previous  criminal
    convictions do not of themselves justify a decision to remove him  under
    the regulations. Rather his personal conduct must represent a  "genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
    interests of society".

58. We are satisfied  that  his  propensity  to  re-offend  does  amount  to
    serious grounds of public policy or public  security  that  justify  his
    exclusion.

59. The supporting letters emphasis how, in the opinion of the writers,  the
    appellant is British in all but name and should be allowed to remain  in
    the United Kingdom close to his British relatives. The problem with this
    contention is that he is not British. Rather his presence in the  United
    Kingdom is a danger to the security of British people and  he  does  not
    become entitled to be treated as if he has British nationality by reason
    of a long residence during which he  has  repeatedly  committed  crimes.
    Many of the points made in the letters about  his  ties  to  the  United
    Kingdom  echo  the  rules  and  particularly  the   requirements   under
    regulation 21 to take account of a variety  of  personal  circumstances.
    They may be excellent reasons for not seeking to  deport  the  appellant
    the first time that he got  into  trouble  but  that  is  not  what  has
    happened here.

60. As is set out above, we are particularly required  under  the  rules  to
    consider the appellant's degree of integration into British society. Our
    understanding of "integration"  is  enhanced  by  the  decision  of  the
    European Court of Justice in MG. It  would  be  quite  wrong  to  remove
    lightly a person who has lived in an EEA state for  ten  years  or  more
    even if he had not lived in a way that  has  entitled  him  to  enhanced
    protection.  However the regulations require us to consider, inter alia,
    the degree of integration rather than mere length  of  residence.   This
    appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for nearly all his life as  if
    it were his own country.  He has been educated  there.   He  has  worked
    there.  We accept that he does have  a  history  of  employment,  albeit
    interrupted by periods of detention.

61. The problem is that although he has made the United  Kingdom  his  home,
    his behaviour is that of a person who is  ill  at  ease  in  the  United
    Kingdom rather than integrated into it.  He is a persistent criminal and
    a dishonest and irresponsible man.   He  has  not  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom.  He has simply lived there for most of his  life.   This
    is significant.  If the  directive  intended  a  lesser  test,  such  as
    extended residence, that is what the directive would have said.

62. We are required to focus on integration and the  evidence  is  that  the
    appellant has not integrated in any meaningful way.

63. We have also reflected on the  prospects  of  his  being  rehabilitated.
    There is nothing before us that persuades  us  that  he  is  a  reformed
    character. He has squandered the opportunities given him by  the  courts
    to  improve  his  behaviour.  Removing  him   will   not   interrupt   a
    rehabilitation process. It is just possible that the jolt of deportation
    and its  associated  new  beginning  in  Italy  will  encourage  him  to
    reorganise his life.

64. The appellant said little about his contacts in Italy but  he  has  made
    many visits to the country and has relatives there who can reasonably be
    expected to offer some help in establishing himself.  He  said  that  he
    spoke some Italian and, as a cook  who  has  learned  from  his  Italian
    father, he has transferable skills. He can establish himself in Italy.

65.  We  have  asked  ourselves  if  removal  would  contravene  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the  European  Convention  and  particularly
    under article 8. The appellant can only  succeed  on  these  grounds  in
    exceptional circumstances and everything that has to be considered under
    article 8 has already been considered. Plainly removal  would  interfere
    with his private and family life and indeed with the private and  family
    life of his child. However in all the circumstances we find his  removal
    proportionate. He is a mature man. He has no partner and  no  meaningful
    relationship with his child.  The  interference  with  his  private  and
    family life is proportionate to the proper purpose  of  maintaining  law
    and order.

66. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun  has  already  ruled  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has erred in law and directed that its decision is  set  aside.
    Her reasons are given above. The appellant has  acquired  the  right  to
    permanent residence under regulation 21(2) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  He  has  not  acquired  the  right  to
    enhanced protection. His propensity to reoffend does  establish  serious
    grounds of public security so that  his  removal  is  justified.  Before
    deciding  the  appeal  we  have  taken  account  of  all  his   personal
    circumstances  including  those  identified  in  the   regulations   and
    particularly his degree of integration into the United Kingdom. We  have
    reminded ourselves of the  need  for  proportionality.  We  dismiss  the
    appeal under the rules. Notwithstanding that his removal would interfere
    with his and other peoples' private and family life his circumstances do
    not  create  an  exception  within  the  rules  and   his   removal   is
    proportionate to the proper purpose of maintaining order and  preventing
    crime.

67. In the circumstances, we dismiss this appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 April 2014                   |




