
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018                         |On 31st October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Viesturs Kamaldins
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Latvia born on 24 April 1980. His  appeal
    against deportation under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal on 15 June 2018.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds that the judge erred  in
    law in considering Regulation 27(5)(e) in isolation and failed to  give
    adequate consideration to the remaining provisions of Regulation 27 and
    Schedule   1.   The   Appellant's   deportation   was   justified   and
    proportionate.

3.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hodgkinson on 4 July 2018 for the following reasons: "The grounds argue
    that the Judge erred as follows: first, in basing  her  proportionality
    assessment solely upon Regulation 27(5)(e)  of  the  2016  Regulations,
    rather than taking into account that Regulation as a whole,  including,
    but not limited to, the question of risk to the public, his  propensity
    to reoffend and the fact that the Judge concluded  that  the  Appellant
    continued to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of  society;  second,
    when assessing proportionality, in failing to have adequate  regard  to
    the provisions of Schedule 1  to  the  Regulations.  The  grounds  were
    arguable."

Submissions

4.   Mr Bramble submitted that, although the  judge  set  out  the  relevant
    provisions in the decision, she adopted the wrong approach in  applying
    Regulation  27  and  focused  only  on  sub-paragraph   27(5)(e),   the
    Appellant's previous convictions. The judge referred to Schedule  1  at
    paragraph 20 and acknowledged  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  was
    justified to protect the public and that he was of good character until
    May 2017.  However, the judge failed to  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant was considered to be medium risk to the public,  even  though
    there was a low risk of reoffending. There was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had completed any rehabilitation. The judge  found  that  the
    Respondent had shown that Schedule 1 applied, but the judge had  failed
    to take into account  the  medium  risk  of  harm  and  had  not  fully
    considered the public interest. She  had  scant  regard  to  the  OASys
    Report and the public interest in her findings  at  paragraph  20.  The
    judge had chosen only to focus on the Appellant's previous  convictions
    and had not appropriately dealt with the  factors  in  the  context  of
    Regulation 27(5). She had not ignored material facts but had failed  to
    properly apply Regulation 27(5).

5.    Mr  Kamaldins  submitted  that  his  behaviour  did  not   justify   a
    deportation order.  Although there was insufficient evidence before the
    judge to show permanent residence, he did have that  evidence  to  fill
    the gap in employment identified by the  judge.  At  the  time  of  the
    appeal he had limited access to documents but he had since prepared all
    the documents and sent them to court. He had  not  yet  applied  for  a
    permanent residence card. He  had  been  living  in  the  UK  since  13
    December 2009. In relation to the OASys Report he  was  not  offered  a
    rehabilitation course in prison but he has been actively taking part in
    and working with a probation officer since his release.

6.    In  response,  Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  the  judge  set  out  the
    Regulation, but at paragraph 23 of  the  decision  the  judge  had  not
    properly  dealt  with  the  public  interest  in  the   assessment   of
    proportionality.

The judge's findings

7.   The judge set out the burden of proof at paragraph 12 stating  that  it
    was for the Secretary of State to prove that the person  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. The  judge  set  out  Schedule  1  at
    paragraph 13 and Regulation 27(5) at paragraph 14.  The judge made  the
    following findings at paragraph 20: "Having considered all the evidence
    submitted by the Appellant I  am  satisfied  that  his  deportation  is
    justified to protect the public,  maintain  public  order  and  prevent
    social harm. I acknowledge that the Appellant  was  a  person  of  good
    character until May 2017 when he suddenly and spectacularly  fell  from
    grace. His OASys report at page 14/21 states that he believed  carrying
    the weapons was legal, he carried them as protection against  potential
    attack, he carried the gun so that it could not be found by his nephew,
    the axe was a useful tool as was the knife which he used  at  work.  He
    acknowledged that he might have used them if he had been  attacked  and
    that he was in drink at the time, having started to use  drink  heavily
    after his suspension from work in May 2017 and  had  used  the  gun  to
    attract the attention of a friend after he refused to answer the door."

8.   The  judge  rejected  the  Appellant's  explanation  for  carrying  the
    weapons and concluded that his behaviour was a threat  as  set  out  in
    Schedule 1 to the 2016 Regulations. At paragraphs 23 to  26  the  judge
    stated:

         "23. Having found that his offending behaviour is a threat  to  one
             of the fundamental interests of society under  Schedule  1,  I
             have had regard to the case of ARRANZ and note  that  for  the
             Respondent to succeed in discharging her burden of proof,  she
             must  also  show  that  the   Appellant's   personal   conduct
             represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society and  the
             OASys report would appear to support that opinion because when
             in drink he does present a  medium  risk  to  the  public  and
             former associates, albeit that his actual risk of re-offending
             is calculated as low at 8-12%.


         24.  Regulation 27(5) makes it clear that an individual's  previous
             convictions do not, in themselves,  justify  the  decision.  I
             have looked at the evidence presented by the Respondent and  I
             cannot see what conduct other than  the  Appellant's  previous
             convictions justify this decision. There is no  evidence  from
             the Appellant to show that he has completed any rehabilitation
             courses whilst in  prison  to  address  the  reasons  for  his
             offending behaviour.  But equally there is no evidence  before
             me to say that  such  courses  were  available  to  him,  were
             offered and were refused  by  him.  The  burden  is  upon  the
             Respondent and I am not satisfied that she has shown,  on  the
             balance of probabilities, that there is conduct other than his
             previous convictions which justifies the  decision  to  deport
             him.


         25.  Under Regulation 27(6) the Respondent is obliged to take  into
             account  his  age,  state  of  health,  family  and   economic
             situation, his length of residence in the UK, his  social  and
             cultural integration into the UK and the extent  of  his  inks
             (sic) to his country of origin. The Appellant is 38 years old.
             He has been  here  he  claims  since  2009  but  the  evidence
             certainly shows he has been here since 2010 and until 2015  he
             was in full time  permanent  employment.   He  took  voluntary
             redundancy in 2015 and claims that  having  then  claimed  job
             seekers allowance and undertaken some qualifications at  Leeds
             City college, he was soon back in work where he remained until
             May 2017. He has no previous convictions prior to June 2017. I
             am satisfied that he has established  his  economic  situation
             and has shown that he was integrated into the UK because,  but
             for the missing 4 months between march (sic) and July 2015,  I
             would have been satisfied that he was  entitled  to  permanent
             residence here in the UK.  However, there is  no  evidence  of
             his family here in the UK and nothing to say that he has  lost
             all ties to Latvia.


         26.  In the circumstances, given that there  is  no  conduct  other
             than his previous  convictions  to  justify  the  decision  to
             deport him, I am satisfied that the  decision  to  deport  the
             Appellant  under  Regulation  23(6)(b),  with   reference   to
             Regulation 27(5) and Schedule 1 is not justified  and  not  in
             accordance with the 2016 Regulations."

Discussion and conclusions

9.   On 15 June 2017 the  Appellant  pleaded  guilty  to  possession  of  an
    offensive weapon, possession of a knife/bladed article  and  possession
    of an imitation firearm in a public place. He was arrested  carrying  a
    sack containing an axe, a penknife and a BB gun.  On 31 October 2017 he
    was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment. After that conviction  he
    received a conditional discharge for a public order offence.

10.   The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not  acquired  permanent
    residence and his deportation was justified to protect the public.  The
    Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society.   However,
    although there was a medium risk of harm to the public, there was a low
    risk of reoffending. There was no evidence that  he  had  completed  an
    alcohol awareness course, the offence having been committed  whilst  he
    was drunk.  The judge concluded that the Respondent had failed to  show
    reasons other than the Appellant's previous convictions justifying  his
    deportation and therefore the decision to deport was not in  accordance
    with the 2016 Regulations.

11.  The decision is challenged on the  basis  that  the  judge  focused  on
    Regulation  27(5)(e),  which  states:  "a  person's  previous  criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify the decision", and in doing so
    she failed to consider other relevant information in the OASys  Report,
    namely that the Appellant was of medium risk to the  public.  This  was
    relevant to Regulation 27(5)(f) which states "the decision may be taken
    on preventative grounds even in the  absence  of  a  previous  criminal
    conviction provided that the grounds are specific to the person."

12.  I find that the judge did consider the  OASys  Report  and  the  medium
    risk of harm to the public and she specifically referred to that  issue
    at paragraphs 20 and 23. She did take into account the risk  factor  in
    addition to considering the Appellant's previous convictions  and  this
    factor was relevant to her assessment of proportionality. She also  set
    out Schedule 1 in full and properly applied it at paragraph  23,  where
    she found that the Appellant's behaviour came within Schedule  1,  such
    that it was a threat to one of the fundamental  interests  of  society.
    There was no error of law in the judge's decision as submitted  in  the
    grounds.

13.  Mr Bramble submits that, because  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    medium risk of harm to the public, she failed to attach  proper  weight
    to the public  interest  and  her  assessment  of  proportionality  was
    flawed.

14.  I am satisfied, on reading the decision as  a  whole,  that  the  judge
    properly applied Regulation 27(5) and considered all  factors  relevant
    to sub-paragraphs (a) to (f) therein.  She took into account Schedule 1
    and properly applied it to the facts of the case. Her finding that  the
    Respondent had failed to show that the Appellant's conduct  other  than
    his previous convictions justified the decision to deport him was  open
    to her on the evidence before her.

15.  I find that there was no error of law in the decision of 15  June  2018
    and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date 26 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
