
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00649/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Smith, Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order but make clear that anonymity has not been  granted  in  order  to
protect the respondent's reputation following his convictions  for  criminal
offences. Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
respondent is granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order under section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 following
    a number of convictions for a variety of offences.  The  index  offence
    that led to the deportation  decision  was  a  conviction  for  assault
    occasioning actual bodily harm for which the appellant was sentenced to
    a period of two years detention in a young offenders institution. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kamara allowed the appeal in a  decision  dated  06
    March 2015.

3.    The respondent's grounds of appeal seek to challenge the  decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in her findings relating  to
         the availability of internal relocation  [38].  She  conflated  the
         proper test as outlined in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 with  issues
         associated with  the  appellant's  health.  There  was  no  finding
         relating to the availability of healthcare in rural locations.

    (ii)   Similarly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  her  findings
         relating to the exception to deportation outlined in paragraph 399A
         of  the  immigration  rules.  She  conflated  the  issue   of   the
         appellant's  health  (without  making  findings  relating  to   the
         availability  of  treatment)  with  the  appellant's   ability   to
         integrate [48].

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  apparently  seeking  to
         make a "freestanding" assessment of Article 8 outside the rules [49-
         67]. At the hearing Mr Norton confirmed that he no longer relied on
         the point in the form stated in the  original  grounds  but  argued
         that the error made in relation to the second ground  would  infect
         any findings made in relation to the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         overall proportionality assessment.

4.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
    of law.

5.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration
    history,  his  history  of  criminal  offending  and  the  reasons  for
    deportation [2-6]. She went  on  to  conduct  a  careful  and  detailed
    analysis of the evidence before her and gave clear reasons  to  explain
    what weight she placed on each piece of evidence [14-34]. No  challenge
    has been made to those findings of fact. It appears that there  was  no
    real dispute as to the appellant's history of criminal  convictions  or
    the conclusions drawn by the professional risk  assessments.  She  gave
    clear and cogent reasons for concluding that the appellant  had  failed
    to rebut the presumption that he posed a danger to  the  community  and
    upheld  the  certificate  that  was  made  under  section  72  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002") [30-32].

8.    The appellant had been recognised  as  a  refugee  in  line  with  his
    mother in October 2003 when he was just 11 years old. Because  she  had
    found that the section 72 certificate applied the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge quite rightly concluded that the appellant  could  only  rely  on
    human rights grounds to resist deportation  and  went  on  to  consider
    whether the appellant would still be at real risk of  serious  harm  if
    returned to his country of origin for the purpose of Article 3  of  the
    European Convention of Human  Rights  ("ECHR").  In  assessing  whether
    there was evidence to show that the appellant would continue to  be  at
    risk the First-tier Tribunal Judge took into account the findings  made
    by the Tribunal in his mother's successful asylum appeal  in  September
    2003 [23]. She also explained in some detail why she placed  weight  on
    the expert psychological assessment carried out by  Ms  Kralj  [25-28].
    She also took into account social  services  records  as  part  of  her
    overall assessment of the appellant's difficult  family  situation  and
    past history of abuse.  Those findings are not  challenged,  were  well
    reasoned and  were  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  the
    evidence.

9.    After having conducted a careful review of  the  evidence  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge concluded that she accepted the appellant's account
    of past ill-treatment in his country of origin and  concluded  that  he
    had been targeted as a result of his mother's sexual orientation  [34].
    She also accepted that the evidence showed to the low standard of proof
    that his mother and other members of the family  had  suffered  various
    attacks in the past, both in his country of origin and in the  UK  [34-
    35]. She made clear reference to the background  evidence  relating  to
    the situation for those who are  gay  in  the  appellant's  country  of
    origin, and in light of that evidence, it was open to her  to  conclude
    that the situation had not changed in any  significant  way  since  the
    appellant and his mother were recognised as refugees [33].  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge quite properly considered all relevant  matters  in
    the round, including the appellant's own past  history  of  abuse,  and
    concluded that there continued to be  a  real  risk  of  the  appellant
    suffering serious harm as a result of his mother's  sexual  orientation
    if he were to be removed to his country of origin [36].

10.   Having found that the appellant and his mother had been  subjected  to
    ill-treatment amounting to serious harm  in  the  past  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's findings in paragraph  36  were  consistent  with  the
    approach outlined in paragraph 339K of  the  immigration  rules,  which
    states that the fact that a person has been subjected to persecution or
    serious harm in the past will be regarded as a  serious  indication  of
    the person's real risk of suffering serious harm unless there are  good
    reasons to consider that such serious harm would not be repeated.

11.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
    authorities in the appellant's country of origin were able and  willing
    to provide effective protection. She directed herself to  the  relevant
    country guidance and in light of that guidance it was open  to  her  to
    conclude that no effective protection was likely to be available to the
    appellant in his country of origin [37]. The respondent does  not  seek
    to challenge any of the findings outlined above.

12.   The respondent  focuses  her  challenge  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's subsequent findings relating to  whether  the  appellant  could
    avoid serious harm through internal relocation. Her  findings  on  this
    issue are contained in paragraph 38 of the decision:

         "38.     In terms of the issue of internal  relocation,  I  do  not
         accept that it is reasonable to expect the  appellant  to  seek  to
         reside in another area of Jamaica in order to avoid his own and his
         mother's persecutors. The appellants' only links in Jamaica are  in
         the area of Kingston where he used to  live  with  his  mother  and
         maternal grandparents. Neither  remain  in  Jamaica.  Firstly,  the
         appellant has not lived in Jamaica since 2001, visited the  country
         subsequently or been in contact with any party there. Secondly, the
         appellant  is  deeply  traumatised  and  in   need   of   long-term
         psychological treatment (he  is  also  described  by  Ms  Kralj  as
         institutionalised) and thirdly, most employment  opportunities  are
         likely to be available in the capital. Therefore, in order to avoid
         persecution, the appellant would be faced with moving  to  a  rural
         location in order to avoid the general population, where  he  would
         be unsupported, homeless, destitute,  unemployed  and  in  need  of
         psychological treatment."

13.    Mr  Norton  argued  that  these  findings  were  either   flawed   or
    inadequate. The fact that the appellant had not been to his country  of
    origin since 2001 was irrelevant to whether it would be  reasonable  to
    relocate to a  rural  area.  There  were  no  findings  as  to  whether
    healthcare would be available in the area of relocation. He  said  that
    the reasoning was inadequate to show that  internal  relocation  "gives
    rise to an Article 3 breach". He said that the test set out  in  Januzi
    is a stringent test and the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider the relevant issues properly.

14.   I find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  discloses  no
    material error of law. She referred herself to the correct test set out
    in Januzi i.e. whether there was a safe area, and if there was, whether
    it was reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to  another  area
    of a small island in order to avoid serious harm. It is clear from  her
    findings that she considered whether  it  would  be  possible  for  the
    appellant to relocate to a rural  location  in  particular  because  it
    would be necessary "in order to  avoid  the  general  population".  Her
    findings in  paragraph  38  cannot  be  considered  in  isolation.  The
    background evidence, which she  had  already  considered,  showed  that
    there is widespread discrimination and violence against LGBT people and
    she had accepted that this extended to family members in this case.  As
    such it was reasonable for her to infer that the only possible area  of
    safety might be a rural area. That conclusion was open to  her  on  the
    evidence.

15.    Paragraph  339O  of  the   immigration   rules   makes   clear   that
    consideration of the availability of internal relocation is the same in
    an asylum claim as well as  in  a  claim  for  humanitarian  protection
    (which includes a claim to be at risk of serious harm for  the  purpose
    of Article 3 of  the  ECHR).  In  examining  whether  a  person  should
    reasonably be expected to stay in another part of the country of origin
    the respondent will  have  regard  to  (i)  the  general  circumstances
    prevailing in that part  of  the  country  and  (ii)  to  the  personal
    circumstances of the person. This approach is entirely consistent  with
    the  test  outlined  in  Article  8  of  the  Qualification   Directive
    (2004/83/EC) and the authorities, UNHCR guidance  and  academic  papers
    considered by the House of Lords in Januzi [20].

16.   Mr Norton is correct in saying that each of the  factors  outlined  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in paragraph 38 would not,  taken  alone,
    be  sufficient  to  conclude  that   internal   relocation   would   be
    unreasonable. However, it is clear  from  an  overall  reading  of  the
    decision, which informs the findings at paragraph 38, that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge applied the correct test of  "reasonableness",  had
    considered the general  circumstances  prevailing  in  the  country  of
    origin and had also considered the appellant's personal  circumstances.
    It was not necessary for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  also  to  make
    findings relating to the  availability  of  medical  treatment  in  the
    possible area of relocation. In arguing this the  respondent  conflates
    the test that should be applied in an Article 3 case brought solely  on
    medical  grounds  with  the  more  holistic  assessment  required  when
    assessing whether it would be reasonable, in  the  circumstances  of  a
    particular  appellant,  for  them  to  seek  safety  through   internal
    relocation.

17.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the  appellant's  past  history
    of abuse and serious harm, and had given weight  to  the  psychological
    assessment  of  Ms  Kralj,  which  indicated  that   he   was   "deeply
    traumatised". It was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  make  a
    cumulative assessment of a number of factors that, taken  as  a  whole,
    rendered internal relocation unreasonable. The fact that the  appellant
    had not lived in his country of origin since he was 10 years  old,  had
    no remaining links to the country, was vulnerable as a result  of  past
    persecution, and that it was reasonable to infer  that  he  could  only
    avoid  persecution  by  going  to  a  rural   area   where   employment
    opportunities would  negligible  compared  to  urban  areas,  were  all
    matters that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to  take  into
    account. For these reasons I conclude that is  not  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings relating  to  internal  relocation
    were flawed for lack of reasoning or disclose any  material  errors  of
    law.

18.   Having found that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  findings  relating
    to risk on return under Article 3 do not disclose any errors of  law  I
    find that, even if her findings relating  to  the  appellant's  private
    life under Article 8 could be criticised, any  potential  errors  would
    not be material to the  overall  outcome  of  the  appeal  because  the
    appellant succeeds on Article 3 grounds.  In  any  event,  the  grounds
    relied on a similar point relating  to  the  assessment  of  healthcare
    facilities, but for the same reasons given above, it was open  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider the appellant's circumstances  as
    a whole before concluding that there were very significant obstacles to
    reintegration.

19.   The appellant's appeal against deportation has been allowed  on  human
    rights grounds but it is clear why  a  deportation  decision  was  made
    given his history of persistent criminal offending and the current risk
    assessments. The evidence shows that  the  appellant  has  had  a  very
    difficult,  violent  and  traumatic  childhood.   Although   his   past
    experiences  of  extreme  violence  may  have  informed  some  of   his
    aggressive and violent offending behaviour it provides  no  excuse  for
    the offences that he committed. Ms Kralj's report states that he  would
    benefit from treatment for his significant  and  enduring  symptoms  of
    Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder as well as other forms  of  support  and
    assistance. The appellant would be wise to seek professional advice and
    assistance as soon as possible in order to help him try to overcome his
    past experiences and reform his behaviour. If he does not take steps to
    tread a different path it will be open for the respondent to review the
    position if he were to be convicted of  further  criminal  offences  in
    future, especially if they were of a serious nature.

20.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of  law  and  that  the  decision
    shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

The respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed       [pic]     Date 21 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
