
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00258/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 February, 14 June and 21 December   |On 22 December 2016               |
|2016                                      |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Ed Adjei Chief Boateng
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Bassiri-Dezfouli, Counsel instructed by A2
Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to remove  him  to  the  Netherlands.  As  a  citizen  of  the
    Netherlands, the claimant has the benefit of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) and  Regulations  19(3)(b)
    and 21(3) apply to his removal.

 2. The matters relied upon in the refusal letter  are  that  the  claimant
    committed  the  offence  in  question;  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    disagrees with the NOMS assessment that  he  presents  a  low  risk  of
    reconviction; that the claimant has denied some aspects of the  offence
    during his trial (although  he  pleaded  guilty  and  appealed  neither
    conviction nor sentence); that (in effect) his remorse is not  genuine;
    and that she considers that the claimant has not successfully addressed
    the issues  which  caused  him  to  offend.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the claimant had a propensity to  re-offend,  but  that
    appears to have been based on his cannabis use, which has  ceased,  and
    his having committed the offence in the first place.

 3. The extent to which the prospects of  rehabilitation  are  relevant  to
    this appeal are governed by the Upper Tribunal's guidance in  MC  (Essa
    principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC) (MC 'Essa Recast') which draws
    a distinction between EEA criminals  who  have  a  permanent  right  of
    residence and those who have only the basic Regulation  21  protection.
    It is now accepted on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    claimant has a permanent right of residence  and  is  entitled  to  the
    medium level of protection, that is to say, that she  must  demonstrate
    'serious grounds of public policy or public security'  before  removing
    him to the Netherlands.

 4. When adjourning the hearing on 14 June 2016, I  gave  directions  which
    led to that acceptance.  I further directed  the  parties  to  agree  a
    schedule of facts not  in  dispute,  indicating  those  which  remained
    contentious, and to serve that Schedule on the Upper Tribunal, together
    with written submissions, including whether a further oral  hearing  is
    required, and dealing (as appropriate) with the Essa (recast)  factors.
    The directions concluded:

         "The Upper Tribunal, on receipt of the written submissions directed
         at (d) above, and the Secretary of State's statement at (c)  above,
         if relevant, will decide how the appeal should proceed.  The  Upper
         Tribunal may decide to determine the appeal without a further  oral
         hearing, or to re-list it for evidence and/or submissions on a date
         to be fixed."

 5. The submissions directed were received by 12 August 2016,  although  in
    the case of the claimant's submissions, they were  not  linked  to  the
    file until today.  No statement of facts has been served  as  directed.
    The Secretary of State's submissions assume,  but  do  not  justify,  a
    further hearing.  Neither party's submissions engaged  in  detail  with
    the principles in MC (Essa recast).

 6. The Secretary of State in her submissions  acknowledged  that  she  had
    received  the  documents  ordered  and  that  she  accepted  that   the
    claimant's mother was exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom
    from 2008-2013 and accordingly, that the claimant had acquired a  right
    of permanent residence here before his conviction and  imprisonment  in
    2014.  She accepted that she would have to  show  'serious  grounds  of
    public policy' for  his  deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Secretary of State relied  on  her  refusal  letter,  noting  that  the
    claimant had been convicted of a violent robbery and asserting that  he
    still posed a threat to society.

 7. The claimant's representatives made written submissions, copied to  the
    Secretary of State.  They argued that the claimant had been very  young
    when the offence happened, and had been treated,  for  the  purpose  of
    sentencing, as a person  of  good  character.   His  actions  had  been
    completely out of character and he had pleaded guilty.   The  appellant
    had dealt with his cannabis use,  and  had  a  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom, with whom his relationship was serious.   He  lived  with  his
    mother and sister, and was close to both. His emotional  and  financial
    needs were met by his mother and sister, and he hoped to  continue  his
    education in the United Kingdom.

 8. The claimant's solicitors submitted that it was unlikely that he  would
    reoffend.  He had learned his lesson, and had  grown  up.   He  was  no
    longer a  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  one  of  the
    fundamental  interests  of  society  (LG  and  CC   (EEA   Regulations:
    residence: imprisonment: removal) Italy [2009]  UKIAT  00024  at  [103]
    cited). They argued that the Secretary of State's  refusal  letter  did
    not engage with the test at  Regulation  21(5)(6)  and  her  submission
    added nothing to the refusal letter relied upon.

 9. The claimant did not seek a further oral hearing,  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli
    inviting me to 'allow the appeal' based on the facts of this case,  the
    relevant law, and her written submissions. I assume, since this is  the
    Secretary of State's appeal, that  Ms  Bassiri-Dezfouli  wishes  me  to
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and remake the decision in  the
    claimant's favour.

Discussion

10. I do not consider that a further hearing is necessary.  The  facts  are
    not in dispute and the law can now be applied to them.  The  facts  are
    that the claimant, a citizen of the Netherlands, has been in the United
    Kingdom since he was 12 years old and is now 22 years old.  He has  had
    all of his adult and teenage years  and  all  his  secondary  schooling
    here.  The claimant began a football career, which was  interrupted  by
    his conduct and his imprisonment.  His  mother  is  in  employment  and
    rents a house for herself, the claimant and his sister.   The  claimant
    has a  partner,  whom  he  met  in  2011  and  with  whom  he  began  a
    relationship in 2014.  She visited him regularly  in  prison,  twice  a
    month.

11. The claimant has come to the adverse attention of  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities on 3 occasions, but has only one conviction.  In 2011, when
    he was 17 years old, he received a caution  for  false  representations
    and fraud, pursuant to section 1(2)(a) and 2 of the Fraud Act 2006;  in
    2012, he was cautioned again for the opportunistic theft of a  bicycle,
    which he found, he says, abandoned at the rubbish bins and rode away.

12. In 2013, when with two friends, he went out and one of them used a home-
    made baton to attack someone and try to  steal  his  mobile  telephone,
    causing actual bodily harm.   The claimant was then 19 years  old,  and
    the victim was intoxicated and  vulnerable.   The  victim  subsequently
    felt insecure going out at night. The Judge found the claimant to be  a
    man of 'virtually impeccable character' and sentenced him to  2  years'
    detention in a Young Offender Institution.  NOMS considered him to pose
    a low risk of re-offending, but a medium risk of harm, on his  release,
    if he continued to use cannabis.  He was subjected to the minimum level
    of Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements (MAPPA).

13. The claimant did not appeal either the conviction or the  sentence  and
    served his sentence without incident.  In prison, he  took  courses  in
    Peer Mentoring and Employability.  He did not take a  Victim  Awareness
    course or an Enhanced Thinking  Skills  course,  which  may  have  been
    available to him.  He  expresses  remorse  in  relation  to  the  index
    offence. The claimant could not work after his release, but his mother,
    sister and partner gave him money.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal, applying the 'serious
    grounds' basis which, it is now established, is the  correct  approach,
    and  found  the  claimant  to  be  genuinely  remorseful.   The   Judge
    considered that the claimant's removal was disproportionate,  and  that
    he had a better chance of continuing his rehabilitation with  the  help
    of his mother, his sister, and  his  partner  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    rather than in the Netherlands, where he knew no one.

Regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations

15. The claimant is entitled to the medium level of protection afforded  by
    Regulation 21(3):

         "21.-(1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health. ...

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security."

16. Regulations 21(5) and 21(6) set out the considerations to be taken into
    account when considering whether to remove  an  EEA  citizen  from  the
    United Kingdom:

         "21. ...(5) Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

          a)   the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;
          b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;
          c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society;
          d) matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or  which
             relate to considerations of general prevention do not  justify
             the decision;
          e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in  themselves
             justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."

MC (Essa principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC)

17. In MC (Essa recast) the Upper Tribunal identified the correct  approach
    thus:

          "1.   Essa rehabilitation principles  are  specific  to  decisions
         taken on public policy, public security and public  health  grounds
         under regulation 21 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

         2.    It is only if the personal conduct of the person concerned is
         found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society
         (regulation 21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider  whether
         the  decision  is  proportionate  taking  into  account   all   the
         considerations identified in regulation 21(5)-(6).
         3.   There is no specific reference in the expulsion provisions  of
         either  Directive  2004/38/EC  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations   to
         rehabilitation, but it has been seen by the Court of Justice as  an
         aspect of integration, which is one of the factors referred  to  in
         Article 28(1) and regulation 21(6) (Essa (2013) at [23]).
         4.   Rehabilitation is not an issue to be addressed  in  every  EEA
         deportation or removal decision taken under regulation 21; it  will
         not be relevant, for example, if rehabilitation  has  already  been
         completed (Essa (2013) at [32]-[33]).
         5.   Reference to prospects of rehabilitation  concerns  reasonable
         prospects of a person ceasing  to  commit  crime  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [35]), not the mere possibility of rehabilitation. Mere  capability
         of rehabilitation is not to be equated with reasonable prospect  of
         rehabilitation.
         6.    Where relevant (see (4) above) such prospects are a factor to
         be taken into account in the proportionality assessment required by
         regulation 21(5) and (6) ((Dumliauskas [41]).
         7.       Such prospects are to be taken into account  even  if  not
         raised by the offender (Dumliauskas [52]).
         8.       Gauging such prospects  requires  assessing  the  relative
         prospects of rehabilitation in the host Member  State  as  compared
         with those in the Member State of origin, but, in  the  absence  of
         evidence, it is not to be assumed  that  prospects  are  materially
         different in that other Member State (Dumliauskas  [46],  [52]-[53]
         and [59]).
         9.   Matters that are relevant when examining the prospects of  the
         rehabilitation   of   offenders    include    family    ties    and
         responsibilities, accommodation, education,  training,  employment,
         active membership of a community  and  the  like  (Essa  (2013)  at
         [34]). However, lack of access to a Probation Officer or equivalent
         in  the  other  Member  State  should  not,  in  general,  preclude
         deportation (Dumliauskas [55])
         10.  In the  absence  of  integration  and  a  right  of  permanent
         residence, the future prospects of integration cannot be a  weighty
         factor (Dumliauskas [44] and [54]). Even when such  prospects  have
         significant weight they are not a trump card, as what the Directive
         and the 2006 EEA Regulations require  is  a  wide-ranging  holistic
         assessment. Both recognise  that  the  more  serious  the  risk  of
         reoffending, and the offences that a person may commit, the greater
         the right to interfere with the right of residence (Dumliauskas  at
         [46] and [54])."

18. That is the basis on which I proceed to examine this appeal and  remake
    the decision.

Discussion

19. The claimant has  a  permanent  right  of  residence  and  accordingly,
    rehabilitation is a factor  which  must  be  considered  in  his  case.
    Although he is a citizen of the Netherlands, he has lived in the United
    Kingdom since he was 12.  He is now 22  years  old.   He  committed  an
    offence in 2013, when he was 19 years old, pleaded guilty and  went  to
    prison without challenging either the conviction or the sentence.

20. I accept that the claimant's offending conduct in 2013 was serious, but
    the sentencing  Judge  accepted  that  it  was  out  of  character  and
    inexplicable, and nothing of the kind has occurred  again.  I  bear  in
    mind the following positive  observations  in  the  sentencing  Judge's
    remarks in 2013:

         "It  is  noteworthy  that  you  are  regarded  as  a  low  risk  of
         reoffending and a medium risk of  serious  harm  through  violence.
         For these reasons, I have determined that this is not a case  which
         needs to engage the dangerousness criteria, so that  issue  is  now
         put to one side. ... This was a very mean and nasty offence: coming
         from the background that I have read that  you  come  from...it  is
         probably a mystery to all, including perhaps to yourself, how it is
         that you became involved in  such  a  serious  offence,  against  a
         background of what appears to be a virtually impeccable  character.
         I do know that you have two cautions, you have no  convictions.   I
         treat you for the purposes of this sentencing exercise as a man  of
         good character.  You come from a secure and loving family and  this
         action, or these actions, are completely out of character. ..."

21. In prison, the claimant stayed out of trouble.  He  took  employability
    and peer mentoring courses.  The Secretary of State's criticism of  the
    claimant for not taking other courses which might have  been  available
    to him seems to me to be neutral to the outcome of the appeal,  on  the
    facts.

22. Although he has stayed out of trouble since coming out of  prison,  the
    evidence before me is not that  his  rehabilitation  is  complete,  but
    rather, that there is no cause for concern and has not been for several
    years now.

23. The claimant's personal conduct since he left prison bears out the NOMS
    assessment that he presents a low risk of  reconviction.   He  has  not
    been in trouble.  Nothing has brought  him  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  Despite being unable to work or study, and having to rely
    financially and emotionally on the  women  in  his  life  (his  mother,
    sister and partner), it is not suggested that he has returned either to
    crime or to cannabis use.

24. The Secretary of  State  has  not  satisfied  me,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the claimant's personal conduct  now  represents  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society,  and  the  issue  of  proportionality
    under  Regulation  21(5)  and  21(6)  is  therefore  not  engaged.  The
    Secretary of State's decision was taken while the claimant was still in
    prison, and is not based on the claimant's present personal conduct: it
    is based on his  conviction,  on  the  basis  that  when  released  the
    claimant would return to crime and cannabis.  Neither has occurred.

25. As regards Regulation 21(6), I find that the claimant is  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the United Kingdom, where he has spent  more
    than half his life, and all his adult life, living  with  close  family
    members, and where he had all his secondary schooling.  His links  with
    his country of origin, the Netherlands, go back to when he was a  child
    of 12 with a violent father. His principal parent has been his  mother,
    since she fled the Netherlands to escape his father.  He is, of course,
    still a young man and there are no known health problems,  but  all  of
    his family (mother, sister and partner) are in the United Kingdom.

26. I do not find, having regard to the test of serious grounds  of  public
    policy, that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden upon  her
    under of showing that there is any present risk, still less one at  the
    level required by Regulation 21(5)(c).  I find that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is caught by Regulation 21(5)(e), in that the previous
    conviction, which is all that stands against the  claimant,  cannot  of
    itself justify deportation.

27. Accordingly, the deportation of the  claimant  to  the  Netherlands  is
    unlawful and the Secretary of  State's  appeal  fails.   I  remake  the
    decision in favour of the claimant.

DECISION

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside for error of
    law.  I remake the decision by allowing the claimant's appeal.



Date:         21 December  2016                    Signed:   Judith  A  J  C
Gleeson
                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
