
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
DA/00188/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 March 2016                         |   On 22 April 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                    yoran nataniel barbosa palma pimentel
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals  against  the
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  A  Cox  who,  in  a
       decision promulgated on 09 November 2015, allowed the appeal  of  Mr
       Yoran  Pimentel  against  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
       Department's decision of 24 April 2015 to make a  deportation  order
       against him under regulation 19(3)(b) of the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations). For the sake
       of convenience I will refer to the parties as they were  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.


Background

    2. The Appellant is a national of Portugal  born  in  Angola,  date  of
       birth 25 December 1995. He was 19 years old and 10 month old at  the
       date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The Appellant maintained
       that he first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  with  his  mother  in
       September 2008. The Respondent maintains that there is  no  evidence
       to substantiate this claim.


    3. The Appellant first came to the  attention  of  the  United  Kingdom
       authorities on 08 June 2011 when he was reprimanded  for  destroying
       or damaging property. Between 30 January 2013 and 10 June  2014  the
       Appellant received 5 convictions for 11 offences. These included one
       offence against property, 6 theft  and  kindred  offences,  3  drugs
       offences and one firearm/shotguns/offensive weapon  offence.  On  24
       April 2014 he was convicted on a plea of guilty on the day of  trial
       to five counts  of  robbery  and  received  a  total  of  32  months
       detention. He was aged 18 at the date of  his  conviction.  These  5
       counts related to a series of robberies that occurred  on  a  single
       day in a park on 21 July 2013. On this date the Appellant  was  aged
       17 years and 5 months.  The Appellant was part of a group  of  young
       men who robbed victims in the  park.  According  to  the  sentencing
       judge's remarks the Appellant was the ring-leader in  the  robberies
       and was described as angry and aggressive. He showed a knife  handle
       to victims when they refused to hand  over  their  phones,  and  the
       evidence indicated that it was he who took most of the  phones.  The
       sentencing judge noted that the  Appellant  had  a  lack  of  family
       support and help. The offences committed in the park occurred  while
       the Appellant was on bail for another robbery offence.


    4. An OASys report concluded that the Appellant posed a medium risk  of
       harm to the public. The report noted that such risk was likely to be
       greatest when the Appellant needed money, was without family support
       and was with peers who would also commit  offences.  The  Respondent
       noted the absence of any evidence from the Appellant as  to  how  he
       would  be  financially  supported  upon  his  release.  The   report
       additionally concluded that the Appellant was at high  risk  of  re-
       offending. The OASys report noted that there had been an  escalation
       on the Appellant's offending. The report stated that  the  Appellant
       had shown,  by  his  actions,  that  there  was  a  deficit  in  his
       consequential thinking which lead him to make poor  decisions  about
       how to solve his issues.

    5. In light of the Appellant's offending,  and  having  regard  to  the
       contents of the OASys report,  the  Respondent  decided  to  make  a
       deportation order against him. The  Respondent  believed  there  was
       insufficient evidence that the Appellant  had  adequately  addressed
       all the reasons for  his  offending.  The  Respondent  believed  the
       Appellant had a propensity to reoffend and that he posed a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the   public.   The
       Respondent was not satisfied the Appellant had obtained a  permanent
       right of residence as there was no evidence he arrived in the United
       Kingdom in September 2008,  or  that  he  or  his  mother  had  been
       exercising free EEA free movement rights for a 5  year  period.  The
       Respondent noted that the time the Appellant spent in detention  did
       not count towards his lawful residence.  The  Respondent  considered
       that the Appellant's deportation was justified on grounds of  public
       policy according to the principles set out in  regulation  21(5)  of
       the 2006 regulations.


    6. The Respondent  maintained  that  her  decision  complied  with  the
       principle of proportionality  and  that  she  took  account  of  the
       Appellant's age, state of health,  family  and  economic  situation,
       length of residence in the United Kingdom, the extent of  his  links
       with Portugal and the degree  of  his  integration.  The  Respondent
       specifically noted a letter from the Appellant dated 14 October 2014
       in which he claimed that he had no regular contact with  his  mother
       and that he had moved out of her home after  disagreements.  In  the
       same  letter  the   Appellant   indicated   that,   prior   to   his
       incarceration, he had lived in his own flat. He mentioned  having  a
       girlfriend but there was no indication  they  were  cohabiting.  The
       Respondent was satisfied the Appellant had spent his formative years
       in Portugal, would be familiar with its culture and customs, and may
       have family or friends there who could  assist  his  re-integration.
       The Respondent did not consider that the Appellant's deportation  to
       Portugal  would  prejudice  his  prospects  of  rehabilitation.  The
       Respondent noted that, although the Appellant  had  undertaken  some
       courses in prison, there was no evidence that any  external  courses
       or networks had been arranged to continue the  Appellant's  path  to
       rehabilitation.


    7.  The Respondent then considered whether the decision to  deport  the
       Appellant breached his Article 8 ECHR rights, having regard  to  the
       immigration rules relating to deportation (paragraphs A398  to  399D
       and A362) and sections 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2002. The Respondent noted that  the  Appellant  had  his
       mother and brother in the United  Kingdom,  but  additionally  noted
       that the Appellant had no  regular  contact  with  his  mother.  The
       Respondent stated that the Appellant provided no evidence in support
       of his article 8 claim and noted that the Appellant made no claim to
       have a partner or children. It was not accepted that  the  Appellant
       had resided in the United Kingdom lawfully for most of his  life  or
       that he was socially and culturally integrated given the absence  of
       evidence of his ties to the community  and  the  fact  that  he  was
       serving a prison sentence  which  excluded  him  from  society.  The
       Respondent stated that the Appellant's deportation was conducive  to
       the public good in light of the length  of  his  sentence  and  that
       there were no very compelling circumstances capable of resisting his
       deportation on human rights grounds.


    8. At the time of her decision the  Respondent  additionally  certified
       the  Appellant's  case  under  regulation  24AA.  Pursuant  to  this
       regulation the Appellant was removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  to
       Portugal on 10 June 2015. On 15 May  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       sent to the Appellant at his place of  detention  a  'Non-Suspensive
       Overseas Address Direction' requiring the Appellant to  provide  the
       First-tier Tribunal with his new  address  within  28  days  of  his
       removal from the United Kingdom. The Direction indicated that  if  a
       new address was not provided the Appellant's appeal may  be  decided
       on the papers before the Tribunal. There was no  compliance  by  the
       Appellant with the Direction and the First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded
       with the appeal on the basis of the documents before it and  without
       the Appellant being represented.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    9.  In his grounds of appeal the Appellant reiterated that he had lived
       in the United Kingdom since 2008 and that he was 17 years  old  when
       charged with the offences in respect  of  which  he  was  eventually
       convicted on 24 April 2014. He claimed he had a greater  opportunity
       to 'become better' in the United Kingdom as he had no one to  return
       to or communicate with in Portugal. He claimed  his  mother  was  in
       hospital and he had to look after  her  and  his  two  brothers.  He
       referred to courses he had undertaken and referred to probation  and
       social care reports he sent to the Respondent.


   10. There was no appearance by anyone representing the Appellant at  the
       appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. In his  decision  the
       judge accepted, with reference to the Appellant's manuscript  of  14
       October 2014, that he had  an  unsettled  and  troubling  childhood.
       Reference was made to the Appellant's  mother  who  entered  into  a
       number of abusive relationships, and the many moves the  family  had
       made. The judge noted that information contained in the OASys report
       did provide some support for  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was
       genuinely intent on rehabilitating himself and  that  he  wanted  an
       opportunity to find employment and become a  citizen  respectful  of
       the law.


   11. At paragraph 10 the judge, applying  the  balance  of  probabilities
       standard,  agreed  with  the  Respondent's  conclusions   that   the
       Appellant's personal conduct, judged from his history of  persistent
       offending at an increasing level of seriousness,  coupled  with  the
       OAYys report assessment of a medium risk of harm to the public and a
       high risk of re-offending, showed that  he  represented  a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
       fundamental interests of society.


   12. In paragraph 11 the Judge set out  the  requirements  of  regulation
       21(4) of the 2006 regulations. This provides:


       (4) A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
       grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
       (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
       least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or
       (b)is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is necessary
       in his best interests, as provided for in the Convention on the
       Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of the United
       Nations on 20th November 1989
   13. It is the judge's reasoning in  respect  of  the  above  regulation,
       contained at paragraph 12 of his decision that forms  the  basis  of
       the Secretary of State's appeal. The  judge  acknowledged  that  the
       Appellant was not under the age of 18 at the date  of  the  hearing,
       nor was he when he was convicted of the 5 counts of robbery or  when
       the decision was made to deport him. The Appellant was however  aged
       17 years and 5 months when the offences were  committed.  The  judge
       stated that regulation 21(4)(b) "... clearly reflects  the  European
       jurisprudence in such cases as Uner v The Netherlands and  Maslov  v
       Austria". The judge continued,


         The point  here,  however,  as  I  see  it,  is  that  all  of  the
         Appellant's offending including the index offences  were  committed
         as a minor. ... The clear inference  from  Regulation  21(4)(b)  is
         that juvenile offenders are not to be deported  save  in  the  most
         extreme circumstances. I cannot see that the circumstances that the
         Appellant's conviction and sentence and the Respondent's consequent
         decision occurred after his 18th  birthday  could  justifiably  and
         proportionately undermine that basic principle. When I add to  that
         the consideration that the  Appellant  would  have  a  prospect  of
         assistance with his rehabilitation  in  this  country  but  in  all
         probability none in Portugal, I am  driven  to  conclude  that  the
         Respondent's  decision  does  not  comply  with  the  principle  of
         proportionality and that accordingly the Appellant's appeal must be
         allowed under the regulations.


   14.  The  judge  consequently  allowed  the  appeal   under   the   2006
       Regulations.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   15. The Secretary of State takes issue  with  the  judge's  reliance  on
       regulation 21(4) in his proportionality assessment.  The  Respondent
       contends that the imperative grounds needed  to  be  established  in
       order to remove an individual under regulation 21(4) only relates to
       an individual who  is  under  the  age  of  18  when  the  'relevant
       decision', that being an EEA deportation decision, is taken. As  the
       Appellant was over the age of 18  when  the  relevant  decision  was
       taken  regulation  21(4)  cannot  apply.  The  First-tier   Tribunal
       therefore  materially  erred  in  finding  that  the  decision   was
       disproportionate by reference to that regulation and had  unlawfully
       adopted the 'imperative' threshold.


   16. The grounds further contend that the judge's reliance  on  Uner  and
       Maslov were misguided as these decisions concerned the degree of  an
       individual's integration in a state  in  respect  of  Article  8  in
       circumstances where that individual arrived in the state at a  young
       age and not the age at which offences were committed. While the  age
       at which an individual committed an  offence  would  be  potentially
       relevant under regulations 21(4)(a) and 21(6), they had no relevance
       under regulation 21(4)(b). Moreover, given  that  an  assessment  of
       proportionality was required under regulation 21(6),  there  was  no
       logical or lawful basis to have a further or  additional  assessment
       of proportionality under regulation 21(4)(b).


   17. The grounds finally contend that the judge  placed  disproportionate
       weight on the issue of rehabilitation  in  circumstances  where  the
       Appellant only had available to him the lowest level  of  protection
       under the 2006 regulations, and that the judge was not  entitled  to
       find that the Appellant's prospects of  rehabilitation  in  Portugal
       would  be  markedly  worse  than  in  the  United  Kingdom,   having
       particular regard to the decision in Secretary of State for the Home
       Department v Dumliauskas & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 145.


The error of law hearing

   18. There was no attendance by anyone on the Appellant's behalf  at  the
       hearing.  This  is  not  surprising  given  that   there   were   no
       representatives instructed by the Appellant,  and  that  he  had  no
       identified sponsor, and that he failed to provide a  postal  address
       to the First-tier Tribunal. It  is  likely  that  the  Appellant  is
       wholly unaware of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  allowing  his
       appeal or the Upper Tribunal hearing.


   19. Ms Isherwood reiterated the grounds, pointing out that the  relevant
       decision was taken when the Appellant was over the  age  of  18  and
       regulation  21(4)(b),  on  its  plain  and  clear  wording,  had  no
       relevance.  Ms  Isherwood  then  made  further   submissions   under
       regulation 21 generally, having regard to the  absence  of  evidence
       provided by the Appellant in respect of the life he  established  in
       the United  Kingdom  or  the  extent  of  his  social  and  cultural
       integration.  It  was  submitted  that  the  Appellant   failed   to
       demonstrate that he had acquired a permanent right of residence. Any
       proportionality assessment fell in favour of the Respondent.  I  was
       referred to paragraph 53 of Dumliauskas which suggested  there  were
       rehabilitative options in Portugal.

Discussion

   20. This appeal raises an issue  as  to  the  proper  interpretation  of
       regulation 21(4)(b) of the 2006 regulations. The judge  was  of  the
       view that "the clear inference  from  Regulation  21(4)(b)  is  that
       juvenile offenders are not to be deported save in the  most  extreme
       circumstances." Accordingly, as the Appellant was under the  age  of
       18 when all his offences  were  committed,  the  Respondent  had  to
       establish the existence of imperative grounds in  order  to  justify
       the Appellant's deportation.


   21.  The  starting  point  in  assessing  the  meaning  and  purpose  of
       regulation 21(4)(b) is to examine the actual language  used  in  its
       construction. A 'relevant decision' is an EEA decision, such  as  an
       expulsion decision,  taken  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
       security or public health. Such a decision  can  only  be  taken  on
       imperative grounds if an EEA national  has  resided  in  the  United
       Kingdom for a continuous period of at least 10 years  prior  to  the
       relevant decision (reg 21(4)(a)), or the EEA national 'is' under the
       age of 18 (reg 21(4)(b)). The age of the EEA is directly  linked  to
       the making of relevant decision. The use  of  the  singular  present
       tense to describe the age of the EEA national vis-�-vis the relevant
       decision strongly suggests that regulation 21(4) only  applies  when
       the EEA national is under the age of 18 when the actual EEA decision
       is taken.


   22. I have additionally considered Article 28(3) of Directive 2004/38/EC
       which reads:

       An expulsion decision may not be taken against Union citizens,
       except if the decision is based on imperative grounds of public
       security, as defined by Member States, if they:


       a) have resided in the host Member State for the previous ten years;
          or


       (b) are a minor, except if the expulsion is necessary for the best
       interests of the child, as provided for in the United Nations
       Convention on the Rights of the Child of 20 November 1989.

   23. The Directive, echoing the Regulation, directly links  the  decision
       to expel an EEA national with his  or  her  age  using  the  present
       tense. The consistent use of the present tense in  both  legislative
       provisions  compellingly  suggests  that  the  need  to  demonstrate
       imperative grounds of public security only comes into play where the
       decision is made when the EEA national is a minor.

   24. The judge sought to interpret regulation  21(4)  in  a  teleological
       manner, in light of the  ECrtHR  decisions  in  Uner  v  Netherlands
       [2006] 3 FCR 229 and Maslov  v  Austria  [2008]  EHRR  546  and  the
       emphasis they placed on age. Such an approach to the construction of
       the regulation cannot however undermine its otherwise clear wording.
       In  any  event,  the  factors   relevant   to   an   assessment   of
       proportionality identified in these authorities find  expression  in
       regulations  21(5)  and  21(6).  Given  the  overall  structure   of
       regulation 21, subparagraphs 3 and 4 act as gateway requirements for
       EEA decisions that are taken on public policy and security  grounds,
       as well as public health grounds.


   25. I also accept the criticism in the grounds that the judge failed  to
       actually identify the particular principles established by those two
       authorities that were said to be reflected in  regulation  21(4)(b).
       At paragraph 75 of Maslov the ECrtHR stated, "In  short,  the  Court
       considers that for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent  all  or
       the major part of his or her childhood and youth in the host country
       very serious reasons are required to justify expulsion. This is  all
       the more so  where  the  person  concerned  committed  the  offences
       underlying the expulsion measure as a  juvenile."  Whilst  the  fact
       that a person committed all his offences as a minor was relevant  to
       the ECrtHR in Maslov, it is apparent that the principle  concern  of
       the ECrtHR was the fact that the migrant had spent all  or  a  major
       part of their childhood or  youth  in  the  host  state.  Regulation
       21(4)(b) however makes no reference to the length  of  residence  of
       the EEA national. I additionally note, on the  particular  facts  of
       the instant appeal, that there was no satisfactory evidence that the
       Appellant had lawfully lived all or most of his youth in the  United
       Kingdom, even taking his claim to have arrived in the United Kingdom
       in 2008 at its highest. In any event Akpinar, R (on the  application
       of) v The Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  [2014]
       EWCA  Civ  937  confirms  that  the  EcrtHR  was  not  intending  to
       establishing a new rule of law creating a consistent  and  objective
       hurdle to be surmounted by the  State  in  all  cases  to  which  it
       applies.


   26. I find  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  fall  into  legal  error  by
       requiring the Respondent to demonstrate that imperative  grounds  of
       public security were required in order to deport the Appellant. I am
       satisfied that such error was material to the First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision.


   27. In the absence of any further contact from the Appellant or evidence
       provided by him it is appropriate to remake the decision.  I  do  so
       having regard to the evidence before me, including the OASys report,
       the Appellant's grounds of appeal  and  his  manuscript  letter.  In
       remaking the decision I adopt the approach identified by  the  Upper
       Tribunal in Badewa (ss 117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 00329
       (IAC)


   28. Given the absence of any firm evidence  as  to  when  the  Appellant
       first entered the United Kingdom and whether he or his  mother  were
       ever qualified persons, or the family members of a qualified person,
       there is no basis upon which I can conclude that the  Appellant  has
       acquired a right of permanent  residence  under  the  provisions  of
       regulation 15 of the 2006 regulations.


   29. No criticism has been made of the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusion,
       reached at paragraph 10, that the Appellant represented  a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
       fundamental interests of society. I find, in any event, that he does
       constitute such a threat having regard to the details of  the  OASys
       report as described above, his history of persistent criminality  of
       increasing  seriousness,  and  in  light  of  the  absence  of   any
       satisfactory evidence that he has access to networks of support.


   30. I have considered the deportation decision in  accordance  with  the
       factors under regulation 21(5) and  (6)  of  the  2006  regulations.
       Although the Appellant claims  to  have  no  friends  or  family  in
       Portugal, he left that country when he  was  13  years  old  and  is
       likely to be familiar with the language and  culture.  There  is  no
       satisfactory evidence of the degree of the Appellant's  integration,
       both social and cultural, in the United Kingdom. Although he claimed
       to have a girlfriend he failed to provide  any  further  details  of
       this relationship. There is no evidence that he has any children and
       his letters to the Respondent suggest that he is estranged from  his
       mother. There is nothing to suggest he has  any  significant  health
       issues.


   31. I do attach weight to the fact that the Appellant committed all  his
       offences when he was a minor. This is clearly a  significant  factor
       to take into  account  when  considering  whether  the  decision  is
       proportionate under regulation 21(5)(a) and  is  a  relevant  factor
       under regulation 21(6). This  factor  however  has  to  be  balanced
       against the seriousness of his offending and the threat he poses  to
       the United Kingdom given the conclusions of the OASys report. I have
       considered  the  EEA  decision  to  deport   the   Appellant   based
       exclusively on his own conduct.


   32. Although the Appellant claims that Portugal  does  not  provide  the
       same opportunities in life as England does I am satisfied that there
       are likely to be sufficient  opportunities  for  him  to  engage  in
       rehabilitation such that there is a reasonable prospect that he will
       cease to commit offences. In Dumliauskas the Court of Appeal stated,
       at paragraph 53, "... in the absence of evidence, it is  not  to  be
       assumed that medical services and support for, by  way  of  example,
       reforming drug addicts, are materially  different  in  other  Member
       States from those available  here.  This  is  not  the  occasion  to
       conduct a comparative survey, but it is appropriate to  mention,  by
       way of example, that medical services  in  France  are  said  to  be
       excellent, and that Portugal has  been  innovative  in  relation  to
       treating drug addiction." This is of some relevance in light of  his
       previous convictions for possession of cannabis.

   33. Having holistic regard to the aforementioned factors I am  satisfied
       that the Appellant's personal  conduct  does  represent  a  genuine,
       present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
       fundamental interests of society, that the  Appellant's  removal  is
       proportionate in all the circumstances, and, having  regard  to  the
       factors in regulation 21(6) of the 2006 Regulations,  and  that  his
       removal is therefore justified  under  regulation  21  of  the  said
       Regulations.

   34. I will deal briefly with whether the Appellant's removal is a breach
       of Article 8 ECHR. I note the absence of any  satisfactory  evidence
       that the Appellant is in a relationship with anyone  in  the  United
       Kingdom. I note his claim to have a  mother  and  siblings  but  the
       Appellant  has  not  provided  any  satisfactory  evidence  of   his
       relationship with his family  members.  Nor  is  there  satisfactory
       evidence of the nature and extent of any private life  that  he  may
       have  established  in  the  United  Kingdom.  With  respect  to  the
       requirements for my consideration in sections 117B and 117C  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  I  am  prepared  to
       accept that the Appellant is proficient  in  English.  There  is  no
       evidence that he  is  financially  independent.  Nor  is  there  any
       indication that he was lawfully entitled to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom, either under the immigration rules or as a  result  of  his
       free movement rights as a national of an  EEA  state.  I  note  that
       deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and  that
       his offence was serious as  reflected  in  the  two  year  custodial
       sentence. Given that the Appellant has not  resided  in  the  United
       Kingdom for most of his life neither Exceptions 1 or  2  in  section
       117C apply to him. Having regard to these factors 'in the  round'  I
       am satisfied that the Appellant's  removal  does  not  constitute  a
       disproportionate interference with Article 8.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a material error of law.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal is allowed.
I remake the decision dismissing Mr Pimentel's appeal against the making  of
a deportation order.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]                               20 April 2016

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
