
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00863/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8th April 2014                             |On 10th April 2014           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    N A R
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Ahmed instructed by Peer & Co.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, promulgated on 24th January  2014,  following  a  hearing
        before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Snape  and  Mr  G.F.   Sandall
        (hereinafter  referred  to  as  'the  Panel')  who  dismissed   the
        Appellant's appeal against refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  to
        revoke a deportation order made against him  as  a  result  of  his
        conviction and sentence for the supply of controlled drugs.


     2. The Appellant is a Jamaican national born in June 1987.


     3. The deportation order is  dated  20th  August  2010  and  was  made
        pursuant to section 32 (5) UK Borders Act 2007.  An appeal  against
        that order was heard by Designated  Judge  Murray  and  Mrs  Morton
        sitting as a panel at Stirling Sheriff Court on 14th February  2011
        ('the Murray panel').  That panel concluded  that  the  Appellant's
        history meant it must be considered that he is likely  to  reoffend
        [55], that there were a number of  discrepancies  in  his  evidence
        [56], but in relation to his relationship with his son; that he had
        not seen his son for fifteen months and not seen  his  partner  for
        eleven months.  It was not believed his  alleged  partner  was  his
        fianc�e and no arrangements had been made by his partner or his own
        father for his  son  to  visit  him  in  prison  [60].  The  crimes
        committed by the Appellant are serious and  it  is  in  the  public
        interest to deport him to Jamaica [61]. The Murray  panel  did  not
        find it was in the best interests of the child for the Appellant to
        remain in the United Kingdom [62]. They found the Appellant to be a
        serial offender [65] and his claim to have no one  in  Jamaica  was
        not accepted [66].  It was found that  any  interference  with  his
        family and/or private life would not breach Article 8 ECHR.


     4. That determination was challenged and resulted in a hearing  before
        me in the Upper Tribunal sitting at Birmingham on 14th  July  2011.
        Having heard argument it was found there was no material  error  of
        law and that the determination of the  Murray  panel  shall  stand.
        There is no evidence that finding was  successfully  challenged  to
        the Court of Appeal.


     5. In relation to the refusal to revoke the deportation decision;  the
        Panel considered an adjournment application made on the  basis  the
        Appellant was seeking to obtain direct contact  with  his  son  and
        that proceedings in the Family Court  remained  ongoing  which  was
        refused for the reasons set  out  in  paragraphs  6  to  8  of  the
        determination.


     6. The Panel note in  paragraph  41  of  the  determination  that  the
        Appellant was not only convicted and  sentenced  to  thirty  months
        imprisonment on 16th  April  2010  but  also  has  twelve  previous
        convictions, having been convicted on eight occasions since 2005 of
        offences relating to the police, courts, possession with intent  to
        supply controlled drugs, possession  of  an  offensive  weapon  and
        motoring offences.


     7. It is recorded at paragraph 43 of the  determination  that  it  was
        accepted by the Appellant's representative at the hearing  that  he
        cannot meet any of the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
        relation to leave to remain  and  the  appeal  on  this  basis  was
        dismissed.


     8. In relation to Article 8 ECHR it was accepted by the Panel that the
        Appellant has both family and private life in  the  United  Kingdom
        and that the issue under this ground was  one  of  proportionality.
        The Panel clearly considered the  Social  Workers  report  produced
        following a direction from the Family Court of the 24th April  2013
        and noted that the Appellant had been inconsistent  in  maintaining
        contact with his son [53]. The Panel noted that according  to  that
        report there has been no direct contact since December  2012.   The
        Family Court, on 30th January 2013, ordered  indirect  contact  "in
        the form of cards/brief letters once  monthly"  although  only  one
        card was received in April 2013 and  no  documentary  evidence  was
        produced at the hearing of any other indirect contact  between  the
        Appellant and his son [54].  As a result the Panel  concluded  that
        although family life exists between the Appellant and his  son  the
        application for physical  contact  made  in  December  2012  was  a
        cynical attempt to avoid deportation.


     9. The Panel considered section 55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
        Immigration Act 2009 but  given  the  lack  of  evidence  that  the
        Appellant has established social and/or familial ties with his  son
        and in light of the finding the Appellant's application for contact
        is a cynical attempt to avoid deportation, they were satisfied that
        the current arrangements in which the child is  cared  for  by  his
        maternal grandparents, and had been since twelve weeks of age,  are
        in the child's best interests [58].  This is a finding  fully  open
        to the Panel on the facts.


    10. The Panel found  that  the  compelling  public  interest  justified
        deportation based on the fact he  had  been  convicted  of  serious
        offences, for the purpose of preventing further offences,  and  the
        deterrent element [61].


    11. The Panel noted the submission that the Appellant had not committed
        further  offences  for  some  time  but  found  that  his  acts  of
        criminality and likelihood of reoffending weighed heavily in favour
        of removal.


    12. In paragraph 64 the Panel found:


              64. Furthermore, as stated above, we  do  not  find  that  the
   strength of any                  relationship that existed or the welfare
   or  needs  of  the  Appellant's                son  were  such  that  his
   continued presence in the United Kingdom               was  necessary  or
   desirable.      Although      we      were      invited      by       the
   Appellant's  Counsel  to  allow  the  appeal  until  the   Family   Court
     proceedings are determined,  given  our  findings  in  respect  of  the
     relationship between the Appellant  and  his  son  as  outlined  above,
     we do not think that to be a reasonable option available to us.



Discussion



    13. Mr Ahmed relied upon the four grounds as pleaded  but  in  addition
        challenged the lawfulness of the refusal to adjourn the hearing.  I
        find his submission that there was a mandatory requirement for  the
        Panel to adjourn in the circumstances of this case  to  be  without
        arguable merit and unsupported by any authority.


    14. The relationship between immigration  and  family  proceedings  has
        been the subject of much discussion and it is accepted that  it  is
        not the role of the judges in either jurisdiction  to  predict  the
        outcome of proceedings in the other jurisdiction.  It  is  accepted
        that where a decision in the Family Court is likely to be a weighty
        consideration in an immigration decision it is anticipated that  it
        will normally be necessary for  the  Tribunal  to  wait  until  the
        Family Court has reached a decision on the issue  relevant  to  the
        immigration appeal. This can be achieved by either the appeal being
        allowed in anticipation of a short period of leave being granted or
        the  hearing  being  adjourned,  depending  upon  the   anticipated
        timescale of the family proceedings. The above  does  not  make  an
        adjournment the only possible outcome and does not seek  to  fetter
        the exercise of the discretionary case management power a judge has
        when considering an adjournment request. It only provides  guidance
        on the way in which such a power should be exercised.


    15. The request made at the hearing was not  the  first  such  request.
        This appeal was initially listed for the 7th December  2012  before
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford and Mr J Eames  ('the  Ford  Panel')
        who, it appears were advised that the Appellant's son R was  living
        with him. The child's mother had been imprisoned for  drug  related
        offences for which she received a twenty month custodial  sentence.
        The Ford Panel were also advised that it was  unlikely  there  were
        sentencing  remarks  or  a  pre-sentence  report  as  the   initial
        conviction had been in Scotland.


    16. The Ford Panel adjourned the hearing with specific directions which
        included  a  direction  that  "Written  evidence  as  to  the  case
        management arrangements currently in place for [R] and confirmation
        that Social Services are aware of  the  arrangements  and  have  no
        concerns and that [R's] mother agrees the arrangements" was  to  be
        filed.


    17. Mr Ahmed represented the Appellant at the next hearing on the  29th
        January 2013 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson and  Mrs  S
        Hewitt ('the Robertson Panel'). At that hearing  it  was  said  the
        Appellant had not experienced difficulties  in  exercising  contact
        when R was with  his  mother  but  as  the  child  lives  with  his
        grandmother  who  will  not  allow  him  to  have  contact  he  has
        instituted family proceedings. A court order  dated  27th  December
        2012 was handed in.  Mr Ahmed requested an adjournment on the basis
        (i) there was no Pre-sentencing report or  sentencing  remarks  and
        (ii) because he submitted a CAFCASS  report  would  be  helpful  in
        assessing the best interest of the children, although no time scale
        for the production of such a report was available.  The  Presenting
        Officer was unaware of there being any such proceedings and  having
        taken instructions opposed the application on the basis  there  was
        no  need  for  an  adjournment  to  consider  the  outcome  of  the
        proceedings as per RS [2012] UKUT 00218.   It  was  also  submitted
        that the Panel were entitled to consider  whether  the  proceedings
        have been instituted to frustrate removal.


    18. Having risen to consider the application the Robertson Panel  noted
        some  evidential  discrepancies  regarding  contact   between   the
        Appellant and R and that it was not clear that this was a  case  in
        which proceedings had been instituted to frustrate removal although
        the adjournment was granted on the basis a report would be  helpful
        to the Tribunal. Directions were given for the Appellant, no  later
        than 1st February 2013, to provide the Tribunal with a copy of  the
        country court order made pursuant to a directions hearing  on  30th
        January 2013 in relation to the contact application and to  provide
        a realistic timescale within which a CAFCASS report  will  be  made
        available. At a later date the period  in  which  to  provide  this
        evidence was extended.


    19. On 27th February 2013 the case was listed for a directions  hearing
        before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan at which it was noted  that
        a CAFCASS report had been ordered on the 30th  January  2013  which
        would take 12 weeks to complete. The hearing was  adjourned  for  a
        further case management review hearing which  took  place  on  10th
        June 2013 before Judge Chohan.  At that hearing  Mr  Ahmed  advised
        the court that the family proceedings had  been  further  adjourned
        with no date being fixed. Judge Chohan has recorded on  his  record
        of proceedings the following:


              "I pointed out to Mr Ahmed that on this occasion I  will  list
   this matter             for a further PHR in two  months  time.  However,
   the matter cannot be             adjourned indefinitely.   A  point  will
   come when even if the Family Court             matter  is  not  concluded
   this appeal will have to be listed for a hearing."

    20. Under cover of a letter dated 29th July 2013 Peer & Co  provided  a
        copy of an order made in the Birmingham County Court  on  22nd  May
        2013 in relation  to  two  named  children,  one  of  whom  is  the
        Appellant's child R. That order provided, inter alia,:


              i.  That the children in the interim continue to  reside  with
   the maternal                 grandparents.


              ii. That the children be joined as parties to the proceedings.


              iii.     That a nominated solicitor is  appointed  as  a  Rule
   16.4 Guardian on                 behalf of the children.


              iv. That the matter be adjourned to  9th  August  2013  for  a
   directions                       hearing.


    21. Other  ancillary  directions  were  made  relevant  to  the  family
        proceedings.


    22. As the date of the County Court hearing was  exactly  the  same  as
        that listed for the further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
        that hearing was adjourned until 16th August 2013 when  the  matter
        came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox. The  Judge  was  advised
        that the children's proceedings were ongoing in the  County  Court,
        that the hearing on 9th  August  had  been  adjourned  with  a  new
        listing anticipated, and that no current contact had  been  agreed.
        Judge Cox noted that the proceedings were "no further on"  although
        it was agreed by the advocates that the  matter  be  listed  for  a
        further prehearing review on Monday, 11 November 2013.


    23. The hearing on the 11th November 2013 was listed before  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge C Lloyd who noted  that  the  Appellant  attended  a
        meeting the previous week but that the mother failed to attend  and
        that it was anticipated that the next  hearing  before  the  Family
        Court will be in early  2014.   Judge  Lloyd  enquired  as  to  the
        whereabouts of the CAFCASS report which Mr Peer,  who  appeared  on
        behalf of the Appellant, claimed  not  to  have  seen  stating  the
        Appellant had a different solicitor representing him in the  family
        proceedings although he claimed not to know  who  it  was.   Having
        heard submissions Judge  Lloyd  made  specific  directions  in  the
        following terms:


              i.  The Appellant's representative to supply documentary proof
   of court                orders to show what had  happened  at  Birmingham
   County  Court                  family  proceedings  on   09.08.2013   and
   06.11.2013, and any other                     hearings since 22.05.2013.


              ii. The Appellants representative to  supply  a  copy  of  the
   CAFCASS                 report and/or  information  re  progress  of  the
   CAFCASS report.


              iii.     The Appellant's representative to  disclose  name  of
   Appellant's                       Family   Court   solicitors   and   the
   information from them on progress                  of family case.


              iv. The Appellant's representative to confirm name and date of
   birth of                Appellant's child/children.


    24. On 25th November 2013 the First-tier Tribunal  received  a  further
        letter  from  Peer  &  Co  indicating  that   the   Appellant   was
        representing himself at  the  Family  Court,  enclosing  copies  of
        orders  made  by  the  Birmingham  County  Court,  a  copy  of  the
        preliminary letters sent by CAFCASS dated 4th January 2013,  and  a
        copy of the Section  7  report  prepared  by  the  Birmingham  City
        Council Social Worker dated 24th April 2013.


    25. The author of the Section 7 report noted  that  the  Appellant  had
        brought R and his sibling, of whom he is not  the  father,  to  the
        maternal grandmother's  home  when  their  mother  was  taken  into
        custody in 2009. The Appellant had made his application for contact
        on 27th December 2012 following  which  the  maternal  grandparents
        made an application for a Residence Order. It is  recorded  in  the
        report that the children's  mother  supports  the  Residence  Order
        application but not the Appellant's application for direct  contact
        due to concerns about R's  safety  in  his  father's  care.  It  is
        further  noted  that  both  the  children's  mother  and   maternal
        grandparents  state  they  have  attempted  to  facilitate  contact
        between the Appellant and R although he has been inconsistent, only
        visited approximately five times since  2009,  and  had  failed  to
        contribute to R's care. The Social Worker records that the maternal
        grandparents report that they have  spoken  to  the  Appellant  and
        attempted to support him and  set  expectations  in  terms  of  his
        involvement with R, although they do not feel he  has  demonstrated
        appropriate behaviour.


    26. In the section of the report detailing  the  background  situation,
        the Appellant's immigration history, including his failed  attempts
        to oppose the deportation decision, is noted  and  it  is  recorded
        that both R's mother and maternal  grandparents  stated  that  they
        believe the Appellant is currently pursuing contact with R  due  to
        his current immigration status and that he  approached  R's  mother
        and asked her to say that they had been living together to aid  his
        appeal against his deportation order.


    27. In the section of the report dealing with current care and  contact
        arrangements it is recorded that  the  maternal  grandparents  were
        directed on 30th January 2013 to allow  indirect  contact  although
        they reported only receiving  one  card  in  April  2013  from  the
        Appellant since that direction  was  made  although  the  Appellant
        states he had sent two cards.  It is also  noted  that  R's  mother
        would not oppose indirect contact but opposes any direct contact.


    28. It is also noted in the section of  the  report  dealing  with  the
        likely effect on the child of any change in his circumstances  that
        R is aware that the Appellant is his father although the  level  of
        contact has been inconsistent and R has not had the opportunity  to
        form a sufficient attachment with  his  father.  The  same  section
        refers to the Appellant not  acknowledging  that  his  relationship
        with  R's  mother  was  anything  out  of  the   ordinary   whereas
        information gathered suggested that his behaviour towards  her  was
        aggressive and violent. It is said that if R was  to  witness  such
        aggression and violent behaviour this is very  likely  to  have  an
        impact upon R and cause distress, upset, and confusion.


    29. The report recognises there is no evidence that the  Appellant  has
        ever harmed R directly although his  capacity  to  meet  R's  needs
        remains un-assessed.


    30. In her conclusion section the author of the report states:


          Conclusions


          [The Appellant] has expressed his wish to have  contact  with  [R]
   and to be part          of his daily life.  [The  Appellant]  feels  that
   contact with [R] is being prohibited      by [maternal grandparents]  due
   to the perception of him as a result of having a        criminal  record.
   However information given  by  [maternal  grandparents]  and         [R's
   mother] suggests that [the Appellant] has not shown his dedication to [R]
          and has been inconsistent  in  his  involvement.   It  is  also  a
   concern that [the            appellant] does not acknowledge any violence
   within his relationship  with  [R's          mother]  and  gives  a  very
   different account of this.  Additionally, [the appellant]        has  not
   been open and honest with the UK  Border  Agency  in  relation  to  [R's]
   living arrangements or with the Social  Workers  completing  the  Initial
     Assessment in January 2013.


          In the past, [the Appellant] has been allowed contact with [R]  by
   [R's  mother]         whereas  [maternal  grandparents]  have  been  more
   reluctant to facilitate this  due           to  their  ongoing  concerns.
   Since  December  2012  however,  [R's  mother  ]  and           [maternal
   grandparents ] have been in agreement  that  direct  contact  with   [the
   Appellant ] is not in the best interests of [R]  due  to  concerns  about
   [the            Appellants]  potentially  aggressive  behaviour  and  his
   lifestyle.  [Maternal            grandparents] and [R's  mother]  do  not
   feel that, if direct contact was granted,          [the Appellant]  would
   be  a  consistent  figure  in  [R's]  life.   They  are   also   of   the
   opinion that the application of contact appears to be for the benefit  of
   his appeal          against his deportation order.


    31. The Local Authorities recommendations are (i) that [R]  remains  in
        the care of his maternal grandparents and that they consider  their
        options of making an application for a Residence Order or a Special
        Guardianship Order, (ii) that the  Local  Authority  have  concerns
        about the Appellant having direct  contact  with  [R]  due  to  the
        Appellant's history and issues around domestic violence in which he
        remains in denial and therefore  has  not  completed  any  work  in
        relation to the risk he poses to R.   The Local Authority therefore
        recommends that the monthly indirect contact by way of brief  cards
        or letters directed by the court on 30th January 2013 continues for
        a period designated by  the  Court.  It  is  said  that  given  the
        concerns regarding the motivation behind  the  Appellant's  request
        for  contact,  continuing  with  indirect  contact   will   provide
        additional information about the Appellant's level of commitment to
        having contact with R.  This will assist any future reviews of  the
        contact arrangements. The Local Authority is of the opinion that if
        the Appellant is inconsistent in his indirect contact the impact of
        this upon R will be far  less  than  if  direct  contact  had  been
        recommended and the Appellant did not attend.


    32. The case was listed for what was described as  a  final  prehearing
        review which  occurred  on  2nd  December  2013  before  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Ford at which directions were given for  the  matter
        to be listed for the substantive hearing on 13 January 2014  before
        the Panel.


    33. The Appellant was represented at the hearing and in relation to the
        adjournment application the Panel record  the  following  in  their
        determination:


              4.  At the commencement of the hearing, Miss Revill applied to
   adjourn                 the case on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  was
   seeking to obtain direct                  contact with his son, and  that
   proceedings in the Family Court                    remained  ongoing.  Mr
   Box  on  behalf  of  the  Home  Office  objected  to                  the
   application  because  there   was   "little   evidence"   of   what   was
     taking place in the Family  Court,  and  no  documentary  evidence  had
     been supplied by the  Appellant  at  the  hearing  as  to  the  current
          position with regard to Family Court proceedings.


              5.  A Social Workers report which had been produced  in  April
   2013 had                concluded that the Appellant had  not  been  open
   and honest with                  Social Workers and  given  the  lack  of
   evidence concerning the                        relationship  between  the
   Appellant  and  his  child,  the  Tribunal                         should
   continue  with  today's   hearing   irrespective   of   any   proceedings
   pending in the Family Court.


              6.  We retired  to  consider  Miss  Revill's  application  and
   decided not to                   allow her application for an adjournment
   on the basis that the                     Appellant's case had previously
   been adjourned, a hearing listed                   on 9th August 2013 was
   vacated.  Furthermore, we  noted  that  we                 had  not  been
   provided with any specific information; neither had                   any
   documents  being  provided  with  regard  to  the   current   status   of
   proceedings in the Family Court.


              7.  Additionally, we had not been provided with  any  evidence
   that there                   was any indirect contact by card  or  letter
   between the Appellant and                 his son; neither had the carers
   of the child provided any evidence to                  that effect.


              8.  Finally, we noted that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
   Appellant                    played any role in his son's  life;  neither
   was there any evidence that               the Appellant had established a
   relationship with his son which               would be prejudiced by  the
   continuation of these proceedings.


    34. There have been a number of authorities which have  considered  the
        relationship between  immigration  and  family  proceeding.  In  RS
        (immigration  and  family  court  proceedings)  India  [2012]  UKUT
        00218(IAC) it was held that:


          (i)     Where a claimant appeals against a decision to  deport  or
   remove and there             are outstanding family proceedings  relating
   to a child of the claimant, the           judge of the IAC  should  first
   consider:


              a)  Is the outcome  of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
   likely to be                 material to the immigration decision?
              b)  Are there compelling public interest  reasons  to  exclude
   the claimant                 from the United Kingdom irrespective of  the
   outcome of the family                 proceedings or the best interest of
   the child?


              c)  In  the  case  of  contact  proceedings  initiated  by  an
   appellant in an                  immigration appeal, is there any  reason
   to  believe  that  the  family                  proceedings   have   been
   instituted to  delay  or  frustrate  removal  and                 not  to
   promote the child's welfare?


          (ii)    In assessing the above questions, the judge will  normally
   want to  consider:             the  degree  of  the  claimant's  previous
   interest in and contact with the child,            the timing of  contact
   proceedings and the commitment with  which  they               have  been
   progressed,  when  a   decision   is   likely   to   be   reached,   what
   materials (if any) are already available or  can  be  made  available  to
   identify            pointers to where the child's welfare lies?


          (iii)   Having considered these matters the judge will  then  have
   to decide: a)           Does the claimant have  at  least  an  Article  8
   right to  remain  until  the                  conclusion  of  the  family
   proceedings? b) If so, should the appeal be                 allowed to  a
   limited  extent  and  a  discretionary  leave  be  directed  as  per  the
   decision on MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133? c) Alternatively, is it
              more appropriate for a short period of an  adjournment  to  be
   granted to              enable the core decision to be made in the family
   proceedings? d Is it                  likely that the family court  would
   be assisted by a view on  the  present           state  of  knowledge  of
   whether the appellant would be allowed to remain            in the  event
   that  the  outcome  of  the  family  proceedings   is   the   maintenance
   of family contact between him or her and a child resident here?


    35. In Mohan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA
        Civ 1363 the Appellant  was  being  deported  for  drugs  offences.
        Family proceedings had been instituted in relation to  his  contact
        with his children here. The Court of Appeal said that  the  general
        approach of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RS  (immigration  and  family
        proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC)  and  Nimako-  Boateng
        (residence orders -  Anton  considered)  [2012]  UKUT  00216  (IAC)
        represented the correct reconciliation of the conflicting  concepts
        of automatic deportation and Article 8 in  immigration  and  family
        proceedings (para 21). There was little  evidence  to  support  the
        UT's finding that the Claimant had revived the  family  proceedings
        belatedly and with the intention  of  delaying  or  preventing  his
        removal. He had instituted the residence application long before he
        was arrested for the drug offence.  Although  the  proceedings  had
        moved slowly, it could not  be  said  that  the  inception  of  the
        application was a cynical ploy or an attempt to thwart  removal  by
        reference to a crime that the Claimant had not  yet  committed.  It
        was  not  surprising  that  he  could  not  pursue  the   residence
        proceedings while he was in custody (paras 24 - 28). The real legal
        flaw in the instant case was the Upper Tribunal's treatment of  the
        relationship  between  the  deportation  appeal  and   the   family
        proceedings. Its determination amounted to a finding that the  case
        had only one possible outcome, being that it  was  inevitable  that
        whatever the findings of the family court, the Claimant's offending
        and immigration history were such that  his  deportation  would  be
        found to be proportionate. The Court rejected that submission as it
        considered  there  to  be  sufficient  material  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal to compel the conclusion that the family court could, when
        considering the best interests of the child, make an order for  her
        to reside with the  Claimant.  As  the  Tribunal  said  in  Nimako-
        Boateng, the family court was best placed to make  those  necessary
        evaluations.  In  Nimako-Boateng  there  was  material  before  the
        Tribunal to justify the conclusion that it would be unnecessary  to
        delay determination of the deportation appeal in order to await the
        judgment of the family court because the material in favour of  the
        claimant lacked substance and the public  interest  in  deportation
        was overwhelming. That was not the situation in  the  instant  case
        (paras 29 - 31). . The judgment of the family court,  with  all  of
        the tools at its disposal (including the assistance of CAFCASS  and
        the opportunity to assess the adults  involved)  could  and  should
        inform the decision-making of the Tribunal  on  the  issue  of  the
        proportionality of deportation, in relation to the  best  interests
        of the child.


    36. The fact the appeal had been adjourned on previous occasions  as  a
        result of the existing proceedings is not, in itself, determinative
        as whether a hearing needs to be adjourned is a matter that has  to
        be considered on each and every occasion that the question  arises.
        The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  Appellant  may  have  at
        least an Article 8 right to remain  until  the  conclusion  of  the
        family proceedings earlier in the case as  otherwise  the  previous
        adjournments would not have been granted.  It is  also  clear  that
        notwithstanding the Appellant being given a number of opportunities
        to provide information regarding the Family  Court  proceedings  he
        failed to do so.  There is specific reference in the  determination
        to the lack of details regarding the ongoing proceedings which  was
        amply demonstrated by Mr Ahmed at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal producing a statement from the  Guardian  which  pre-dated
        the date of the hearing before the Panel, but which  had  not  been
        disclosed to them. That statement referred to the need for a  fact-
        finding hearing to determine whether there was  any  merit  in  the
        assertions regarding the Appellant's conduct and his denial of  the
        same.


    37. It cannot be said that on the basis of the material the  Panel  had
        available to them that the outcome of the  family  proceedings  was
        likely to be material to the immigration decision.  This is a  case
        involving a refusal to revoke a deportation order  in  relation  to
        which the previous challenge failed and it was not found to  be  in
        R's best interests for  the  Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom. The Social Worker's report sets out the likely outcome  of
        the proceedings which is that R will continue to  reside  with  his
        maternal grandparents  with  his  parents  having  ongoing  contact
        appropriate to the needs and welfare/safety of the child.  For  the
        reasons set out in the report the Local Authority  believe  that  a
        period of indirect contact is suitable. This can be maintained from
        abroad. It was said before the Upper Tribunal that there is another
        hearing in May 2014 to  ascertain  the  truth  of  the  allegations
        regarding  the  Appellant's  conduct  which,  if,  they   are   not
        substantiated may lead to the possibility of some  form  of  direct
        contact.


    38. The preserved findings of the Murray Panel  meant  that  compelling
        public interest reasons to exclude the  claimant  from  the  United
        Kingdom, irrespective of the outcome of the family  proceedings  or
        the best interest of the child, existed as also found by the  Panel
        in their determination.


    39. The Panel also make a finding that  the  contact  proceedings  have
        been initiated by the Appellant to delay or frustrate  removal  and
        not to promote the child's welfare.  There is specific reference to
        this being the view of others too in the Social Workers report  and
        of the lack of  evidence  of  the  Appellant  taking  opportunities
        available to him to  enjoy  the  indirect  contact  that  has  been
        granted by the court. This and the timing of the  application  does
        not mean that this is a finding that in any  way  be  described  as
        being perverse or irrational.


    40. The chronology also clearly shows that the Tribunal were expressing
        concern regarding the delay in these proceedings and, whilst  delay
        in civil proceedings cannot be the fault of the Appellant,  it  was
        not found by Panels that any reason had been established to justify
        any further delay when considering the best interests of the child.
        This was specifically considered by the Panel as evidenced  by  the
        phrase "neither was there  any  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has
        established a relationship with his son which will be prejudiced by
        the continuation of these proceedings."


    41. The decision by the Panel to proceed has not been  shown  to  be  a
        decision infected by any material legal error.  The  Panel  decided
        to exercise their discretionary power to adjourn in  the  way  that
        they did and it has not been shown  that  in  proceeding  with  the
        hearing they acted irrationally or unfairly.


    42. In relation to the pleaded Grounds; the first of which is that  the
        Panel erred in finding that  the  Appellant  had  initiated  family
        proceedings to avoid deportation.  I find no material error  proved
        in relation  to  this  decision  which  is  supported  by  adequate
        reasons. The fact the Appellant had been in prison and  immigration
        detention is an understandable explanation for  why  he  could  not
        visit his son but it is also relevant that his son was not taken to
        visit him. The entry in the Social Services  records  that  it  was
        only in late 2012 that the Appellant  experienced  problems  seeing
        his son, having attended the maternal grandparents  home  at  which
        time the Police were called to remove him, is noted. The fact there
        was no need to initiate proceedings to obtain contact  before  this
        event may provide a credible explanation for any delay  in  issuing
        proceedings but not in relation to the history  of  contact  since.
        The Appellant's oral evidence was that he had  been  sending  cards
        and presents but this was clearly not accepted  by  the  Panel  who
        gave greater weight to the report from the Social Worker. There was
        no evidence of other forms of indirect contact from  the  Appellant
        and the Panel were only able to deal with the evidence before them.
         It is clear they considered that evidence with the degree of  care
        required in an appeal of this nature and gave adequate reasons  for
        the findings they have made. As such the weight to be given to that
        evidence was a  matter  for  them  and  no  legal  error  has  been
        established.  It has not been shown that such  a  conclusion  is  a
        decision so devoid of any plausible justification or so  outrageous
        in its defiance of logic or of accepted  moral  standards  that  no
        sensible person who had applied his mind  to  the  question  to  be
        decided could have arrived at it.


    43. Ground 2 alleges the Panel erred in  its  assessment  of  the  best
        interests of the child. It is alleged  that  the  approach  by  the
        Panel was incorrect as it should have  been  found  as  a  starting
        point that the best interests of the child is to be with  both  his
        parents.  It was not disputed that the child  in  fact  lives  with
        maternal grandparents and it has been accepted that this is in  the
        child's best interests. The grandparents must therefore be seen  as
        those with de facto care and preserving the status quo and the care
        arrangements that have  been  found  to  be  in  the  child's  best
        interests to date is the correct starting  point.  It  is  accepted
        that if a child lives with other than his or  her  natural  parents
        maintaining contact with the natural parents is important and it is
        not suggested that the child should leave  the  home  in  which  he
        currently lives. There is in fact now a Residence Order in force in
        favour of the maternal  grandparents  who  have  acquired  parental
        responsibility as a result. The Grounds  accept  that  it  was  not
        disputed that it is in  the  child's  best  interests  to  continue
        living with the grandparents and I reject the submission the  Panel
        failed to consider what was in the child's best interests generally
        and whether this was for the Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom. It was specifically found by the Murray  Panel  that  this
        was not in the child's best interest and the  Panel  clearly  found
        that the Appellant's continued presence in the United  Kingdom  was
        not necessary or desirable [64].  There is no  evidence  indicating
        that it will harm the child's best interests if his father  was  to
        be removed and any contact limited  to  indirect  contact  at  this
        stage in the child's life. On the basis of the  information  before
        the Panel no legal error is established.


    44. Ground three alleges the Panel failed to  consider  the  Article  8
        rights of the Appellant's partner and her son but such a claim  has
        no arguable merit.  The findings of the Panel are within the  range
        of those the Panel were entitled to make on the evidence especially
        as it was conceded that the Appellant was not able to  satisfy  the
        requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Even  if  family   life
        recognised by Article 8 existed, it is necessary for the merits  of
        the case to be considered within the structure set  out  in  recent
        case law. It has not  been  shown  the  Panel  failed  to  consider
        relevant material or failed to apply the correct legal  principles.
        An Article 8 assessment must now be considered in  accordance  with
        the approach set out by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192, the High Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and
        by the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as  confirmed  by
        Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).   The
        starting position for the Panel was to look at the  Rules  and  see
        whether the Appellant was able to meet their requirements.  If not,
        the question arises whether the decision would lead to a breach  of
        Article 8 but in the context  of  whether  there  are  factors  not
        covered by the Rules which  give  rise  to  the  need  to  consider
        Article 8 further. The Panel considered  the  merits  of  the  case
        outside the Rules and found there  was  no  reason  established  to
        warrant the appeal being allowed on this basis.  In  light  of  the
        material the Panel was asked to consider it has not  been  arguably
        made out that the decision will result in compelling  circumstances
        giving rise to unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  Applicant
        or any family member, such as to establish an arguable case at this
        time.

    45. The specific finding made  by  the  Panel  regarding  other  family
        members who gave oral evidence at the hearing is  to  be  found  in
        paragraph 57 of the determination, namely that  the  decision  will
        result in interference sufficiently serious to engage Article 8 but
        that  it  was  necessary  for  that  to  be  balanced  against  the
        legitimate aim relied upon by the Secretary of  State.   The  Panel
        record the evidence that was given at  the  hearing  where  it  was
        noted at paragraph 20 that the  Appellant's  current  partner  gave
        evidence that she and the Appellant had been  living  together  for
        just over twelve months and that prior to this they lived with  the
        Appellant's stepmother and then her mother's  house.   The  partner
        confirmed she was aware of the Appellant's previous conviction  and
        that were he to be to be deported to Jamaica she would be  prepared
        to go to Jamaica to live with him.  She has no  family  in  Jamaica
        and accepted she may experience problems living  there  because  of
        her son.  He  is  a  British  citizen  aged  12  years.   Mr  Ahmed
        submitted that notwithstanding such a clear statement of  intention
        the Panel should have looked behind the evidence and considered the
        reasonableness of the proposal although when  asked  whether  there
        was evidence to support a claim it was not  reasonable  or  whether
        this was a matter raised at the hearing, Mr  Ahmed  was  unable  to
        adequately assist.   Even if it is arguable the Panel  should  have
        gone further, in Gulshan  it was held that the term "insurmountable
        obstacles" in provisions such as Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles
        which  are  impossible  to  surmount  They  concern  the  practical
        possibilities of relocation. In the absence of such  insurmountable
        obstacles,  it  is  necessary  to  show  other   non-standard   and
        particular   features   demonstrating   that   removal   will    be
        unjustifiably harsh. The material provided to  the  Panel  did  not
        arguably establish that such circumstances existed.


    46. The situation of R was considered in relation to section 55 aspects
        in the determination and no legal error is proved.


    47. Ground  four  alleges  the  Panel  erred  in  concluding  that  the
        Appellant was likely to reoffend but their reasons for this are set
        out above and even if a report had been provided showing  that  the
        risk of  reoffending  was  low  this  is  not  determinative.   The
        previous findings of the Murray Panel and the  Appellant's  history
        of criminality justify the conclusion he is an  habitual  offender.
        If he maintains there is no risk or a low risk of reoffending it is
        arguable that the burden is upon him to prove it. The Grounds refer
        to the fact that no pre-sentence report was available  at  this  or
        any previous appeal and nor was there any evidence from  any  other
        source relating to this issue.  This is correct but I note  in  the
        Tribunal file a letter from Peer & Co dated 23rd  January  2013  in
        which they state (when writing in response to the directions  order
        dated 10th December 2012):


              "In regards to our efforts to  adhere  to  the  Directions  at
   point C we  have               requested  details  concerning  sentencing
   remarks and presentence report            for the incident  offence  from
   our client's  previous  solicitor.  They  were              unfortunately
   delayed  in  responding  to  us   and   requested   a   �50   charge   to
   obtain the required file from storage. We have made this payment and  are
          now awaiting the full history regarding these events. As  soon  as
   we [sic]            receive this information we  will  serve  it  on  the
   relevant parties."


          No such information was provided even though there is no  evidence
   Peer & Co      did not receive the file from the Scottish advocates.   If
   the requested                documentation was not  provided  because  it
   did not exist there can be no             criticism of the  Secretary  of
   State for not providing that information.  If that          evidence  did
   exist the Appellant and/or  his  representative  can  be  criticised  for
   failing to file it in accordance with directions.


    48. There is no obligation upon the Tribunal to seek  material  of  its
        own accord in all but exceptional circumstances - see SS (Nigeria).
         In this appeal the Panel clearly considered the history and  noted
        the lack  of  reoffending  since  release  from  prison  two  years
        previously but found that other reasons justified  the  deportation
        as set out in the determination.  Those  findings  are  within  the
        range of findings the Panel are entitled to make  on  the  evidence
        and accordingly no legal error is proved. The risk  of  reoffending
        is not determinative in any event and has not been shown to  be  an
        element that is likely to tip the balance of the  decision  in  the
        Appellants favour.


Decision

    49. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    50. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  I
        continue that order, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, to protect the identity of the child.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9th April 2014




