
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00167/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th December 2017                      |On 13th December 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               ismail hussein
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fripp, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a national of the Netherlands born on 1  January  1984
    and he appealed a decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  23  March
    2016 to make a  Deportation  order  on  the  basis  that  the  decision
    contravened Regulation 21 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 and represented a breach of his Article 8 rights under
    the European Convention.

The applicable Regulations

 2. At the hearing on 2nd October 2017, I raised the issue of  whether  the
    EEA Regulations 2006 or 2016 applied.  This was not a matter raised  in
    the grounds for permission to appeal.    The EEA Regulations 2016  came
    into force in full on 1st  February  2017  prior  to  the  hearing  and
    promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision,  which  had
    applied the EEA Regulations 2006.  Initially Mr  Fripp  contended  that
    the 2016 Regulations applied but that this would not make a difference.
      Indeed that was agreed by the Secretary of  State.   I  referred  the
    parties to the transitional provisions (specifically schedule 6(5))  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  If the  EEA
    Regulations 2016 applied the considerations  would  arguably  vary  and
    arguably have a material influence on the outcome.

 3. I invited the parties to submit further written representations on  the
    issue.

 4. The Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment)  Regulations  2017
    (No. 1) state as follows:


         Schedule 4 (revocations and savings), new paragraph 3 (appeals)


         4. After paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 insert-


         "Appeals


             3.-


             (1) Notwithstanding the revocation of the 2006 Regulations by
             paragraph 1(1), those Regulations continue to apply-
                  (a) in respect of an appeal under those Regulations
                  against an EEA decision which is pending (within the
                  meaning of regulation 25(2) of the 2006 Regulations) on
                  31st January 2017;
                  (b) in a case where a person has, on 31st January 2017, a
                  right under those Regulations to appeal against an EEA
                  decision.
             (2) For the purposes of this paragraph, "EEA decision" has the
             meaning given in Regulation 2 of the 2006 Regulations and the
             definition of "EEA decision" in regulation 2 of these
             Regulations does not apply."

 5. The explanatory memorandum to the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (No. 1),  which  made technical changes to
    the 2016 Regulations, indicates at 7.5 that

             'Paragraph 4 of the Schedule inserts a new  paragraph  3  into
             Schedule 4 to the 2016 Regulations to clarify  that  the  2016
             Regulations do not affect an  appeal  against  or  a  person's
             right to appeal against an EEA decision made  under  the  2006
             Regulations. The provisions of the 2006 Regulations will apply
             to an appeal against a decision made under  those  Regulations
             irrespective of whether the appeal  commences,  or  is  to  be
             continued after 1 February 2017'.

 6. The Explanatory  Note  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations 2017 (No. 1) states


             'Paragraph 4 of the Schedule inserts a new savings provision
             in paragraph 3 into Schedule 4 to make it clear that the
             principal Regulations do not affect an appeal against, or a
             person's right to appeal against, an EEA decision made under
             the 2006 Regulations'.

 7. The seemingly contradictory wording in Schedule 6 paragraph  5  of  the
    2016 Regulations (commencing 1st February 2017) reads

             Removal decisions, deportation  orders  and  exclusion  orders
             under the 2006 Regulations

             5-

             (1)  A  decision  to  remove   a   person   under   regulation
             19(3)(a),(b) or (c) of the 2006  Regulations  must,  upon  the
             coming into force of  Part  4  of  these  Regulations  in  its
             entirety, be treated as a decision to remove that person under
             regulation 23(6) (a), (b) or (c) of these Regulations, as  the
             case may be.

             (2)  A deportation order made under regulation  24(3)  of  the
             2006 Regulations must be treated as a deportation  order  made
             under regulations 32(3) of these Regulations.



 8.  The  Secretary  of  State  made  written  representations  under   the
    authorship of  Mr  P  Deller.   He  acknowledged  the  tension  between
    Schedule 4, as amended by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) Regulations  2017  (No.  1)  and  Schedule  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016. He submitted Schedule 4 applied to 'pending  appeals'
    and Schedule 6 applied to 'operational functions' and therefore it  was
    Schedule 4 which applied.   Schedule  4  Paragraph  3(2)  imported  the
    meaning of 'EEA decision' from the 2006  Regulations.  Accordingly  for
    relevant pending appeals the Tribunal should apply the 2006 Regulations
    in this instance.

 9. Initially Mr Fripp contended that the 2016 Regulations applied but that
    this would not make a difference.  At  the  resumed  hearing  Mr  Fripp
    agreed that it was indeed the EEA Regulations 2006 which applied.

10. I am surprised Schedule 6 does not specifically acknowledge  its  scope
    (that it is subject to  Schedule  4)  and  further  that  the  amending
    regulatory provision did not address this point. The Secretary of State
    argued  that  Schedule  6  paragraph  5  dealt  with  the   operational
    consequences of decisions made under the 2006 Regulations.   An  appeal
    commenced on 1st February 2017 or later against a deportation  decision
    made under the 2006 Regulations would be considered  under  the  scheme
    applied by the 2006 Regulations. Thus  eventually  when  a  deportation
    order was made in the light of a deportation decision, it should, after
    1st February 2017 be made in accordance with regulations.

11. I conclude, however, that Schedule 6 paragraph 5  cannot  not  override
    Schedule 4 paragraph 3 which specifically governs pending  appeals.  To
    do otherwise would render the effect of paragraph 3 otiose.

12. In my view the anomaly may be the result of piecemeal amendment but  in
    the light of the clear direction under Schedule 4 that pending appeals,
    which this is, should be heard in line with  the  2006  Regulations,  I
    will follow that paragraph and conclude for the purposes of this appeal
    that the 2006 will apply.

The Appellant

13. The appellant was born in Somalia in 1984 where his mother died and  in
    1984 he was taken by relatives to the Netherlands for  a  reunion  with
    his father and then recognised as a  refugee.   Both  are  nationalised
    citizens of the Netherlands.  The father came to the United Kingdom  in
    1997 to work followed by the appellant in 1998 and he maintains he  has
    been continuously resident in the UK since that time, that is  eighteen
    years and six months.

14. The appellant has had three periods  in  custody.  First,  following  a
    conviction for robbery on 4 December 2000, he was  sentenced  to  three
    years' confinement in a youth offender's institution  serving  eighteen
    months in custody prior to release  on  4  June  2002.   Secondly,  the
    appellant was sentenced  to  nineteen  months  in  aggregate  following
    conviction on 16 October 2012 and he served nine and a half  months  in
    custody before being detained under immigration powers  for  a  further
    seven months.  Thirdly on 10 June 2015 the appellant was  convicted  of
    possession of an offensive weapon in a public place and other  offences
    and sentenced to thirteen months' imprisonment.  In  total  he  was  in
    custody for seven months.

15. When the Secretary of State refused his human rights claim and made the
    deportation order the appellant appealed.

Dismissal by First-tier Tribunal

16. In the event First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on all grounds and  the  appellant  appealed  on  the  following
    grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

17. It was submitted before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  the  appellant's
    representatives that his period of residence in the United Kingdom  was
    one which met the requirement for enhanced protection under  Regulation
    21(4)(a) that is a  relevant  decision  may  not  be  taken  except  on
    imperative grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who
    (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of  at
    least ten years  prior  to  the  relevant  decision.   This  transposed
    Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38/EC.  It was  submitted  that  the
    respondent accepted that the  appellant  was  resident  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for five  years  between  2006  and
    2011 but not that he reached ten years' continuous residence.  This was
    because (i)  he  had  not  provided  any  evidence  that  he  had  been
    exercising his treaty rights since 2011 and/or because, secondly,  time
    in prison had broken the accumulation of relevant time.

18. The failure to exercise the EEA treaty rights since 2011 was irrelevant
    because the Secretary of State had accepted that the appellant had five
    years' continuous  residence  on  or  before  2011  and  therefore  his
    continued residence did not depend on exercising his EEA  rights.   The
    Secretary of State had conceded that he  had  permanent  residence  and
    thus he needed merely to continue to reside in the UK.

19. Further, the ten year period was counted back  from  the  date  of  the
    Secretary of State's deportation order dated 23 March  2016.   The  ten
    year period encompassed two periods of imprisonment, one of nine and  a
    half months in 2012 to 2013 and one  of  nearly  eight  months  between
    November 2014 and June  2015.   It  was  argued  that  the  periods  of
    imprisonment did not automatically break the  continuity  of  residence
    and the ability to show ten years' relevant residence.  Further  to  MG
    (prison-Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive)  Portugal  [2014]  UKUT
    00392 (IAC) paragraph 48 reads:

         "Despite our difficulties, we have  concluded  that  a  categorical
         reading of (1) cannot be what the Court meant or at least that what
         it must have had in mind  was  to  draw  a  distinction  between  a
         positive taking into account and a negative  interruption.  If  the
         Court in MG had meant to convey by the terms "cannot be taken  into
         account" that periods of imprisonment  automatically  disqualify  a
         person from enhanced protection under Article 28(3)(a)  protection,
         it would not have seen fit to proceed in paragraph 35 to accept  as
         a possibility that the  "non-continuous"  nature  of  a  period  of
         residence did not automatically prevent  a  person  qualifying  for
         enhanced protection. Nor would it have chosen in  paragraph  38  to
         describe periods of imprisonment as "in principle, capable both  of
         interrupting the continuity of the  period  of  residence  for  the
         purposes of that provision and of affecting the decision  regarding
         the grant of the enhanced protection provided for thereunder..." It
         would have had to say that, if they fall within the 10 year  period
         counting back from the date of decision,  periods  of  imprisonment
         always prevent a person qualifying  for  enhanced  protection.   In
         addition, what the Court goes on to say in paragraph 37  about  the
         implications of the fact that a person  has  resided  in  the  host
         Member State during the 10 years prior to imprisonment  is  clearly
         intended to underline that even though such  a  person  has  had  a
         period  of  imprisonment  during  the  requisite  10  year   period
         (counting back from the date of decision  ordering  the  expulsion:
         see para 27) it is still possible for them to qualify for  enhanced
         protection and in this regard their prior period of residence  "may
         be taken into consideration  as  part  of  the  overall  assessment
         referred to in paragraph 36  above".  We  also  bear  in  mind,  of
         course, as  did  Pill  LJ  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department v FV (Italy) [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1199  at  [42]  that  in
         Tsakouridis the CJEU Grand Chamber did not consider the  fact  that
         Mr Tsakouridis had spent a substantial period of time in custody in
         Germany in the year prior to the decision to expel him (taken on  9
         August 2008) as defeating his eligibility for  enhanced  protection
         under  Article  28(3)(a).   Nevertheless  (and  this  is  where  we
         consider Mr Palmer right and Miss Hirst wrong), the fact  that  the
         Court  specifies  that  "in  principle"  periods  of   imprisonment
         interrupt the continuity of residence for the purposes  of  meeting
         the 10 year requirement can only mean that so far  as  establishing
         integrative links is concerned such periods must  have  a  negative
         impact."

    Further to paragraph 20 of SSHD v Franco Vomero (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49:



         "The ten year previous period is, in contrast, only 'in  principle'
         continuous,  and  may  be  non-continuous,  where,   for   example,
         interrupted by a period of absence or  imprisonment.   Whether  the
         ten years is to be counted  by  including  or  excluding  any  such
         period of interruption is however unclear."

    It was argued before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had
    long been integrated into the United Kingdom and remained linked to the
    community during his imprisonment  by  contact  with  and  visits  from
    family and friends and even if the  months  of  imprisonment  were  not
    counted he reached more than ten years' relevant residence.  He had  an
    overall residence of eighteen years of which three years had been spent
    in custody.  It was put to the First-tier  Tribunal  if  that  was  not
    accepted then the 'serious grounds' test should be used.

20. In sum the grounds were as follows:-

21. Ground (i).  The judge erred in his approach to the level of protection
    afforded to the appellant and the test to be applied.   He  misdirected
    himself that the appellant had to show evidence of continuous  exercise
    of EEA rights after 2011 as the appellant had permanent residence prior
    to this date.  Further the question of whether  the  short  periods  of
    imprisonment broke the continuity of residence was  in  issue  and  the
    judge failed to address. The Vomero decision in which the Supreme Court
    indicated the two year period of absence marked  a  bright  line  which
    point the continuous residence was broken.  A period of imprisonment of
    less than two years will not have this effect and even cumulatively the
    applicant's two periods of imprisonment did not meet this  requirement.
    The judge gave inadequate reasoning as to the question of  whether  the
    two relatively short  periods  of  imprisonment  broke  the  continuous
    residence.   There  was  an  assessment  of  the  wider   circumstances
    required.  It had been argued the  appellant  had  a  relatively  short
    residence in the Netherlands,  four years compared with eighteen  years
    in the United Kingdom, reference made to the short periods in which  he
    has been imprisoned, the presence in the  United  Kingdom  of  all  his
    significant connections, his wife, his former wife and their child, his
    father and other relatives.

22. Ground (ii).  The First-tier Tribunal inadequately addressed the  issue
    of rehabilitation and provided no adequate assessment of  the  evidence
    heard such as family support by his father.  The  judge's  decision  is
    posited on the applicant having no permanent right of residence.

23. Ground (iii) it was apparent from  the  determination  that  the  judge
    failed to adequately deal with all the evidence from the witnesses such
    as the appellant's father and had failed to adequately  deal  with  the
    medical evidence and does not substantively deal with  the  independent
    social worker's evidence of Miss Christine Brown.

24. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King.

The Hearing

25. At the hearing before me Mr Fripp argued that the question was which of
    the Regulation 21 rubrics  should  be  applied  to  the  appellant  and
    whether it was 'serious grounds' or 'imperative grounds' that should be
    applied.  The judge when he had set out  the  relevant  Regulation  had
    omitted Regulation 21(4) and  stated  N/A.   This  showed  he  did  not
    consider 'imperative grounds'.  There  were  two  bases  on  which  the
    appellant could reach the ten year enhanced protection and that was  by
    having had his permanent residence accepted by the Secretary  of  State
    and then a continuous five years but then  a  second  avenue  would  be
    through the reasoning of Vomero whereby the permanent residence was not
    required as a precursor to having the ten year protection.   The  judge
    seemed to deal with the case not even  granting  the  middle  level  of
    protection to the appellant  and  he  did  not  address  the  ten  year
    submission at all.

26. By the date of the 'October 2012 sentence' the appellant  had  been  in
    the UK for thirteen years and had extensive links in  the  UK.  He  had
    integrated. He had served nine and a half months and it was argued this
    did not break continuity.  As to the second  conviction  he  had  spent
    only seven months in prison in 2014 and it was argued that this did not
    break  continuity  either.   He  submitted  that  MG   suggested   that
    protection could be lost but not for imprisonment under one year.

27. Mr Fripp also submitted that the judge had inadequately considered  the
    rehabilitation and his approach had been on the basis that there was no
    right of residence and that was an error. Further, the judge had failed
    to address the evidence of the witnesses fully or the reports.

28. Mr Tufan resisted the application pointing out that the  appellant  had
    had two periods of imprisonment and indeed in 2000 he had  spent  three
    years in a young offenders' institution.  Mr Fripp countered that  this
    had been prior to the granting  of  the  permanent  residence  and  not
    relied on at the First-tier Tribunal  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Nonetheless  Mr  Tufan  submitted  that  there  had  been  an
    extensive  record  of  the  appellant   offending   with   periods   of
    imprisonment and the issue was centred on integration as per  MG.   The
    judge cited MG and recited the law there was no  legal  basis  for  the
    permanent residence and if the  matter  went  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that concession would be withdrawn.  Nonetheless the judge was
    aware of the concession.  The case of Warsame v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA CIV  16  considered  MG  and  the  four
    months' imprisonment in 2007 given to that appellant was sufficient  to
    prevent him from fulfilling ten years' residence.

29. Mr Fripp did not suggest that  any  period  of  imprisonment  could  be
    counted in the calculation of ten years but pointed out that  the  four
    months' imprisonment prevented the appellant from reaching a cumulative
    period of ten years rather than the period of imprisonment  undermining
    his integration.

30. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant had continued to offend this  was
    the case as regards integration.

31. With respect to ground (ii)  and rehabilitation, he  pointed  out  that
    Upper Tribunal Judge King had identified no error on the assessment  of
    rehabilitation and with respect to ground (iii) evidence that was given
    was identified at paragraphs 17 and 18.

32. Mr Fripp repeated that the judge had failed to deal with the  ten  year
    point and failed to address the effect of paragraph 48 of MG which  had
    been identified in the skeleton argument at page 8.  The appellant  had
    continuous residence of ten years and he did  not  need  the  permanent
    residence.

33. At the resumed hearing Mr Tufan handed me the opinion of  the  Advocate
    General Szpunar dated 24th October 2017 in B v  Land  Baden-Wurttenberg
    and the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  v  Franco  Vomero
    (Directive 2004/38/EC) Joined Cases C-316/16 and  C-424/16.   Mr  Tufan
    advanced that this  confirmed  that  permanent  residence  would  be  a
    requirement prior to obtaining the highest level of protection  against
    removal under European Union law on imperative  grounds.   Should  this
    case be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  concession  on
    permanent residence would be retracted.

34. Mr Fripp rejoined that this was not the  substantive  decision  of  the
    Court of Justice of the European Union.

Conclusion

35. Ground (i) To my mind the judge did address the question of whether the
    appellant was entitled to the highest  level  of  protection.   Despite
    having recorded 'N/A' next to Regulation 21(4), it  is  clear  that  he
    turned his mind to that question by the substance of his decision.  The
    judge referred to MG, properly realising that time spent in prison  did
    not automatically bar the appellant from acquiring the highest level of
    protection. The judge looked  at  the  period  of  residence  and  also
    addressed the level of the integration of the appellant and as a result
    of that integration as to whether his periods of imprisonment could  be
    taken to interrupt ten years' residence  rendering  him  with  a  lower
    level of protection.

36. The judge set out the basis facts of the  appellant's  convictions  and
    sentences  in  the  decision.  The  appellant  had  three  periods   of
    imprisonment accompanied by a series of convictions which did not  lead
    to imprisonment.   In fact a deportation order was made on  25th  April
    2013 following the appellant's conviction on  4th  September  2012  for
    affray for which he was sentenced  to  19  months  imprisonment.   That
    deportation order was withdrawn.  The appellant was again convicted  of
    assault and arrested on 7th November 2014 and sentenced  on  10th  June
    2015 to 13 months in prison and the Deportation order  giving  rise  to
    the decision under challenge was made on 23rd March 2016.  The time  of
    ten years is counted back from the date of the deportation order - that
    is 23rd March 2016.

37. The judge reasoned in his decision as follows:-

         "28. In giving evidence the  Appellant  accepts  that  all  of  the
             convictions are correctly recorded in the decision letter save
             that which is recorded for  27  September  2000  at  Southwark
             Crown Court for common assault and for  threatening  behaviour
             and 27 February 2004 at Tower  Bridge  Magistrates  Court  for
             public order offences.  I am prepared to accept  his  evidence
             but that still leaves very many criminal offences  covering  a
             range  of  offences,  many  of  which  involve  possession  of
             controlled drugs or offences linked  to  serious  breaches  of
             public order, and include  the  possession  of  weapons.   The
             Appellant relies on MG (prison-Article  28(3)(a)  of  Citizens
             Directive) Portugal [2014] UKUT 00392 (IAC) and that time that
             he has spent in prison does not necessarily prevent  him  from
             acquiring the highest protection counted back from the date of
             assessment in March 2017.  At paragraph 48 of that judgment is
             the following comment ".. the fact that  the  Court  specifies
             that "in principle"  periods  of  imprisonment  interrupt  the
             continuity of residence for the purposes  of  meeting  the  10
             year requirement can only mean that  so  far  as  establishing
             integrative  links  is  concerned  such  period  must  have  a
             negative impact."  In  the  Appellant's  case  there  are  two
             periods of imprisonment.  The first was  imposed  by  Woolwich
             Crown Court on 16 October 2012 when he  was  sentenced  to  12
             months for affray, 6 months consecutive for  offensive  weapon
             in a  public  place,  3  months  for  destroying  or  damaging
             property, to run consecutively and a  further  one  month  for
             failing to comply with an  earlier  suspended  sentence.   The
             second period of imprisonment  was  imposed  by  Inner  London
             Crown Court on 10 June 2015 when for possession of  controlled
             drugs and offensive weapons he  was  sentenced  to  13  months
             imprisonment.  As part of the overall assessment, and I accept
             that  the  periods  of  imprisonment  do   not   automatically
             disqualify him from enhanced protection under the regulations,
             and that he has lived in the UK for many years  beforehand,  I
             find that although in themselves the criminal  convictions  do
             not determine the issue, the Crown Courts  having  found  that
             the nature of the offences  are  serious  ones  which  merited
             periods of imprisonment which are not  insubstantial  they  do
             have  a  negative  impact,  do  interrupt  the  continuity  of
             residence and he is not entitled to enhanced protection.

         29.  The Respondent accepts that the Appellant has resided  in  the
             United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
             "continuous period of  5  years"  as  required  by  regulation
             15(1)(a).  It is well established  law  that  that  protection
             once  acquired  is  not  lost   by   subsequent   periods   of
             imprisonment.  I have to consider his case in accordance  with
             regulation 21  and  in  particular  whether  the  decision  is
             proportionate.   In  doing  so  I  have  to  consider  if  the
             Appellant is rehabilitated or making good  progress  with  his
             rehabilitation and if so whether that rehabilitation is or  is
             likely on  present  evidence  to  be  durable.   I  have  been
             assisted in considering this issued by the following  guidance
             to be found in Essa [2012] EWCA Civ 1718:

                  "32. We  observe  that  for  any  deportation  of  an  EEA
                      national ... to be justified on public  good  grounds
                      (irrespective of whether permanent residence has been
                      achieved)  the  claimant  must  represent  a  present
                      threat to public policy.   The  fact  of  a  criminal
                      conviction is not enough.  It is not  permissible  in
                      an EEA case to deport a  claimant  on  the  basis  of
                      criminal offending  simply  to  deter  others.   This
                      tends to mean, in the case of criminal conduct  short
                      of the most serious threats to the public  safety  of
                      the state, that a candidate for EEA deportation  must
                      represent a present threat by reason of a  propensity
                      to re-offend or an  unacceptably  high  risk  of  re-
                      offending.  In such a case, if  there  is  acceptable
                      evidence of rehabilitation, the prospects  of  future
                      rehabilitation  do  not  enter  the   balance,   save
                      possibly as future protective factors to ensure  that
                      the rehabilitation remains durable.

                  33.  It is only  where  rehabilitation  is  incomplete  or
                      uncertain that future prospects may play  a  role  in
                      the  overall  assessment.   Here  we  must  take  our
                      guidance from the Court of Justice in Tskouridis  and
                      the Court of Appeal in the present case remitting the
                      matter to this Tribunal.  It is in the  interests  of
                      the citizen, the host state and the Union itself  for
                      an offender to cease to offend.  This is most  likely
                      to be the case with  young  offenders  who  commit  a
                      disproportionate number of offences, but many of whom
                      will stop offending as they mature and  comparatively
                      few of whom go on to become  hardened  criminals  and
                      persistent  recidivist  offenders.   We  can  exclude
                      consideration of offenders beneath the age of  18  as
                      EEA law will prevent their deportation  save  in  the
                      unusual event  that  it  is  in  their  own  interest
                      (Article 28 (3) (b) of the Citizens Directive).

                  34.   If  the  very  factors  that   contribute   to   his
                      integration that assist  in  rehabilitation  of  such
                      offenders   (family   ties   and    responsibilities,
                      accommodation,   education,   training,   employment,
                      active membership of a community and the  like)  will
                      assist  in   the   completion   of   a   process   of
                      rehabilitation, the that can be a substantial  factor
                      in the balance.  If the claimant cannot constitute  a
                      present  threat  when  rehabilitated,  and  is  well-
                      advanced in rehabilitation  in  a  host  state  where
                      there is a substantial degree of integration, it  may
                      well very well  be  disproportionate  to  proceed  to
                      deportation.

                  35.  At the other end  of  the  scale,  if  there  are  no
                      reasonable prospects of rehabilitation, the  claimant
                      is a present threat and is likely to  remain  so  for
                      the  indefinite  future,  we  cannot  see   how   the
                      prospects  of  rehabilitation  could   constitute   a
                      significant factor in the balance.   Thus  recidivist
                      offenders, career criminals, adult offenders who have
                      failed to engage with treatment programmes, claimants
                      with impulses to commit sexual  or  violent  offences
                      and the like may well fall into this category"."

38. As can be seen  from  above  the  judge  was  clearly  aware  that  the
    appellant was reliant on MG such that he had derived the highest  level
    of protection counting back from the date of the deportation order. The
    judge  undertook  a  wider  assessment  recognising  that   convictions
    themselves did not determine the issue.  The judge cited directly  from
    MG at paragraph 28 that the court specifies "in  principle"  that  'the
    period of imprisonment interrupts the continuity of residence  for  the
    purposes of meeting the ten year requirement can only mean that so  far
    as establishing integrative links is concerned such periods must have a
    negative impact'.  However,  the  judge  assessed  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's convictions and noted the extensive  criminal  record  that
    the appellant had as part of his overall assessment.  It was  not  just
    the extent of his imprisonment but the nature of his offending and  the
    variety of the offending which affected the  approach  to  whether  the
    appellant was integrated.

39. The judge also  in  the  decision  as  a  whole  considered  the  scant
    documentary evidence showing the appellant's activities  prior  to  his
    obtaining permanent residence.  As such the  judge  concluded,  in  his
    overall assessment, that the convictions  and  their  sentences  had  a
    negative impact on  the  appellant's  integration,  and  therefore  did
    interrupt any continuous residence.  The weight that the judge afforded
    to the evidence and his assessment was open to him.  He considered  the
    evidence  and  directed  himself  appropriately  in  relation  to   the
    imperative grounds. The appellant  entered  the  UK  in  1998  but  was
    imprisoned between 2000 and 2002 but it is not evident that  the  judge
    took this into account as a negative factor.

40. That the appellant was not sentenced for two years does  not  undermine
    the finding of the judge that in his view the overall  convictions  and
    sentences of imprisonment - that is two spells of imprisonment  in  the
    four years prior to the deportation order -  undermined  the  claim  of
    integration and thus the continuity of residence was broken.  That  was
    sufficiently reasoned on the part of the judge.

41. It was argued that a period of imprisonment of less than two years  did
    not break continuity and even cumulatively the applicant's two  periods
    of imprisonment did not meet this length of sentence. I do  not  accept
    that Vomero lays down a hard and fast rule and it is open to the  judge
    to  decide  on  both  whether  the  sentence  is  capable  of  breaking
    continuity of residence and integration. Vomero refers to the  loss  of
    permanent residence through the absence from  the  host  member  state.
    That is not the position here and mere absence is wholly different from
    being imprisoned. At paragraph 10 stated

         'Under article 16(4) a right of permanent residence acquired in the
         past may be lost "through absence from the host member state for  a
         period  exceeding  two  consecutive  years".  The  thinking  behind
         article 16(4), as explained in Lassal (Case C-162/09) paras  53-58,
         is that a two-year absence affects "the link of  integration"  with
         the host member state of the Union citizen concerned. In Dias (Case
         C-235/09) this thinking was developed in a more complex situation'.

    Vomero also underlined the importance of the integrative link.

         The requirement of an overall assessment to identify whether or not
         a sufficient integrative link exists is also open  in  its  meaning
         and effect. An overall assessment of  integration  appears  on  its
         face a different test from residence "for the previous ten  years".
         MG indicates that,  in  considering  whether  ten  years'  previous
         residence exists in  a  sufficiently  integrative  sense  when  the
         person ordered to be deported is or has recently been in prison  at
         the date of the deportation order, account can and should be  taken
         of the length of  residence  prior  to  such  imprisonment.  In  MG
         itself, the Court of Justice said that, in assessing whether MG had
         ten years' residence previous to  the  deportation  order,  it  was
         relevant to have regard to the period (which  the  court,  somewhat
         confusingly, also described as a ten-year period - in fact  it  was
         well  over  11  years)  which  she  had  spent  at  liberty  before
         imprisonment.

42. Nor do I accept that MG is authority for the proposition that less than
    one year sentence should not be taken into account. As  that  authority
    emphasised any decision was fact sensitive.  It is not  the  case  that
    the judge merely concluded that the periods  of  imprisonment  excluded
    the appellant from claiming the enhanced protection outright.  Although
    it was argued that two years of imprisonment  and  an  absence  of  two
    years could be taken into account it is quite clear that  there  needed
    to be an overall assessment as to whether it was still possible for the
    appellant to qualify for enhanced protection and in  the  circumstances
    clearly the judge did not accept that it could.  The judge did  address
    the criteria under Regulation 21(4) and overall gave  cogent  reasoning
    for finding that the prison sentences had indeed broken the  continuity
    of residence.

43. I do not accept that the judge's resistance to  the  appellant  showing
    that he had sent sufficient documents to  show  periods  of  residence,
    demonstrated that the judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had
    achieved  permanent  residence.  That  was  part  and  parcel  of   the
    assessment of integration as I have alluded to  above.  That  said  the
    permanent residence was said to have been  acquired  between  2006  and
    2011.

44. Further from the assessment of the limited evidence prior to 2006,  the
    judge did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  indeed  proved  with
    documentary evidence his continuous  residence  in  the  UK.  Even  the
    Directive requires the requisite  residence.  The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted the evidence in relation to the period 2007 to  2011  for  the
    purposes of 5 years residence.  The judge's view of  the  evidence  was
    more with a view to the integrative links that the appellant had rather
    than to conclude whether he had permanent residence  or  not,  but  the
    fact remains that the judge found there was  scant  evidence  that  the
    appellant had resided in the UK between his release in  2002  and  2007
    from when the appellant provided documentary evidence. The judge stated
    at [27] with specific reference to the  time  of  10  years  under  the
    Regulations

         'The Respondent maintains that  he  is  unable  to  show  10  years
         continuous residence, and that no precise details in evidence  have
         been provided The onus is upon him on the balance of  probabilities
         to establish that to be the case.   Documents  have  been  produced
         that show periods of residence and court appearances  and  in  deed
         professional appointments referred to in reports and correspondence
         and in other documents which appear to show that he has been in the
         UK for substantial periods However  there  is  simply  no  credible
         evidence to show that period of  time  as  continuous  as  required
         under the regulations'.

45. The appellant was sentenced on 16th October 2012 and 10th June 2015 and
    those periods of sentences of imprisonment (at the very  least  served)
    would be deducted. Mr Fripp agreed  that  the  prison  sentence  served
    should not contribute to the length of residence.  The  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant had demonstrated  residence  prior  to  2006.
    Counting 10 years back from the Deportation order in March 2016,  would
    require the deduction of the served prison sentences  (at  least  16  �
    months), and would take the appellant into 2005.  That was prior to the
    evidenced period and when the appellant was an adult  (born  in  1984).
    Between the appellant's release in 2002  and  2005  there  was  limited
    evidence of residence. As the judge found the appellant could not count
    back 10 years.  Vomero in this instance does not assist  the  appellant
    as his permanent residence, as accepted by the Secretary of State,  and
    accepted in the grounds of appeal would have commenced at the  earliest
    in 2006.

46. Further and overall the judge gave an adequate assessment as to whether
    the appellant was integrated and concluded on grounds which  were  open
    to him that the appellant was not.

47. Exploring the position with regard the second level  of  protection  or
    'serious  grounds',  at  paragraph  29  the  judge  realised  that  the
    appellant had been deemed to have permanent  residence  and  indeed  at
    paragraph 26 identified that relevant decision could not  be  taken  in
    respect of a person with permanent residence except on serious  grounds
    of public policy.  Particularly at paragraph 30 the judge addressed the
    issue of rehabilitation, identifying that in the case  of  an  offender
    with no permanent right of residence 'substantial weight' should not be
    given to rehabilitation SSHD v Dumliasuskas & Oths [2015] EWCA Civ 145.
     In this instances, the  judge  nonetheless  proceeded  to  assess  the
    prospects of rehabilitation, an exercise, as he  directed  himself,  he
    would undertake when applying the 'serious grounds' test. I accept that
    the judge had the test of 'serious grounds' in mind.

48. It is clear that the judge, although  referring  at  paragraph  27,  to
    there being no credible evidence to show that the appellant had spent a
    period of time continuous as required under the Regulation, nonetheless
    accepted that the respondent had considered the appellant had  achieved
    a continuous period of five years,  that  is  permanent  residence,  as
    required by Regulation 15(1)(a).  The judge identified the  requirement
    to take into  account  personal  considerations  and  referred  to  the
    reports from Dr Abbas Lohawala, Dr Rachel Daly, Dr David Thomas and  Dr
    Pankaj Agarwal which dealt at length with the appellant's mental stated
     which remained  '  relatively  stable'.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had remarried and had two step children but did not live with
    them.  His father had little success in preventing his son from further
    offending.  Overall the judge found little evidence  of  employment  in
    the UK and a few family and friends with whom  the  appellant  did  not
    live. He struggled with the language in the United Kingdom and would be
    able to access the language in the Netherlands. The judge explored  the
    criminal offending of the appellant  and  found  every  likelihood  the
    appellant would persist  in  his  criminal  behaviour,  which  included
    violent behaviour, if allowed to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge found that the appellant remained a  threat  to  society.  It  is
    implicit that the judge found the appellant's removal justified overall
    on 'serious grounds' having explored his personal circumstances and his
    offending (the reasons which I refer to below).  The judge's  reasoning
    was in parts intertwined but this does not  undermine  his  conclusions
    overall.

49. Ground (ii). As stated in the  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge King stated "I see no error on the matter of  rehabilitation  but
    it will be for the judge hearing the residence point to determine  what
    if other arguments are relevant."

50. I find the judge's assessment of the rehabilitation was open to him. At
    paragraph 32, he identified the support the appellant had received from
    his father noting that the appellant had been assessed  and  the  OASys
    Assessment of 18 December 2015 and which had concluded that the risk in
    the community was assessed as high and a risk of  his  re-offending  as
    medium.  The judge found that  there  was  every  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would persist in his criminal behaviour,  that  his  offences
    had been accurately recorded and that the  appellant  was  prepared  to
    result to violent behaviour and possession  of  offensive  weapons  and
    drugs but reasoning in particular that

         "apart from some course work in prison there is little  by  way  of
         credible evidence that he has undertaken  rehabilitative  work.   I
         consider he poses a threat.  He will be able to  continue  to  work
         towards rehabilitation when he returns to the Netherlands."

51. The above shows that the judge did not just afford  the  appellant  the
    lowest level of protection but considered him on the 'serious  grounds'
    which was the alternative suggested in  the  skeleton  argument  of  Mr
    Fripp before the First-tier Tribunal.

52. At paragraph 32 the judge stated

         'the appellant has repeatedly failed to comply with  court  orders.
         He has reoffended with regrettable regularity  notwithstanding  the
         support he has received from his father among others and state  and
         other agencies'.

53. Contrary to grounds (iii) I am not  persuaded  that  the  arguments  in
    relation to the assessment of the evidence have  been  made  out.   The
    judge has not ignored  the  evidence  as  listed  in  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal.  There are details at paragraph 33 of the reports
    that were submitted and further that  none  of  the  reports  had  made
    reference to the capability of the Netherlands Mental  Health  Services
    to assist the appellant, further the judge factored into his assessment
    that the Netherlands has a considerably higher  number  of  psychiatric
    beds than the UK.  I am not persuaded that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    address the relevant evidence.

54. In conclusion it is clear that the judge has  addressed  the  ten  year
    issue and has concluded that the sentences themselves would have broken
    any ten year period of residence.  It is clear the judge has taken into
    account paragraph 48 of MG and was well aware of  the  extent  of  time
    that the appellant asserted he had spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    first, the judge did not accept that the appellant could show ten years
    continuous residence and secondly the appellant was not integrated  and
    therefore his sentences had interrupted any continuous residence.   The
    judge found the appellant's offending had continued and  was  extensive
    despite the support from his family. It is evident from the findings of
    the judge that he had decided there was a present  serious  threat  and
    the extent of that threat was such that there were serious grounds  for
    his removal.   The judge fully addressed the  point  on  rehabilitation
    and there is no merit in the last  ground  that  the  judge  failed  to
    address the evidence.

55.  I find no error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Helen Rimington                     Date 12th December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
