

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00735/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 February 2014                            |On 11th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                 OMAR HASSAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Royston (of Counsel), instructed by Parker
                  Rhodes Hicknotts Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

   1.     The Appellant is of Somalian nationality and  is  aged  51  years.
      This appeal has its origins in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State")
      dated 28th March 2013, that the Appellant be deported from the  United
      Kingdom on the ground that this would be conducive to the public good,
      pursuant to section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act  1971  and  section
      32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2007. The Secretary of State also  refused
      the Appellant's claim for refugee status.  His ensuing appeal  to  the
      First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed. This appeal gives  rise
      to consideration of the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AMM  and
      Others [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC).

THE REFUSAL OF ASYLUM

   2.     On 13th January 2012, the Appellant  was  sentenced  at  Cambridge
      Crown Court for that the Judge described as "a continuing  fraud  that
      you perpetrated on the Driving Standards Agency in relation to driving
      tests".  The Judge continued:

           "You admitted that you had fraudulently  attended  to  take  the
           tests on behalf of other people .......


           I am afraid I simply cannot accept that there was  no  financial
           motive .......


           You are a man of previous good character .................  (the
           offences) involved deliberate deception  of  a  public  official
           .................. [and] ..............  an intention to put  on
           the road people who have no qualification  to  drive,  with  the
           attendant  dangers  that  that  presents  to  other  road  users
           ................  and it provides an identification document, to
           be used by whoever you are doing it  for,  which  they  are  not
           entitled to."

      The Appellant's offending was aggravated by the consideration that  it
      included offences committed while on bail.  The  Judge  described  his
      offending as "a particularly serious form of fraud".  Giving him  full
      credit for his guilty plea, he sentenced him to 18 months imprisonment
      and disqualified him for  driving  for  12  months.  By  statute,  the
      maximum punishment for this type of offence is 10 years imprisonment.


   3.     On 2nd April 2012, consequent upon the aforementioned convictions,
      the Secretary of State determined  to  make  a  deportation  order  in
      respect of the Appellant.  On 5th May 2012, the Appellant responded by
      making a fresh claim for international protection,  in  the  following
      terms:

           "My removal to Somalia would be contrary to the UK's obligations
           under ECHR, because ........   there is a real risk that I would
           suffer serious harm as defined  in  HC395,  paragraph  339D  and
           Article 3.  In particular I would face:


        a. A real risk of suffering  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment  or
           being unlawfully    killed.


              b. A real risk of a serious and individual threat to  my  life
                 by reason of indiscriminate  violence  in  a  situation  of
                 internal armed conflict ......."

      He asserted that he would be vulnerable to the aforementioned types of
      proscribed treatment as the member  of  a  minority  group,  which  he
      identified as Sufi Muslims. The Appellant claimed that he would suffer
      proscribed treatment at the hands of the  terrorist  organisation  Al-
      Shabab ("AS").  He highlighted the length of his exile  from  Somalia,
      13 years.  He asserted that he has no family or  friends  in  Somalia.
      He claimed that he would not receive  adequate  government  protection
      there.  He further claimed to be a prominent  member  of  the  Somalia
      community in Manchester, where he had participated  in  demonstrations
      and television debates in which he  had  condemned  AS.   Finally,  he
      contended that his deportation would be in contravention of the rights
      enjoyed by him, his spouse and his son under Article 8 ECHR.


   4.     The Appellant's application for asylum was refused in  a  detailed
      letter, dated 28 March 2013.  This noted his  assertion  that  he  had
      left Somalia in 1991 upon the outbreak of the civil war.  It  recorded
      that he had arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2000 and claimed
      asylum.  On 19th March 2001, the Appellant's first  asylum  claim  was
      refused.  He was granted exceptional leave to remain, expiring on 19th
      March 2005.  On 6th October 2005, his application for indefinite leave
      to remain was granted.  This was his immigration status at the time of
      his offending and the ensuing impugned decision of  the  Secretary  of
      State.


   5.      The  refusal  letter  also  contains  the  following   noteworthy
      passages:

          "It is noted that your current claim forms much the same basis  as
           your original claim for which you were interviewed substantively
           on 22 December 2000".


      The letter continues, however, highlighting the following factors:


        a)    When the Appellant first claimed asylum in December 2000,  he
           claimed to have left Somalia in late 2000  after  his  life  had
           been threatened upon his refusal  to  travel  from  Walaweey  to
           Mogadishu.  In the same claim, he had alleged  arrest  in  March
           1997 with ensuing detention for six months.


        b)    In contrast, the Appellant's renewed claim for asylum in 2012
           was based on an assertion that he had left Somalia in  1991  due
           to  the  civil  war.   The  decision  maker  considered  this  a
           fabrication.

        c)    The Appellant is  a  member  of  the  Rahanweyn  Clan,  which
           belongs to Southern  Somalia.   The  relevant  country  evidence
           "strongly  indicates"   that   members   of   this   clan   live
           predominantly in Southern Somalia.  The Appellant would be  able
           to avail of their support and assistance upon return.

      (d) The letter  of  decision  then  gave  extensive  consideration  to
           conditions in Mogadishu and the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
           in AMM, concluding:

                 "It  is  proposed  to  deport  you  to  Mogadishu  by  air.
                 Therefore, further  to  the  above  case  law,  it  is  not
                 considered that you will be at risk  upon  your  return  to
                 Somalia."

      (e) The Appellant's claims under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR  were  rejected
           on the basis that  he  had  not  demonstrated  a  real  risk  of
           suffering any of the  relevant  types  of  proscribed  treatment
           "because it is not accepted that you are of any interest to  the
           interim Somalia Government or the Al Shabaab."

      (f)     It was considered, in the alternative,  that  he  could  avail
           himself of the protection of the Transitional Government  Forces
           and support from his Clan.

      (g) The claim for humanitarian protection was rejected on two grounds.
            The first was that the  Appellant  did  not  qualify  for  this
           discrete form of protection in any event.  The second  was  that
           he is excluded from the protection provided by the Qualification
           Directive, pursuant to Article 17(1)(b) and Rule 339D(i) of  the
           Immigration Rules, as he has committed a serious  offence  which
           generated a sentence of 18 months imprisonment.


      (h) Finally, the Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR  was  rejected
           by reference to paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration  Rules
           on the grounds that (in summary) the potent public  interest  in
           play outweighed the competing  factors,  with  the  result  that
           deportation would not  be  disproportionate  in  his  particular
           circumstances.

THE DECISION OF THE FtT

   6.     We distil the following findings from the relevant passages in the
      determination of the FtT:


      (a) The Appellant's asserted fear  of  prosecution  is  based  on  his
           membership of a minority clan.  This is not  demonstrated  since
           this clan can live in Somalia without fear of harm.


      (b) There is no specific threat to the Appellant.


      (c) The Appellant has no profile which would make him of  interest  to
           any relevant organisation  upon  his  return  to  Somalia.   The
           Secretary of State's assessment of  this  discrete  issue  would
           prevail.


          The remaining findings in the determination relate mainly  to  the
           consideration, and rejection,  of  the  Appellant's  case  under
           Article 8 ECHR.

   7.     We turn to consider the terms  in  which  the  Appellant's  claims
      under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR and his claim for humanitarian  protection
      were dismissed.  The FtT stated in  [44]:

           "It had been submitted on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
           conditions in Somalia were  such  that  the  Appellant's  rights
           under humanitarian protection would be raised as the  conditions
           are such that it would not be right to  return  individuals  who
           would face fear of their life and safety.   However  we  do  not
           find that the evidence provided would establish that there would
           be real risk  under  Articles  2  and/or  3  and  therefore  the
           implementation of humanitarian protection was not necessary."


      This paragraph continues:


           "As to the submission that humanitarian protection would be  put
           into doubt because of the criminality of the Appellant we do not
           accept or adopt the arguments of the Appellant's representatives
           that the offences to which he pleaded guilty were not serious as
           had been suggested.  The period of 18  months  imprisonment  for
           somebody of no previous convictions was a lengthy  sentence  and
           it is clear that the nature of the offence for  [sic]  which  he
           pleaded guilty was to obtain financial benefit  and  also  place
           individuals  in  an  extremely  life  threatening  situation  by
           obtaining driving licences for those who could not  drive.   The
           consequences of the actions of the Appellant were clearly  known
           to him and it is terrifying in the extreme to  have  a  scenario
           whereby because of the Appellant's actions an unqualified driver
           would be allowed to drive without insurance (as  this  would  be
           avoided because of the lack  of  licence)  on  the  streets  and
           motorways of the United Kingdom.  We  find  therefore  that  the
           rights to humanitarian protection have been taken  away  by  the
           Appellant's criminality ........"

      We have reproduced this passage in full since the main  focus  of  the
      grant of permission to appeal is, per Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton:


           "It is arguable that there is insufficient reasoning as  to  why
           he would not be at real risk of Article 15(c) harm  as  referred
           to in AMM ......"

      In the Secretary of State's Rule 24 Notice, it is stated:


           "The Judge may have erred in his consideration  of  whether  the
           Appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection, however it is
           contended that this is immaterial in light of the changes in the
           country situation since the latest CG was promulgated."

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

   8.     We have considered carefully the  terms  in  which  permission  to
      appeal was granted and the submissions of the parties' representatives
      on this issue.  Having done so, we consider that the central thrust of
      the ruling that permission to appeal be  granted  is  as  set  out  in
      paragraph [7] above.

   9.     The substance of Mr Royston's argument on this  issue  focused  on
      the country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AMM  (supra).
      Those aspects of the decision  in  AMM  which  seem  to  us  to  arise
      particularly for consideration are the following  (summarised  in  our
      words):

        a.    Article 15(c) of the Qualifications Directive has  a  broader
           reach than Article 3 ECHR, embracing a more general risk of harm
           and types of harm less severe than those protected by Article 3.




        b.    There is, in general, a real risk of Article 15(c)  harm  for
           the majority of those returning  to  Mogadishu  having  spent  a
           significant period of time abroad.


        c.    The aforementioned risk does not  arise  in  the  case  of  a
           person connected with powerful actors or belonging to a category
           of middle class or  professional  persons  who  can  live  to  a
           reasonable standard.


        d.    Outside Mogadishu, the analysis is different.   There  is  no
           general risk of Article 15(c) harm for those returning to  other
           areas of central and Southern Somalia.  In individual cases,  it
           will be necessary to establish where the individual  comes  from
           and to consider the background  information  pertaining  to  the
           area concerned.


        e.    In general, persons returning to an AS controlled  area  will
           be at risk of suffering treatment proscribed by Article 3  ECHR.




        f.    If a person is at real risk in a home  area  in  Southern  or
           central Somalia, the alternative  of  relocating  internally  to
           Mogadishu is, in general, unlikely to be  available,  given  the
           risk of indiscriminate violence in the city and  the  prevailing
           humanitarian situation.


        g.    Travel by  land  through  central  and  Southern  Somalia  in
           general poses real risks  of  serious  harm,  by  virtue  of  AS
           checkpoints and the prevailing famine conditions.


        h.    Flying into Mogadishu  International  Airport  is  reasonably
           safe.


      The  other  aspects  of  the  decision  in  AMM  do  not   arise   for
      consideration in the context of this appeal. The able  submissions  of
      Mr Royston had as their main focus that aspect of the decision of  the
      Upper Tribunal in AMM which held that there is,  in  general,  a  real
      risk of Article 15(c) harm for the  majority  of  those  returning  to
      Mogadishu following a significant period of time abroad.

  10.      Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  (the  "Qualification  Directive")
      prescribes certain minimum standards whereby third  country  nationals
      or stateless persons qualify either as  refugees  or  as  persons  who
      otherwise need international protection. The Directive also prescribes
      the protection to be  granted.   One  of  its  central  provisions  is
      Article 15, which is inserted under the rubric of  "Qualification  for
      Subsidiary Protection" and provides:

     "Serious harm

     Serious harm consists of:

              a) Death penalty or execution; or
              b) Torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment  of
                 an Applicant in the country of origin; or


              c)  Serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
                 person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations
                 of international or internal armed conflict".

      Article 17 of the Directive regulates exclusion from  eligibility  for
      subsidiary protection.  It provides:


      "1. A third country national or a stateless person  is  excluded  from
           being eligible for subsidiary protection where there are serious
           grounds for considering that:


              a) He or she has committed a crime against peace, a war crime,
                 a crime against humanity, as defined in  the  international
                 instruments drawn up to make provision in respect  of  such
                 crimes;


              b) He or she has committed a serious crime;

              c) He or she has been guilty of acts contrary to the  purposes
                 and principles of the United Nations  as  set  out  in  the
                 Preamble and Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the  United
                 Nations;

              d) He or she constitutes a danger to the community or  to  the
                 security of the Member State in which he or she is present.

      2.   Paragraph  1  applies  to  persons  who  instigate  or  otherwise
           participate in the commission of the crimes  or  acts  mentioned
           therein".


      Article 17(1) of the Directive is the parallel  provision  of  Article
      12(2), which is  concerned  with  exclusion  from  the  protection  of
      refugee status.  The main distinction  is  that  the  "serious  crime"
      provision in  Article  17(1)(b)  lacks  the  elaboration  and  greater
      definition found in Article 12(2)(b).  Articles 12 and 17 are  closely
      comparable to Article 1(F) of the Refugee Convention,  though  couched
      in somewhat broader terms.  Subject thereto, these three provisions of
      the two instruments in question have much in common.


11.  One of the claims of this Appellant was based on Article 15(c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive.  In its determination, the Tribunal failed to
      consider the relevant  jurisprudence, in particular  the  decision  of
      the Court of Appeal in AH (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2012]  1WLR  3469:   see  paragraphs  [33]-[42]  and  [52]
      especially.  It is timely to recall what Ward LJ stated in [54]:

     "Sentence is, of course, a material factor but it is not a bench  mark.
            In deciding whether the crime is serious enough to justify  his
           loss of protection, the Tribunal must take all facts and matters
           into account, with regard to the nature of the crime,  the  part
           played by the accused  in  its  commission,  any  mitigating  or
           aggravating features and the eventual  penalty imposed"


      We would add  that  it  is  also  relevant  to  consider  the  maximum
      punishment which could have been imposed.  However, this must  not  be
      considered in isolation.  Rather,  it  must  be  juxtaposed  with  the
      punishment actually imposed, any agreed basis of plea, the  sentencing
      of the criminal court and any other relevant facts and considerations.
        This series of facts and factors should then be  considered  in  the
      round.  We are of the opinion that,  having  failed  to  consider  the
      decision in AH, the Tribunal did  not  give  adequate  effect  to  the
      principles and guidance which it contains.  While the panel found that
      the Appellant's criminality was sufficiently serious  to  exclude  him
      from the scope of Article  15(c),  it  failed  to  adopt  the  correct
      approach in considering  whether  his  offences  fell  within  Article
      17(1)(b).  Both its finding that  Article  17(1)(b)  applied  and  the
      reasons which were expressed are  unsustainable  in  consequence.  The
      materiality of this error of law seems to us incontestable.


12.  In the Refugee Convention, the provision equivalent to  Article  17  of
      the Qualification Directive is Article 1F, which provides:

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:


         (a)  He has committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  or  a
             crime  against  humanity  as  defined  in  the   international
             instruments drawn up to make  provision  in  respect  of  such
             crimes;


         (b)  He has committed a serious  non-political  crime  outside  the
             country of refuge prior to his admission to that country as  a
             refugee;


         (c)  He has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations."


     We have highlighted Article 1F(b), as this is the kindred provision  of
      Article 17(1)(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive.   Article  1F  was
      considered by the Supreme Court in Al- Sirri and  DD  (Afghanistan)  v
      Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKSC54,  in  the
      following passages:


          "[12]  the Appellants, with the support of the UNCHR,  argue  that
           Article  1F   must   be   interpreted   narrowly   and   applied
           restrictively because of the serious consequences of excluding a
           person who has a well  founded  fear  of  persecution  from  the
           protection of the Refugee Convention ......


          [13]  secondly, Article 1F(c) is applicable to acts which, even if
           they are not covered by the definitions of crimes against peace,
           war  crimes  or  crimes   against   humanity   as   defined   in
           international instruments within the meaning of  Article  1F(a),
           are nevertheless of a comparable  egregiousness  and  character,
           such as sustained human rights violations and  acts  which  have
           been  clearly  identified  and  accepted  by  the  international
           community as being contrary to the purposes  and  principles  of
           the United Nations .....


          [16]  in our view, this is  the  correct  approach.   The  article
           should be interpreted restrictively and  applied  with  caution.
           There should be a high threshold defined in terms of the gravity
           of the  act  in  question,  the  manner  in  which  the  act  is
           organised, its international impact and long term objectives and
           the implications for  international  peace  and  security.   And
           there should be serious reasons for considering that the  person
           concerned  bore  individual  responsibility  for  acts  of  that
           character".


      The UNCHR approach, mentioned in the passage quoted above, espouses  a
      definition of "seriousness"  by  reference  to  crimes  which  involve
      significant violence against persons such  as  homicide,  rape,  child
      molesting,  wounding,  arson,  drugs  traffic   and   armed   robbery.
      Professor Hathaway comments:


         "These are crimes which ordinarily warrant severe punishment,  thus
         making clear the Convention's  commitment  to  the  withholding  of
         protection only from  those  who  have  committed  truly  abhorrent
         wrongs."


         (The Law of Refugee Status, p224.)


      Given the close kinship which links the aforementioned instruments  of
      international law, we consider that these passages provide guidance to
      the  meaning  of  "a  serious  crime"  in  Article  17(1)(b)  of   the
      Qualification Directive.


13.  We have identified a further error of law in the decision of  the  FtT.
      We consider that, in its determination, the FtT incorrectly elided the
      Appellant's claims under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR (on the one  hand)  and
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  (on  the  other).   This
      error of law is clearly demonstrated in the  text  of   [44]  (supra).
      The FtT failed to appreciate the distinctive nature and content of the
      protection provided by Article 15(c) and, in  consequence,  failed  to
      apply the correct tests and to make appropriately  reasoned  findings.
      Furthermore, this error of law was compounded by the FtT's failure  to
      make any reference whatsoever to the  decision  in  AMM.   We  further
      consider that the FtT incorrectly conflated the Appellant's contention
      that his status of convicted prisoner would expose him to  a  risk  of
      Article 15(c) treatment with the quite separate issue of whether he is
      excluded from the protection  of  the  Qualification  Directive  under
      Article 17 (1) (b),  to  which  the  Tribunal  gave  no  consideration
      whatever.

14.  As noted above, the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  dispute  that  the
      decision of the FtT is infected by error of law  with  regard  to  the
      issue under Article 17 of the Council Directive.   It  was  contended,
      rather, that these errors are immaterial "...  in light of the changes
      in the country's situation" since promulgation of the decision in AMM.
          We  have  already  highlighted  in  the  proceeding  paragraph  an
      incontestably material error of law in the approach of  the  FtT.   At
      this juncture, it is appropriate to  highlight  the  country  guidance
      issue formulated for consideration  and  determination  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in MOJ and Others:

           "Whether the current situation  in  Mogadishu  was  such  as  to
           entitle nationals of Somalia whose home  area  is  Mogadishu  or
           whose proposed area of relocation is  Mogadishu  to  succeed  in
           their claims for refugee status, humanitarian protection  status
           under Article 15(c)  or  protection  against  refoulement  under
           Articles 2 or 3 ECHR solely on the basis that they are civilians
           and do not have powerful actors in a  position  to  afford  them
           adequate protection."

      We  remind ourselves of the following passages  in  the  Secretary  of
      State's letter of decision:


           "The  above  objective  evidence  strongly  indicates  that  the
           Rahaweyn clan predominantly live in Southern Somalia with strong
           affiliations with other Somali clans and that they  have  gained
           increasing control over their  own  areas  where  Al-Shabaab  is
           predominantly situated today. It is considered therefore that as
           a member of the Rahaweyn clan that you would be  able  to  avail
           yourself of their support and assistance on return ......


           You claimed that you  lived  mainly  in  the  capital  Mogadishu
           ....................


           It is considered that you can  return  to  Mogadishu  which  now
           enjoys comparative peace with an  improving  security  situation
           ..................


           It is considered highly unlikely that you would be recognised on
           your return to Mogadishu because of your political  opinion  and
           your opposition to the Al-Shabaab Islamists. Even if you were to
           come to the adverse attention of the Islamists extremists, which
           is not accepted, then as already stated above  in  this  letter,
           you can avail yourself of the protection of your  clan  and  the
           Transitional Federal  Government  Forces  who  have  taken  full
           control in Mogadishu .................


           [The evidence] strongly suggests  that  you  would  be  able  to
           utilise [your] skills to find suitable employment  in  Mogadishu
           with the help and assistance of  your  clan  and  other  support
           networks available to you on return ..................


           It is noted that you  have  considerable  connections  with  the
           Somalia community in the United Kingdom ............   who still
           maintain  contacts  with  their  families  and  communities   in
           Somalia.  They would be in a position to provide  funds  to  you
           which ....  would be of some considerable value in Somalia.   It
           is also considered that they could also provide you with  advice
           and  contacts  that  you  could  use  on  your  return.   It  is
           considered therefore  that  you  could  avail  yourself  of  the
           support of your majority clan affiliations in  Southern  Somalia
           and in particular Mogadishu...... "

      Later passages in the refusal letter  lay  repeated  emphasis  on  the
      Appellant's ability to avail himself of the  protection  of  both  his
      clan and the Transitional Government Forces in the event of  returning
      to Somalia.

15.  We are conscious that substantial body of evidence,  both  factual  and
      expert, has been assembled by all parties, including the Secretary  of
      State, in MOJ and Others. Much of this was available at  the  time  of
      the decision giving rise to this appeal, in March  2013.  We  are  not
      satisfied that this evidence was properly considered by the  Secretary
      of State when formulating the passages in the letter of decision which
      we have highlighted immediately above.  Furthermore, we consider  that
      the errors of law which we have found in the determination of the  FtT
      are profound in nature.  We are not  satisfied  that  their  avoidance
      would have produced the same outcome.  For these reasons we reject the
      Secretary of State's contention of immateriality.

16.  Finally, while we permitted the Appellant's Counsel to develop  certain
      further arguments relating to Article 8 ECHR and  Section  55  of  the
      2009 Act and the Secretary of State's related policies,  we did so  de
      bene esse, with certain reservations. Much of this argument was ad hoc
      in nature, giving rise to spontaneous consideration of materials  such
      as the UKBA Criminal Casework Directorate policy documents "Separating
      Families for Deportation and Detention Purposes" (9 November 2012) and
      "Introduction to CCD Children and Family  Cases".   It  will  be  more
      appropriate for arguments and issues of this kind to be considered  in
      a somewhat more orderly fashion in some future  case  where  they  are
      directly relevant.  Given our conclusion on the primary issue,  we  do
      not consider it appropriate to address this  further  in  the  present
      case.


     DECISION

17.  For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the decision of  the
      FtT is infected by material errors of law and must  be  set  aside  in
      consequence.  At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  we  ventilated  the
      possibility of deferring our decision until promulgation of the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in MOJ and Others. Having  reflected,  we  do  not
      consider this appropriate.  Having regard particularly to  the  nature
      of the errors which we have identified in  the  determination  of  the
      FtT, we remit the case for the  purpose  of  a  fresh  decision  by  a
      differently constituted panel of the FtT.  We direct that the  hearing
      be listed so as to postdate promulgation of judgment in MOJ and Others
      (the hearing whereof was completed on 25 February 2014), which has the
      potential to be designated a country guidance decision.



                                    Signed:
                                                 [pic]
                                                THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   28 March 2014
