
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00553/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2014                                |On 25 June 2014              |
|Prepared 24 May 2014                          |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                Dogan Ozdemir

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Howe &
Co,
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Turkey  born  on  10  June  1956  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 20  June  2013  to
    deport him to Turkey under the provisions of  Section  3(5)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  His appeal was allowed  in  the  First-tier  but
    that decision was set aside by me after a hearing on 7 April 2014.   My
    decision, which was given orally at the hearing, was  that  the  appeal
    should proceed to a hearing afresh.  In those circumstances the  appeal
    came before me on 23 May.

2.   My reasons for setting aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were as follows:-

         "1.  This is an oral judgment in the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
             State against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-
             tier Tribunal Judge Callender Smith and non-legal  member  Mrs
             Hewitt) who in a determination promulgated on 15 January  2014
             allowed the appeal of Mr Dogan Ozdemir against a  decision  of
             the Secretary of State made on 20 August 2013 to deport him to
             Turkey  under  the  provisions  of  Section  5  of  the   1971
             Immigration Act.


         2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me,  I
             will for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent  as
             she was the respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly,  I  will
             refer to Mr Dogan Ozdemir as  the  appellant  as  he  was  the
             appellant in the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant arrived in Britain in September 1995 and claimed
             asylum.  That claim was refused  in  2001.   Although  he  was
             granted four years' exceptional leave to remain thereafter, it
             appears that that leave to remain was granted in ignorance  of
             the fact that the appellant had in January 1999 been sentenced
             to  ten  years'  imprisonment  following  a   conviction   for
             conspiracy to supply Class A heroin.


         4.   The appellant was released in 2003, having served part of  his
             sentence and in 2005 applied for indefinite leave  to  remain.
             That was refused in 2007 and in November 2007  he  was  served
             with a notice of liability to deportation.  He indicates  that
             he may not have received that notice.  It  certainly  was  not
             appealed.


         5.   Again, in August 2008 he was served with a notice of liability
             to removal to Turkey as an overstayer.  Again,  the  appellant
             did not appeal.


         6.   He remained therefore as an overstayer after June 2005 but did
             not  leave  the  country.   In  January  2013  the  notice  of
             liability to deportation was served on him.


         7.   The appellant's wife and four  children  were  naturalised  as
             British citizens in 2008.


         8.   In the letter setting out the  reasons  for  deportation,  the
             Secretary  of  State  correctly  referred  to   the   relevant
             structured approach set out by the Court of  Appeal  in  their
             judgment in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  The  Tribunal,
             in their determination, referred to the letter of refusal  and
             noted that the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a  serious
             offence  and  then  considered  the  evidence  given  by   the
             appellant and his wife and children at the appeal.  They noted
             that the appellant is in ill health.  He suffers from Type  II
             diabetes and has physical mobility problems.  In paragraph  34
             of the determination, they said that the presumption in favour
             of deportation in paragraph 396 of the Immigration  Rules  was
             outweighed for the reasons which they had given which included
             the  fact  that  the  appellant's  wife  and   children   were
             naturalised and in Britain, the appellant was  in  ill  health
             and indeed that he had not been convicted of any  crime  since
             2003.  They also took into account the appellant's age.


         9.   The Tribunal gave what must be  stated  were  extremely  brief
             reasons for their decision. In paragraph 36 they wrote that:

                  'In finding  that the appellant's Article 8 rights are  so
                  directly and proportionately engaged  in  respect  of  the
                  current situation we find that  the  same  factors  -taken
                  cumulatively -  amount to sufficiently compelling  reasons
                  and exceptional  reasons,  under  paragraph  399  why  the
                  respondent's decision disproportionately  interferes  with
                  his Article 8 rights.'

     The Tribunal stated that they had reached that conclusion  having  been
             mindful of the case of MM v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWHC 1900.  They therefore allowed the appeal
             both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

         10.   The Secretary of State appealed referring to case law such as
             the decision of the Court of Appeal in DS (India) [2009]  EWCA
             Civ 544 and MF (Nigeria).  In effect, the grounds assert  that
             the  Tribunal  had  not  applied  the  appropriate  structured
             approach to the issue of the deportation of the appellant  and
             the consideration of his rights under Article 8 as set out  in
             paragraphs 396 onwards of the Rules.


         11.  I gave permission on those grounds on 5 March  2014.   At  the
             hearing before me, Mr McVeety relied on the grounds of appeal.


         12.  Mr Harding in reply urged me to accept that the  Tribunal  had
             properly considered the exceptional circumstances in this case
             and in effect had reached conclusions that were open to  them.
             He indicated that it might well be  the  case  that  when  the
             Tribunal had referred to the judgment  in  the  Administrative
             Court in MM they were in fact bearing in mind the judgment  of
             the Court of Appeal in MF.  He stated that  the  Tribunal  had
             taken into account all relevant factors.


         13.   I  find  that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
             determination  of  the  Tribunal.   There  is   now   in   the
             Immigration Rules a properly structured approach to the  issue
             of deportation.  First, it is for the Tribunal  to  take  into
             account the offence which has led to the decision  to  deport.
             In this case, the offence is very serious  indeed.   That  was
             reflected in the conviction of the appellant and a sentence of
             ten years' imprisonment.  It is of note that the Tribunal  did
             not take into account the sentencing remarks of the judge.


         14.  The offence was serious and applying the Rules clearly it  was
             one in which this appellant could not have succeeded under the
             Rules.  The relevant factors that had then  to  be  considered
             are those in paragraph 399, effectively the issue  of  whether
             or not there are exceptional factors that would mean that  the
             appellant should not be deported,  factors  which  would  mean
             that the Rules set out in paragraphs 398 and 399 should not be
             given effect.


         15.  The reality  is  of  course  that  when  the  Rules  refer  to
             exceptionality, they are indicating that what is  relevant  is
             an exercise in the  proportionality  of  removal  but  placing
             weight on the legislation on the Rules themselves,  which  had
             set out the relevant structured approach.


         16.  What is stated in MF (Nigeria) follows a  considerable  amount
             of case law which stressed the need for the courts to  reflect
             the public interest in the deportation  of  criminals.   If  I
             consider the judgment of Lord Justice Rix in DS (India) [2009]
             EWCA Civ 544, I note the final sentence where he says:

                  'The public interest in deportation of  those  who  commit
                  serious crimes goes well beyond depriving the offender  in
                  question from a chance to re-offend in this  country.   It
                  extends  to  preventing  and   deterring   serious   crime
                  generally and  to  upholding  public  abhorrence  of  such
                  offending.'

         17.  That comment is echoed in the Court of Appeal judgment  in  SS
             (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and indeed in the judgment in MF
             (Nigeria).  Although the Tribunal  in  this  case  make  brief
             reference to the terms of Rule 396, there does not  appear  to
             be any weighing up by  them  of  the  serious  nature  of  the
             appellant's offence.  That, I consider, is a  material  error.
             There is the further material error that they state that  they
             are guided by the  judgment  in  MM  [2013]  EWHC  1900.  That
             judgment relates to the levels of income required for  spouses
             to meet the maintenance  requirements  of  the  Rules  is  not
             relevant, or certainly not central to the  issues  before  the
             Tribunal.  I consider that the Tribunal probably misunderstood
             the task before them when they considered that  that  judgment
             was one which would give them guidance in how to approach this
             appeal.


         18.  I would add that this is an extremely brief determination  and
             the findings of the Tribunal are scant  at  best.   However  I
             consider  that  there  are  certain  findings  which  can   be
             preserved.


         19.  However, having found that there are material errors of law in
             the determination,  I  set  aside  the  determination  of  the
             Tribunal and direct that the appeal be heard afresh.  It shall
             remain in the Upper Tribunal.


         20.  The findings that can be preserved  relate  to  the  dates  on
             which the appellant arrived in Britain and his own immigration
             history as set out in paragraphs 3 to 7 of  the  determination
             as it is also accepted the appellant's wife and four  children
             were naturalised as British citizens.


         21.  I am concerned about two matters.  The first is  that  of  the
             confiscation order and what attempts were made to reclaim  the
             money obtained by the appellant from his criminal  activities.
             Secondly, I am concerned to know about what happened when  the
             decisions were made in 2007, when  the  appellant  was  served
             with a notice of liability to deportation, and  that  made  in
             August 2008 when he was served with a notice of  liability  to
             removal.


         22.  For the above reasons, as I say, I have set aside the decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal will  proceed  to  a
             hearing afresh."

3.   It will be noted that in paragraphs 3 through 6 of my  decision  I  set
    out the chronology of  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  his
    offence for which he  was  sentenced  to  ten  years'  imprisonment  in
    January 1999.

4.   At the hearing before me the appellant, his wife and his four  children
    gave evidence, the appellant and his wife giving their evidence through
    an interpreter.

5.   Each relied on a statement or statements prepared before  the  hearing.



6.   The appellant's statement referred to the fact that he  had  fled  from
    Turkey with his wife and four children in 1995 and the  fact  that  all
    his other members of his family are British citizens.  He said that  he
    had no-one in Turkey.  He referred to his  medical  problems  and  said
    that he was a simple man.  He expressed remorse and shame for the crime
    which he had committed.

7.   In his most recent statement he  referred  to  the  confiscation  order
    which had been made at the trial and said that he  knew  nothing  about
    that.

8.   He emphasised that he had received "emergency treatment"  with  regards
    to a suspected heart attack when his arteries were unblocked.   He  had
    been in hospital between 2 and 4 March 2014.

9.   In his oral submissions he expressed remorse for  the  crime  and  said
    that in fact he had not had anything to do with  the  offence  but  had
    merely kept a bag which had been given  to  him  for  safekeeping.   He
    accepted fully that he did commit the crime.  He had not known that the
    bag contained heroin.  He said that he had had nothing to do with drugs
    and had no friends who were involved with drugs.

10.  He said that he had two sisters in Turkey, one older than  he  and  the
    other younger.  They were both ill and he did not know where they  were
    but he had learnt of their medical conditions through cousins  who  had
    travelled to Turkey.  He said there would be no-one to look  after  him
    if he returned to Turkey.

11.  Mr Wilding put to him that 12 kilos of heroin had  been  found  in  the
    bag and he accepted that that was the case.

12.  The appellant's wife gave evidence saying how  difficult  it  had  been
    for her and the children when the appellant had been  sent  to  prison.
    That had caused her to be extremely depressed and she felt the children
    had missed out during their teenage years.   However,  the  family  had
    bonded thereafter.  She stated that although her  children  were  older
    they still required a father figure.  She said there was no-one to look
    after the appellant in Turkey and he had nowhere to return to there.

13.  In her oral  evidence  it  became  clear  that  although  she  and  the
    children lived at one address,  the  appellant  had  a  separate  flat,
    although it was her evidence that  the  appellant  would  come  to  the
    family flat during the day and then return to his own  flat  at  night.
    She said this was because he had not wanted  to  disturb  the  children
    because of his own disturbed sleeping patterns.   She  emphasised  that
    she was concerned for the children should the appellant be deported.

14.  It was her evidence that her eldest daughter lived with  a  friend  and
    was not in the family flat, although she did not know where that friend
    lived.  She said that the two other daughters shared a  room,  her  son
    had a bedroom and she had a bedroom.  Apart from  her  husband,  no-one
    lived in her husband's flat.  She said that they were not  divorced  or
    separated.  They would discuss  the  children's  welfare  together  and
    other domestic  matters.   When  asked  if  she  still  considered  the
    appellant to be her husband she said that they had children.

15.  The appellant's eldest daughter, Sevan, who is aged  29  gave  evidence
    stating that she still lived in the family  flat  rather  than  with  a
    friend, but she had lived with a friend when  she  was  at  university.
    She said that her father had moved out of the family  flat  because  he
    would shout at night and said that she was always there for  him.   She
    would help take him to the doctor and support him.  She  did  not  know
    who would look after him in Turkey and described him as a man  who  had
    lost interest in life.  She described her role as  helping  her  father
    physically and emotionally.

16.  The  appellant's  second  daughter,  Mehrican,  who  is  aged  27  gave
    evidence.  She again described herself as having a  close  relationship
    with  her  father  and  she  would  would  help  him  go   to   medical
    appointments.

17.  The appellant's son Ali who is aged 25 gave evidence.  He  stated  that
    he was working part-time as he had not been able to get a full-time job
    since leaving university.

18.  Finally, the appellant's fourth child, Yasmin, aged  23  gave  evidence
    stating that her father was looked after by all members of the  family.
    She herself is  not  yet  working  because  she  suffers  from  a  skin
    complaint for which, at present,  she  is  receiving  laser  treatment.
    That is likely to come to an end fairly soon, but in  the  meantime  it
    means that, after each treatment (she has had five  treatments  out  of
    eight) she has to remain in the flat.

Submissions.
19.  In summing  up  Mr  Wilding  emphasised  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of those who commit serious criminal offences and  referred
    to the relevant structured approach set out in paragraphs  396  onwards
    of the Rules.  He argued that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    in this case which would mean that the removal of the  appellant  would
    be disproportionate.  While he accepted that the appellant had  private
    and family life here he stated that that family life was  not  entirely
    straightforward given that the appellant had a separate flat from  that
    of the other members  of  his  family.   He  argued  however  that  his
    relationship with the other members of the family  did  not  cross  the
    Kugathas threshold.  Moreover, the appellant's health  issues  did  not
    meet the test set out in the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  N
    (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094.   The public interest in the  deportation
    of a serious criminal was not outweighed  because  of  the  appellant's
    medical condition or other circumstances.  It was not a  case  that  it
    was unreasonably harsh for the appellant to be deported.

20.  Mr Collins in reply referred to the  appellant's  age,  the  length  of
    time he had lived in Britain and the appellant's medical evidence.   He
    asked me to place weight on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  only
    committed one offence and, in the light of the fact that there were  no
    sentencing remarks from the judge  to  accept  the  assertions  of  the
    appellant that he had not known the contents of the bag  which  he  had
    been asked to look after and that he had not known what was in the bag.
     He asked me to find that the appellant's account was unchallenged  and
    that he had minimal involvement in the offence.

21.  Turning to the living arrangements of the family he  argued  that  this
    was a functioning nuclear family where the  priorities  of  the  family
    were the children and he asked me to find that the relationship between
    the appellant and his children was particularly strong - stronger  than
    that of a relationship between most parents and their adult children.

22.  He emphasised that the appellant had only  committed  one  offence  and
    had not committed any crime since release from prison  over  ten  years
    ago.

23.  Having referred to the determinations of the Tribunal in MF (Article  8
    - new Rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) he asked me to find  there
    were clearly exceptional features in this case given the fact that  the
    appellant had been released from prison in 2003 and it  was  not  until
    ten years later that the Secretary of State had taken steps  to  deport
    the appellant.

24.  He emphasised that in the Court of Appeal judgment in  MF  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 it was emphasised that there were parallels between the system
    now in place under the Rules and the issue of whether  or  not  removal
    would be a disproportionate interference with the Article 8  rights  of
    the appellant under the Convention.

25.  Moreover he referred to the determination of  the  Tribunal  in  Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) where at paragraphs  67
    through  69  the  Tribunal  had   referred   to   relevant   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence and placed weight on the  difficulties  of  the  ease  or
    otherwise of relocation and the best interests of the children and also
    factors such as whether or not he appellant had entered  by  fraud.  He
    emphasised that the appellant had entered Britain lawfully in  that  he
    had been admitted and granted leave to remain. The  appellant  was  not
    likely to reoffend.  He also appeared to argue  that,  in  effect,  the
    factors set out in paragraph 399(b) of the rules were met.

26.  He asked me to find that the  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his rights under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR and in all the circumstances this was a case where it would not be
    appropriate for the appellant to be  deported.   While  he  stated  the
    appellant was not arguing that his ill-health was such that his  rights
    under Article 3 of the ECHR would be infringed  his  ill-health  was  a
    factor to be taken into account in the  assessment  of  his  Article  8
    rights.

Discussion

27.   The  relevant  structured  approach  to  the  consideration   of   the
    deportation of this appellant is that set out in Rules 398 and  399  of
    the Immigration  Rules.   It  was  accepted  by  Mr  Collins  that  the
    appellant could not meet the provisions of the Rules  as  he  had  been
    sentenced for a period of more than four years and  the  appellant  had
    not lived in Britain for at least fifteen years  immediately  preceding
    the immigration decision.  However, what is relevant is  the  statement
    in paragraph 398(c) that "it will only be in exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by  other
    factors".  In his judgment in MF the Master of the  Rolls  referred  to
    paragraph 398 expressly contemplating the weighing of  "other  factors"
    against the public interest and the deportation of  foreign  criminals,
    but he went on to state in paragraph 42 that:-

     "Rather it is that, in approaching the question of whether  removal  is
         a proportionate interference with an individual's Article 8 rights,
         the scales are heavily weighted in favour of deportation, something
         very compelling  (which  will  be  'exceptional')  is  required  to
         outweigh the public interest in removal.  In our  view,  it  is  no
         coincidence that the phrase 'exceptional circumstances' is used  in
         the new Rules in the context of weighing the competing factors  for
         and against deportation of foreign criminals".

28.  He went on to say that the word "exceptional" denotes a departure  from
    a general Rule, the general Rule in the concept of deportation that  in
    the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paragraph 399 and  399A  do  not
    apply, very compelling reasons would be required to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation.

29.  In this case the appellant  has  been  sentenced  for  a  very  serious
    offence, that of conspiring/supplying Class A heroin.

30.  It is unfortunate that the judge's sentencing remarks are  not  in  the
    papers, nor indeed was any pre-sentence report, however there  is  only
    one conclusion that can be drawn from the sentence of 10 years which is
    that this was considered to be a very serious crime  indeed.   I  would
    add  that  not  only  was  the  appellant  sentenced  to   ten   years'
    imprisonment, but a confiscation order also, it appears, was  made  but
    that that was not acted upon.  There is now before me  an  e-mail  from
    the appellant's criminal solicitors stating that they could not  recall
    the confiscation order or that anything had been done to  enforce  that
    and the respondent has no evidence regarding the order.  The  appellant
    states that he recalled nothing about the order.  I  will  accept,  for
    the present purposes, that the appellant was unaware of the order.

31.  There are a number of other factors in this case which  must  be  taken
    into account.  It is  relevant  that  since  release  from  prison  the
    appellant has not committed any other crimes  and  I  note  that  in  a
    letter dated 25 March 2013, Mr Rice, his Probation Officer, stated that
    it appeared that the appellant complied  with  all  the  terms  of  the
    licence and that he was not  assessed  as  a  high  risk  offender.   I
    therefore conclude that there is little  likelihood  of  the  appellant
    reoffending or indeed of his having reoffended over the last ten years.



32.  I now turn to the relationship between the appellant and other  members
    of his family.  From  the  evidence  before  me  it  appears  that  the
    appellant spends much of his time in the family home but returns to his
    own flat at night.  This is despite the  fact  that  according  to  his
    wife's evidence the family flat is not overcrowded - she  has  her  own
    bedroom there.  Indeed  there  does  not  appear  any  reason  why  the
    appellant's wife would not go with him to his flat at night.  There is,
    however,  I surmise a functioning relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his wife and the children.

33.  The reality is that the delay in making  the  decision  to  deport  has
    meant that the appellant has been around during his children's  teenage
    years and into their 20s.  Although they appear to be  a  family  where
    the children are only now, in their 20s, making tentative steps towards
    independent lives, that I am sure will develop in the near  future.   I
    do not consider that the  children  now  need  their  father  in  close
    proximity to them.

34.  It was clear from the evidence of the appellant's wife  that  she  sees
    her primary role as that of looking  after  her  children.   They  are,
    however, now at a stage when they do not need the daily help  of  their
    mother.

35.  The further  issue  is  whether  or  not  the  appellant  requires  the
    assistance of his children.  Their evidence was that the  appellant  is
    not a well man and that they take him to medical  appointments  and  on
    visits to the doctor.  The principal reason for  that  is  because  the
    appellant does not speak English.  It does not appear that either he or
    his wife are able to communicate outside the home, apart from  contacts
    with their children and presumably some  contacts  within  the  Turkish
    community here and  the appellant clearly has  contact  with  relatives
    here as he referred to cousins obtaining information about his  sisters
    in Turkey.  My conclusion is that neither the appellant  nor  his  wife
    (who was unable to tell the court what her address was) are in any  way
    integrated into this country.

36.  The appellant's health is clearly  of  concern.   There  is  a  medical
    report from Dr Y K Seymenoglu of 10  July  2013  which  refers  to  the
    appellant being a diabetic and his right arm being  "almost  completely
    out of use".  The report says that he cannot shave without  asking  for
    help and that he had physically and  mentally  regressed  in  the  past
    three years and was inclined to depression.  He finds it  difficult  to
    express himself and needed family support.  A further  report  from  Dr
    Tim Fenn dated 19 July 2013 states that he had heard that the appellant
    no longer had any relations in Turkey who are able to support and  care
    for him and  that  he  expected  his  mental  and  physical  health  to
    deteriorate without the support  of  his  family  which  would  not  be
    available to him in Turkey.  That again  referred  to  the  appellant's
    depression and poor concentration.  Dr Fenn  stated that the  appellant
    had gigantism of his right hand and had a hearing problem  and  he  saw
    the diabetic nurse specialist regularly for a  review  of  his  Type  2
    diabetes which was  poorly  controlled.   He  had  problems  expressing
    himself due to depression and language issues.  There  was  a  detailed
    list of medication which he was taking.

37.  The appellant also produced a letter from Dr Fenn  dated  19  May  2014
    which said that the appellant had a heart attack on 2 March 2014  which
    had been treated with  angioplasty.   The  heart  attack  was  "on  the
    background of Type 2 diabetes since 2004, hypertension since  2003  and
    bladder cancer in 2000.  There is evidence that the appellant is having
    some follow-up treatment at University College London Hospital.

38.  The Secretary of State, in the  letter  setting  out  the  reasons  for
    deportation dated 20 August 2013 deals  with  the  appellant's  medical
    condition under Article 3 of the ECHR.   While  it  is  not  argued  on
    behalf of the appellant that  his  rights  under  Article  3  would  be
    infringed by his removal, the reality is that  the  letter  of  refusal
    does set out information regarding  the  medical  treatment  which  the
    appellant could have in  Turkey  which  includes  free  medication  for
    hypertension and diabetes.  There is detailed evidence relating to  the
    Turkish Diabetes Foundation and there  is  information  regarding  home
    care services.  There is also day care for disabled people  and  family
    consultancy services.  There appears to be appropriate drugs  available
    in Turkey.

39.  It  appears  that  the  appellant  does  suffer  from  various  medical
    conditions which are potentially disabling, but these do not appear  to
    be life-threatening and can be treated in Turkey.

40.  The appellant, I accept, receives considerable support from his  family
    here.  It would be certainly in his interest, if he were deported,  for
    his wife to go with him.   She would be able to provide the care  which
    he requires.  I do not consider that he would need the assistance which
    he receives from his children in Turkey as  I  consider  that  that  is
    largely because of his inability to integrate in Britain and  the  fact
    that he does not speak English.

41.   The  appellant's  wife  is  British.   Mr  Collins  referred  to   the
    concession made by the Presenting Officer in Sanade and others (British
    children - Zambrano- Dereci) India [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC)  that a British
    woman should not be expected to leave Britain to go to a third  country
    when her husband was deported.  However, the facts in Sanade  were that
    the British woman had a child who was being  educated  here.   That  is
    very different from the situation of the appellant's wife.  Although  I
    am sure that she considers her primary concern is  to  look  after  the
    children, the reality is that they are in their 20s and there seems  no
    reason why they should not be able to look after themselves here should
    she decide to go to Turkey with her husband.  That of course, would  be
    a decision for her to make.  Clearly there are  some  indications  that
    the marriage is not as strong as it might be.

42.  With regard to the appellant's relationship  with  his  children  there
    appears no reason why they would not be able to visit him in Turkey  or
    that the family could keep in touch by telephone or even possibly Skype
    if that were set up by the children for the  appellant  in  Turkey.   I
    would add that I do not accept that the  appellant  has  no  ties  with
    Turkey as he clearly has two sisters there with whom  even  if  he,  as
    claimed, is not in contact, other members of the  family  here  are  in
    touch with them.

43.    I note that no asylum issues were raised in the appeal.

44.  It is to be hoped that the delay by the Secretary of State  in  issuing
    deportation proceedings is exceptional.  It  has  however  enabled  the
    appellant to be around while his children were being  brought  up,  but
    they are now effectively independent.  It does not appear that  he  has
    strengthened his own ties and developed his private life  here  in  the
    interval.

45.  The reality is that I do not consider that the appellant or indeed  his
    wife are integrated into British society in any way other than  through
    their immediate  family.  While  I  therefore  take  into  account  the
    appellant's health issues and the elements of private and  family  life
    which he has here against the very serious nature of the offence, I can
    only come to the conclusion that there is nothing disproportionate, let
    alone compelling that would mean that this appellant should be  allowed
    to remain in this country.

46.  I therefore, having set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    remake the decision and dismiss this appeal on  immigration  and  human
    rights grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

