
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 March 2015                         |On 14 April 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  (SI  2014/2604).   Neither
    party invited me to rescind the order and I  continue  it  pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Halliwell) allowing  MP's  appeal  against  a  decision
    taken on 1 May 2014 to deport him as an EU citizen under Reg 21 of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003  as
    amended) and ss.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. For convenience, I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal who was born on 17  March  1980.
    He has been resident in the  UK  since  3  October  2000.   Between  11
    October 2002 and 17 September 2013, the appellant was convicted on  ten
    occasions for seventeen offences, including one sexual  offence,  three
    offences against the person, four public order offences,  two  relating
    to the police and courts and one drugs offence.  On 20 August 2013,  at
    Mold Crown Court, the appellant was convicted  of  assault  occasioning
    actual bodily harm contrary to s.47 of the Offences against the  Person
    Act 1861 and sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.

 5. On 21 October 2013, the appellant was notified that  the  Secretary  of
    State was considering whether to deport him on the  grounds  of  public
    policy.  On 25 October 2013, the appellant responded and  relied  on  a
    nine year relationship with a British national to whom he claimed to be
    married and with whom he had two children aged 7 and 6 who resided with
    their mother.  He also relied on the fact that he had  a  16  year  old
    stepdaughter.  The appellant claimed that he  had  cohabited  with  his
    partner prior to his most recent imprisonment.

 6. On 1 May 2014, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant as an EU national on grounds of public policy under the  2006
    EEA Regulations and to make  a  deportation  order  against  him  under
    s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  issue  before
    Judge Halliwell was whether the appellant could establish that  he  had
    been resident in the UK for a "continuous period of at least ten  years
    prior to the relevant decision" such that he could only be  removed  on
    "imperative grounds of public security" (see reg 21(4) of the 2006  EEA
    Regulations).   It  was  accepted   by   the   Secretary   of   State's
    representative that the  "high  threshold"  under  reg  21(4)  was  not
    established on the evidence.

 8. Judge Halliwell  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  established  the
    required "continuous period of at least ten years" residence in the  UK
    prior to 1 May 2014 (the date of the "relevant decision").  He accepted
    that the appellant had resided in the UK for over thirteen years  since
    3 October 2000 despite having spent fifteen and a half months in prison
    of the fourteen years he had been in the UK.

 9. At para 9 of his determination the judge  considered  the  case  of  MG
    (Prison - Article 28(3)(a) of the Citizens Directive)  Portugal  [2014]
    UKUT 00392 (IAC) ("MG(UT)")and the relevance of periods of imprisonment
    to establishing the continuous residence for "at least  ten  years"  as
    follows:

         "9.  Following the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  MG  (prison-
             Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive) Portugal  [2014]  UKUT
             00392 (IAC) in which case I will refer hereafter to as MG (UT)
             it is clear that where an Appellant has resided in the  United
             Kingdom for more than 10 years that a period  of  imprisonment
             during those 10 years does not necessarily  prevent  a  person
             from qualifying for enhanced protection under Regulation 21(4)
             if that  person  is  sufficiently  integrated.   A  period  of
             imprisonment  must  have  a  negative  impact  in  so  far  as
             establishing integration is concerned."

10. At paras 22-23, Judge Halliwell applied the law as set out  in  para  9
    based upon MG(UT), concluding  that  the  periods  of  the  appellant's
    imprisonment for a total of fifteen and a  half  months  over  fourteen
    years did not prevent him establishing "at least ten years"  continuous
    residence prior to 1 May 2014 because he had "integrated into the  UK".
    The judge said this:

         "22. The Appellant is now 34 years of age  and  he  has  been  here
             since the age of 20.  During  that  time  he  has  amassed  10
             convictions for 17 separate offences, and the last offence for
             serious unprovoked violence which resulted in a 15 month  term
             of imprisonment.  However as an EEA  citizen  the  Appellant's
             position is different from that of a non EU  citizen,  because
             of rights  arising  under  the  EU  Treaties,  directives  and
             regulations.  I have summarized the law at  the  beginning  of
             this determination.  I have no reason  to  doubt  any  of  the
             factual evidence given to me by the Appellant and his  partner
             as to the length of time the Appellant has spent in the United
             Kingdom.  That evidence was not changed, and  I  am  satisfied
             that  at  that  the  date  of  the  Deportation  Decision  the
             Appellant had resided in this Country for over 13  years.   It
             follows  therefore,  that  in  principle,  he  cannot  now  be
             deported  except  upon  the  imperative  grounds  of  National
             Security.  That threshold is extremely high and  there  is  no
             evidence  before  me,  or  submission  from  the  Respondent's
             Representative, that that high threshold has been breached.

         23.  Following the case of MG(UT) the only issue I have  decide  is
             whether the Appellant's offending so negatively  impacts  upon
             his time here that he cannot be considered to be  sufficiently
             integrated into the UK.  I am however satisfied the  Appellant
             is integrated into the UK.  Despite his  offending  he  had  a
             loving family and partner D all of whom support  him  and  are
             emotionally and when working, financially, dependent upon him.
              His offending has resulted in his spending about a  year  and
             quarter in prison, which means he has resided in the Community
             as at the present time for over 12 years.  That is  sufficient
             to bring him within the enhanced protection  from  deportation
             of those EU citizens who have resided here for upwards  of  10
             years.  The high threshold for deportation in such  cases  has
             not  been  reached  and  his  appeal  under  the   Regulations
             succeeds."







The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 15 December 2014, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  J  M
    Holmes) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

12. Thus, the appeal came before me.

13. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the
    grounds set out in the Secretary of State's application for permission.
     His primary submission was that the judge had wrongly applied  EU  law
    and, in particular, the judge had misunderstood MG(UT).  Continuity  of
    residence was broken by a period of imprisonment.   He  submitted  that
    the Upper Tribunal had not concluded that the Court of  Justice's  case
    law - in particular Onuekwere v SSHD (Case  C-387/12)  and  SSHD  v  MG
    (Case C-400/12) (16 January 2014) - had decided  the  opposite,  namely
    that  periods  of  imprisonment,  in  themselves,  did  not  break   an
    individual's residence for the  purposes  of  establishing  ten  years'
    "continuous"  residence.   Mr   Richards   submitted   that   Onuekwere
    established that  periods  of  imprisonment  did  break  continuity  of
    residence when an individual sought to establish five years' continuous
    residence and a resulting permanent right of  residence.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that  the  CJEU  cannot  have  intended  that  any  different
    approach  should  apply  in  establishing  the  necessary  "ten  years"
    continuous residence when removal or deportation could only be effected
    on the basis of "imperative grounds of public security".

14. In the alternative, Mr Richards submitted that if MG had  decided  that
    continuity of residence was not necessarily broken by imprisonment  and
    would not do so if the individual had sufficiently "integrated" into UK
    society, Judge Halliwell had wrongly applied that to the  appellant  in
    para 23 of his determination.  Mr Richards submitted that all the judge
    had, in fact, found was that the appellant had been integrated into his
    "family" but not into "society".

15. The appellant, who was unrepresented, briefly addressed me  and  argued
    that he had become integrated into UK society.

Discussion

16. The relevant provision in the  2006  EEA  Regulations  is,  as  I  have
    already identified, reg 21(4) which states,  so  far  as  relevant,  as
    follows:

         "A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative  grounds
         of public security in respect of an EEA national who -

         (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of
             at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; ..."

17. Regulation 24(4)(a) reproduces Art 28(3)(a) of the Citizens'  Directive
    (Directive 2004/38/EC).  It  is  convenient  if  I  refer  to  domestic
    provision in this judgment  as  nothing  turns  on  any  difference  in
    wording in the Directive.

18. There is no doubt that the appellant has, in one sense, resided in  the
    UK for "at least ten years" continuously since he  arrived  in  October
    2000 prior to the respondent's decision taken on 1 May 2014.   Only  if
    the fifteen and a half months of imprisonment  in  the  fourteen  years
    between those two dates has the effect of breaking the 'continuity'  of
    that residence would reg 21(4)(a) not be applicable.

19. As is well recognised, the "imperative grounds" criterion  for  removal
    or deportation is the "highest" of  three  criteria  applicable  in  EU
    cases.  The 'baseline' threshold for removal is set out in  reg  21(3),
    namely on grounds of "public policy, public security or public health".
     The second, and "middle", threshold is applicable to those who have  a
    "permanent right of residence" under reg 15 when removal can only  take
    place on "serious grounds of public policy or public security".

20. In Onuekwere, the CJEC clearly decided [at 22] that:

         "periods of imprisonment cannot be taken into consideration for the
         purposes of the acquisition of a right of permanent residence".

21. As the Upper Tribunal in MG(UT) observed at [47]:

         "that ruling is expressed without any qualification".

22. It follows that the "middle" threshold will only  be  engaged  when  an
    individual can establish 5 years' continuous  residence  which  is  not
    broken by any periods of imprisonment.  However, in SSHD v MG, the CJEC
    expressed itself in less clear terms in the context  of  the  "highest"
    threshold giving rise to the "enhanced" protection of reg 21(4)(a).

23. I was not referred directly to the text of the CJEC's decision  but  Mr
    Richards relied on the UT's detailed consideration of that decision  in
    MG(UT) - which was, of course, the very case which had been referred to
    the CJEC.

24. The Upper Tribunal in MG(UT) dealt with the CJEU's ruling at [41]-[49].
     The UT noted that there was "an apparent contradiction" in the  CJEU's
    ruling whether periods of imprisonment could interrupt  the  continuity
    of residence for the purposes of  establishing  ten  years'  continuous
    residence which, if established, only permitted removal or  deportation
    on "imperative grounds of public security".  At [48]  the  UT  rejected
    the view that  the  CJEC  had  decided  that  periods  of  imprisonment
    necessarily interrupted continuity of  residence.   The  Tribunal  said
    this:

          "48.    ... If the court in MG had meant to convey  by  the  terms
             'cannot be taken into account' that  periods  of  imprisonment
             automatically disqualify a  person  from  enhanced  protection
             under Article 38(3)(a) protection, it would not have seen  fit
             to proceed in paragraph 35 to accept as a possibility that the
             'non-continuous' nature of  a  period  of  residence  did  not
             automatically  prevent  a  person  qualifying   for   enhanced
             protection.  Nor would it  have  chosen  in  paragraph  38  to
             describe periods of imprisonment  as  'in  principle,  capable
             both of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence
             for the purposes  of  that  provision  and  of  affecting  the
             decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the  enhanced  protection
             provided for thereunder ...'  It would have had to  say  that,
             if they fall within the 10 year period counting back from  the
             date of decision, periods of  imprisonment  always  prevent  a
             person qualifying for enhanced protection.  In addition,  what
             the  Court  goes  on  to  say  in  paragraph  37   about   the
             implications of the fact that a person has resided in the host
             Member State during the 10  years  prior  to  imprisonment  is
             clearly intended to underline that even though such  a  person
             has had a period of imprisonment during the requisite 10  year
             period (counting back from the date of decision  ordering  the
             expulsion:  see para 27) it is  still  possible  for  them  to
             qualify for enhanced protection and in this regard their prior
             period of residence 'may be taken into consideration  as  part
             of the overall assessment referred to in paragraph 36  above."
             We also bear in mind, of course, as did Pill LJ  in  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department v FV (Italy) [2012] EWCA  Civ
             1199 at [42] that in Tsakouridis the CJEU  Grand  Chamber  did
             not  consider  the  fact  that  Mr  Tsakouridis  had  spent  a
             substantial period of time in custody in Germany in  the  year
             prior to the decision to expel him (taken on 9 August 2009) as
             defeating  his  eligibility  for  enhanced  protection   under
             Article 28(3)(a).  Nevertheless (and this is where we consider
             Mr Palmer right and Miss Hirst wrong), the fact that the Court
             specifies  that  'in  principle'   periods   of   imprisonment
             interrupt the continuity of  residence  for  the  purposes  of
             meeting the 10 year requirement can only mean that so  far  as
             establishing integrative links is concerned such periods  must
             have a negative impact."

25.  Consequently,  the  UT  decided  that  the  relevance  of  periods  of
    imprisonment to the continuity of residence for the purposes of the ten
    year requirement was that those periods of imprisonment were  relevant,
    in a negative sense, in establishing "integrative links"  with  the  UK
    which underlay the basis for restricting removal or deportation  of  an
    individual to "grounds of imperative public security".

26. Mr Richards submitted that this statement  by  the  UT  explaining  the
    CJEC's case law was obiter.  In that, he is undoubtedly  correct.   The
    UT decided the appeal in MG's favour on the basis that his  deportation
    could not even be justified applying the 'baseline' level of protection
    of grounds of public policy (see [39]).  Nevertheless, the UT  examined
    in detail the CJEC's case law and reached a reasoned conclusion in [48]
    of its determination.  As the UT itself recognised at [49]:

         "The CJEU's ruling in MG ... clearly contemplates that even someone
         with 'non-continuous' residence over the 10 year period can qualify
         for enhanced protection under [reg 21(4)(a)]."

27. In my view, the UT's decision properly reflects the CJEU's case law.  I
    agree with the interpretation of MG I have set out above at [48] of the
    determination.  Consequently, I reject Mr Richard's primary  submission
    that Judge Halliwell erred in law in concluding  that  the  appellant's
    periods of imprisonment, amounting in  total  to  fifteen  and  a  half
    months, necessarily broke the continuity of his residence  prior  to  1
    May 2014 such that he could  not  establish  he  was  entitled  to  the
    enhanced  protection  under  reg  21(4)(a).   However,  a   period   of
    imprisonment must  have  a  negative  impact  insofar  as  establishing
    integration and, therefore, the required continuity and application  of
    reg 21(4)(a) is concerned.

28. Before moving on to consider  the  judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
    integration, it follows from what I have set out above that  I  do  not
    accept Mr Richards' submission, relying upon ground 1, that in order to
    establish the necessary  ten  years'  continuous  residence  under  reg
    21(4)(a) it is necessary for an individual first to establish  that  he
    has a permanent right of residence based upon  five  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the UK under reg 15.  The CJEU's approach to,  what
    is in our domestic law, reg 21(4)(a) is inconsistent  with  that  view.
    The enhanced protection from removal or deportation under reg  21(4)(a)
    is not necessarily built  upon  an  existing  right  to  the  mid-level
    protection conferred by five years' continuous residence and a right of
    permanent residence under reg 15.

29. Regulation 21(4)(a) confers no right of residence of any sort.   Unlike
    reg 15, it is only concerned with a level  of  protection  afforded  to
    certain individuals with ten years' continuous residence.  They may  or
    may not have a permanent right of residence  as  well  and,  therefore,
    enjoy rights of residence etc. that flow from  it.   Those  individuals
    will also enjoy the mid-level of protection from removal or deportation
    set out in reg 21(3), namely only on the basis of "serious grounds"  of
    public policy or public security.  The  enhanced  level  of  protection
    from removal or deportation in reg 21(4)(a) does not  need  necessarily
    to flow from acquiring  a  further  five  years'  continuous  residence
    beyond that necessary to give rise to the permanent right of residence.
     It is a freestanding basis upon which an individual benefits from  the
    enhanced level of protection from deportation and removal only.   As  I
    have said, the contrary view cannot be sustained in the  light  of  the
    CJEU's decision in SSHD v MG.

30. I now turn to the issue of integration. Mr Richards submitted that  the
    judge's  reasoning  in  para  21,  which  I  have  set  out  above,  is
    insufficient to establish that the appellant  has  integrated  into  UK
    society (despite his periods of imprisonment) such that he is  entitled
    to the enhanced protection from deportation.   I  do  not  accept  that
    submission.  The evidence was, and the judge  accepted  it  as  he  was
    entitled to, that the appellant had a nine  year  relationship  with  a
    British citizen with whom he had two children.  Apart from  periods  of
    imprisonment, he lived with his partner and two children together  with
    his stepchild.  They were a 'family unit'.  The issue of integration in
    society looks to the depth and strength of ties to the UK.   Here,  the
    appellant had the strongest of ties with  a  family  all  of  whom  are
    British  citizens.   The  judge's  finding  was  not,  as  Mr  Richards
    characterised it, simply in effect that the  appellant  had  integrated
    into his family.  The finding was, in essence, that the  appellant  had
    integrated in the UK through his family ties in the UK.   When  he  was
    not in prison, the judge found that there were emotional ties and, when
    he was working, they  were  financially  dependent  upon  him.   In  my
    judgment it was properly open to the judge on this evidence to conclude
    that the appellant had integrated in society such that, despite  having
    spent short periods of time in prison totalling in all  fifteen  and  a
    half months over fourteen years,  he  had  nevertheless  integrated  in
    society and life in the UK such that those periods of imprisonment  did
    not break the continuity of his  residence  for  the  purposes  of  reg
    21(4)(a).  In the light of all the evidence before the judge (which  he
    accepted)  the  judge's  finding  was  not  irrational   or   otherwise
    unsustainable in law.

31. As a consequence, the enhanced protection under  reg  21(4)(a)  applied
    and it  was  not  suggested  before  the  judge  that  the  appellant's
    offending  was  such  that  his  deportation  could  be  justified   on
    "imperative grounds of public security".  Given the high  threshold  of
    the enhanced protection, no other view would be tenable on the facts of
    this appeal.

32. Thus, the judge did not err in law in allowing the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

Decision

33.  Accordingly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   to   allow   the
    appellant's appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations did not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

34. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is not an appeal for which a fee is payable.  Therefore  there  can  be
    no fee award.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

