
[pic]
IAC-AH-al-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: DA/00802/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 November 2014                           |On 17 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Patryk Skupinski
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Bazini, instructed by One Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 16 July 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup and  Mr
    G H Getlevog which allowed the respondent's appeal against deportation.



 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to Mr Skupinski as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 5 March 1986.

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant was convicted on  2
    September 2013 of inflicting grievous bodily harm for which he received
    a sentence of 18 months imprisonment. Following that conviction, on  25
    April 2014 the respondent made a decision to make a  deportation  order
    against the appellant. As above, the appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Before me Mr Smart conceded that he could not rely on paragraphs  6,  7
    and 8 of the grounds of appeal. There was nothing to  substantiate  the
    reference to MAPPA, the case law in paragraph 7  related  to  automatic
    deportation of non-EEA nationals and the assertion in paragraph 8 about
    the mens rea of the offence was not correct.

 6. The challenge maintained before  me,  therefore,  was  that  the  clear
    credibility finding made against the appellant and his partner at  [18]
    had not been taken into account by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  their
    proportionality assessment. In  particular,  submitted  Mr  Smart,  the
    appellant's lack of credibility should have  been  taken  into  account
    when  considering  the  risk  of  reoffending.  The  OASYS  report  was
    predicated on the appellant being in a relationship with another  woman
    at that time  and  prepared  without  the  knowledge  of  his  lack  of
    credibility.

 7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly  entitled  to   make   adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant  and  his  partner  at  [18]
    where they gave significantly different information about  the  history
    of their relationship.

 8. It remains the case that it is common  ground  that  there  had  to  be
    "serious grounds of public policy or public security" as in  Regulation
    21 (3) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    (the EEA Regulations) as the appellant had been a qualifying person for
    at least 5 years and had  obtained  permanent  residence  status  as  a
    result.

 9. Where that was so, it appeared to me that the  panel  was  entitled  to
    find at [23] that it was  precluded  from  relying  on  the  one  index
    offence to show a "genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of   society",   that
    additionally being so where the risk of reoffending  was  low  risk  of
    harm to  others  and  of  reoffending  albeit  a  medium  risk  to  the
    particular victim. It was not my judgement that the assessment at  [23]
    onwards could be undermined by the OASYS report  having  been  prepared
    without full knowledge of  the  appellant's  relationship  history  and
    circumstance to the extent that the outcome of the  appeal  could  have
    been different.

10. In addition, the panel specifically took into account  the  appellant's
    lack of credibility at [23], stating that:

          "Whilst we have serious reservations about the credibility of  the
         appellant's factual account, the fact remains that no conduct other
         than the single criminal convictions is relied on."

11. It was therefore my conclusion that the grounds did not have  merit  as
    they did  not  show  a  material  error  on  a  point  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

