
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00633/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On: 8th June 2015                    |On 7th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Khan, counsel, instructed by Atlantic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica, born on 31 May 1966.  On  19
       November 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Canavan  allowed  her  appeal
       against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing  to  revoke  an
       order to deport her from the United Kingdom pursuant to section  5(1)
       of the Immigration Act 1971.  This decision  was  consequent  to  her
       conviction on 1 March 2006 for possession of a  false  instrument  (a
       counterfeit passport) in respect of which she  was  sentenced  to  12
       months imprisonment and a recommendation made that she  be  deported.
       The Secretary of State  has  sought  and  obtained  permission[1]  to
       appeal against that decision.

       Background and basis of claim

    2. The Respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 November  1999  and
       was granted leave to enter as a visitor for 6 months.  She  may  have
       been granted further leave for another 6 months although the basis of
       this  leave  is  unclear;  what  is  clear  is  that  she  thereafter
       overstayed. On 13 June 2001, her daughter, GBS (born September  1996)
       joined her mother in the United Kingdom. It is not known whether  she
       entered lawfully. On 13 January 2003, the Respondent  gave  birth  to
       her second daughter, CLW, who naturalised as  a  British  citizen  on
       7.11.13. On 11 March 2009, she gave birth to her third daughter,  TM.
       The Respondent is the sole carer for all three children.

    3. On 17 December 2003, she applied for leave to remain as the spouse of
       a person settled in the United Kingdom viz  CLW's  father.  It  later
       transpired that he  did  not  have  leave  to  remain  and  may  have
       subsequently been removed  to  Jamaica.  On  28  February  2006,  the
       Respondent was found in possession of a stolen British passport and a
       fraudulently obtained UK driving licence and on 12 April 2006 she was
       sentenced to  12  months  imprisonment.  The  sentencing  Judge  took
       account of the facts  that  she  had  no  previous  convictions,  had
       pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity and had  not  relied  upon
       the State to support her whilst in the United Kingdom.

    4. On 26 August  2006,  the  Secretary  of  State  issued  a  notice  of
       liability  to  deportation.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that
       decision and following a First-tier Tribunal hearing on 29  September
       2006 her appeal was dismissed on all grounds[2]. An  application  for
       reconsideration was refused and the deportation order was signed on 8
       January 2007.

    5. No action was taken to deport the Respondent or her children.  On  14
       July 2008, the Respondent applied for leave to remain on human rights
       grounds,  which  was  treated  as  an  application  to   revoke   the
       deportation order. This application was refused on 10 July 2008.  The
       Secretary of State subsequently agreed  that  in  doing  so  she  had
       failed to consider policy DP5/96 then in force in respect of children
       who had lived in the United Kingdom for 7 years and the decision  was
       reconsidered, with a fresh decision to refuse  to  revoke  the  Order
       being served on 17 October 2008.

    6. The Respondent appealed against this decision and shortly  after  the
       birth of her daughter, TM, her appeal was heard and  dismissed  in  a
       determination  dated  21  April  2009[3].  Further  applications   to
       challenge this decision were made and refused.

    7. The Secretary of State subsequently decided to revoke the deportation
       order, because the  reasons  for  deportation  letter  had  not  been
       properly served on the Respondent. On 22 July 2010, a fresh  decision
       to make a deportation order was served  on  the  Respondent  and  her
       three children and she appealed against this decision.

    8. Her appeal was then heard  by  a  differently  constituted  panel  of
       Judges[4] and the appeal was dismissed in a  determination  dated  16
       November 2010.  Further applications to challenge this  decision  was
       not successful and the Respondent became appeal rights exhausted on 7
       November 2011. On 14 December 2011, she applied for leave  to  remain
       on Zambrano grounds but this application was refused  on  2  February
       2012 as the Respondent was not the primary carer of  an  EU  national
       child at that time.

    9. A deportation order was signed against the Respondent on 29  February
       2012. On 19 April 2013, she made a further application for  leave  to
       remain on human rights grounds, with her children as her  dependants.
       Her daughter, CLW, was naturalised as a British citizen on 7 November
       2013.  On  25  March  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  this
       application  but  treated  it  as  an  application  to   revoke   the
       deportation order[5].  The Respondent appealed against this  decision
       and her appeal came before Judge Canavan for hearing on 29  September
       2014. The Respondent gave evidence and was cross-examined.

   10. In a determination promulgated on 19  November  2014,  Judge  Canavan
       allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8
       grounds.  On  27  November  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State   sought
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Permission to appeal  was
       refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  on  10  December  2014.  A
       renewed application for permission to appeal was successfully made to
       the Upper Tribunal on 30 December 2014. The grounds of appeal  assert
       that the First-tier Tribunal Judge:

        i) Failed to properly appreciate the context and effect of sections
           117A, B & C of the NIAA 2002;

       ii) Failed to provide adequate reasons for finding that it would  be
           unduly harsh for CLW to return to Jamaica  with  her  mother  or
           remain in the United Kingdom without her mother;

      iii) Failed to properly apply paragraph 399a of the Rules:

       iv) Erred in her consideration of  "very  compelling  circumstances"
           for the purposes of paragraph 398 of the Rules.

       Matters in Issue at the hearing

   11. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Clarke made  submissions
       in respect of grounds (i) and (iv) together. He submitted that in her
       observation that paragraph 399A of the Rules  imparts  an  additional
       step to the 'unduly harsh' test Judge Canavan had erroneously drawn a
       distinction between the  Immigration  Act  2014  and  the  Rules.  He
       submitted that section 117 was not inconsistent with  the  Rules  and
       that at paragraph 26 the determination contained the wrong test.

   12. Mr Clarke submitted that section 117C(v) was not 'new' law  and  that
       paragraphs 29-41 of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) sets  out  European
       jurisprudence regarding precariousness, which is  reflected  in  this
       provision. He submitted that this was relevant to the family life  in
       this case, since the Respondent had contracted her family  life  with
       her children in the full knowledge that her  status  was  precarious;
       the Immigration Act 2014 does not preclude this principle applying in
       respect of children. In respect of Ground 4, Mr Clarke submitted that
       there had been no need to go on to consider exceptional circumstances
       and that the Judge erred in  applying  a  'compelling  circumstances'
       test and should have looked at whether the undue  hardship  test  had
       been met. It was not  appropriate  to  look  outside  the  Rules:  MF
       (Nigeria) (2013) EWCA Civ 1192. He further submitted that  there  was
       no consideration of the impact on CLW at paragraph 45 and whether  or
       not it would be unduly harsh for her to return to Jamaica  or  remain
       in the United Kingdom without her mother. CLW's ties with the  United
       Kingdom had not been  identified.  He  referred  to  the  Immigration
       Directorate Instructions at 2.5.

   13. In response, Mr Khan on behalf of the Respondent submitted  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge made no mistake or misdirection in  respect
       of her assessment of the Immigration Act  2014  and  the  Immigration
       Rules. He  accepted  that  there  may  have  been  an  assessment  of
       paragraphs 398 and 399 the wrong way round but this was not material.
       The issue of the public interest considerations contained in  section
       117C were additional considerations to those in the Rules. He further
       submitted that the correct rules had been applied cf. MK (section  55
       - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) and that the
       Judge's findings at paragraph 42 were consistent with the decision in
       Zoumbas (2013) UKSC 74 per Lord Hodge at 24. Mr Khan noted  that  the
       Home Office policy does not at 2.5  address the effect  on  children;
       at 2.5.4 that one issue that  could  be  considered  is  that  it  is
       perhaps  more  difficult  for  a  foreign  criminal  to   show   that
       deportation would be unduly harsh. The Respondent's conviction was  8
       years ago, since then she has been rehabilitated and there  has  been
       no further criminal activity. The  Judge  applied  the  correct  law,
       applying Zoumbas in considering the impact on CLW.

   14. Judge Bruce then clarified the Home Office's position with Mr Clarke,
       as to whether or not it was the Secretary of  State's  case  that  it
       would not be unduly harsh for CLW to remain in  the  UK  without  her
       mother. He confirmed that the position was that CLW could remain with
       the aunt who had cared for her when her mother was  in  prison;  this
       aunt had not turned up at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
       and the Judge had not given proper consideration to the fact that CLW
       had lived with her before.  The parties confirmed, in response to our
       query, that the Respondent was released from prison  at  the  end  of
       2006 and that CLW has been living at home with her mother since then.

   15. Mr Clarke responded, suggesting that the word "unduly"  imports  into
       the test a proportionality balancing exercise and that in  conducting
       that exercise everything is weighed  in  including  the  Respondent's
       criminality and the unfortunate history of the delay in this  matter.
       Whilst the Deportation Order had been withdrawn in 2010 as no reasons
       had been served, there have been a  number  of  hearings.  It  was  a
       mistake by the Home Office but the Respondent  never  had  leave  and
       knew she should not be here. There is a public policy  in  favour  of
       deporting foreign criminals and the Judge does not consider the  fact
       that the Respondent was at fault in staying  in  the  United  Kingdom
       when she had no leave to do so.

   16. We reserved our decision.

       Error of Law: Our Findings

   17. We do not find that the Judge made material  errors  of  law  in  her
       determination.

   18. We agree with the reasons given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  in
       refusing permission to appeal that, although Judge  Canavan  may,  in
       considering sections  117A-D  of  the  NIAA  2002  have  referred  to
       "additional tests" being imported into the Immigration Rules, she was
       simply highlighting the stages that have to be gone  through  in  the
       Tribunal's consideration of Article 8.  Her  observations  about  the
       structure of the present law were no more than that.

   19. At the centre of this case is Judge Canavan's finding that  it  would
       be unduly harsh for CLW to either live without her mother in the  UK,
       or to go to Jamaica with her. If that finding was sound, and open  to
       Judge Canavan on the evidence before her, the other matters raised in
       the grounds fall away.

   20. Having given careful consideration to the well-made submissions of Mr
       Clarke, we are not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did err  in
       its approach to this question. We do not consider that Judge  Canavan
       erred in finding that it would be unduly harsh  for  CLW,  a  British
       citizen born in the United Kingdom and aged 11 years at the  time  of
       that hearing, to either remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  her
       mother or to relocate to Jamaica. We consider that the Judge did give
       clear and adequate reasons  for  her  findings  in  this  respect  at
       paragraph 42 of the determination where she referred to CLW's  strong
       and longstanding connections to the United Kingdom, with friends  and
       family here; she knows of "no other life".  At paragraph  45  of  the
       determination Judge Canavan refers to CLW's British nationality;  her
       strong ties to the United Kingdom; the fact that she is still a young
       child and her mother had always been her  main  carer  except  for  a
       temporary period eight years ago when she was in prison. It  was  for
       these reasons that the Judge found that the  exception  at  paragraph
       399(a) of the Immigration Rules was met on the facts of this case. Mr
       Clarke provided us with copies of the Home Office guidance at Chapter
       13 of the Immigration Directorate Instructions: Criminality  Guidance
       in Article 8 ECHR Cases  (28.7.14)  and  the  definition  of  "unduly
       harsh" therein (at 2.5. and 3.5.). Judge Canavan was clearly aware of
       the guidance as she cited it at  paragraph  32  and  specifically  in
       respect of the definition at 44; we are  satisfied  her  decision  in
       this respect was properly open to her.

   21. In respect of Ground 4, given that the  Judge  found  that  paragraph
       399(a) applied, it was not necessary for her to go  on  to  consider,
       under  paragraph   398,   whether   there   were   'very   compelling
       circumstances', but the fact that she did so at 52  does  not  render
       her findings of fact or her decision as a whole materially flawed.

       Decisions

   22. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  materially  err  in  law  and  the
       determination is upheld.

   23. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

   24. Having had regard to the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 and the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity
       Orders, and having regard to the minors involved  in  this  case,  we
       maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  in  the
       following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".


                             Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
                             24 June 2015
-----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 7th April 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Keki?
[2] The First-tier Tribunal panel comprising?????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????
????????????????????????????????????????????????? Designated Immigration
Judge Wilson & Mrs Harris
[3] Determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coleman
[4] A First-tier Tribunal panel comprising Judge Hanes and Mrs J Holt
[5] The Order was signed on 29 February 2012

