
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
DA/00303/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |             Decision & Reasons       |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 July 2017                      |             On 7 July 2017           |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            Almaza Ivaskeviciene
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hamid, of Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appellant)  appeals
         against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Malone
         who, in a decision promulgated on  4  November  2016,  allowed  the
         appeal  of  Ms  Almaza   Ivaskeviciene   (Claimant)   against   the
         Appellant's decision of 6 June 2016 to  make  a  deportation  order
         against her pursuant to  regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  2006  Regulations),
         and a supplementary decision dated 6 July 2016.



Background

      2. The Claimant is a national of Lithuania, date of birth 27  November
         1976. She has 2 adult  children,  Toras  Ivaskevicius  born  on  14
         February 1992 and Gabriele Ivaskeviciute born on 6  May  1995.  She
         also has a grandchild, YI, the son of Gabriele, born in the  UK  on
         16 February 2014. The Claimant also has a minor son,  DI,  born  in
         London on the 20 November 2005. The  Claimant  confirmed  that  her
         minor son is being cared for by her parents, that  her  ex-partner,
         Roman Ismailov, the father of DI, sees him every day, and that both
         her adult children and her grandchild also reside with her parents.


      3. The Claimant maintains that she entered the  UK  on  7  March  2005
         following the arrival of her parents, also Lithuanian nationals, in
         2004. In  a  letter  dated  9  June  2016  the  Claimant's  parents
         described themselves as disabled old  age  pensioners.  There  were
         letters from the DWP, dated 19  February  2016  and  5  April  2016
         indicating that both her parents  were  in  receipt  of  Disability
         Living Allowance.


      4. A letter from Caroline Budu, a Specialist Nurse, dated  9  February
         2016,  confirmed  that  the  Claimant  had  been   diagnosed   with
         Parkinson's disease in Lithuania when she was 17 years old and that
         she had been under the care of Consultant Neurologist Dr J Fearnley
         and Caroline Budu at the Royal  London  Hospital  since  2005.  The
         Claimant took a combination of medication every day to control  the
         symptoms of her disease.

      5. The Claimant  first  came  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  UK
         authorities on 5 March 2015 when she was cautioned for shoplifting.
         Over the period 17 June 2015 to 2 May 2016 she was convicted of  10
         criminal offences. These included  3  convictions  for  failing  to
         attend or  remain  for  the  duration  of  a  follow-up  assessment
         following a test for Class  A  drugs.  On  24  June  2015  she  was
         convicted of facilitating the acquisition of criminal property  and
         received a community order. On the same occasion she was  convicted
         of theft from a motor vehicle and was also sentenced to a community
         order. These community orders were later  varied,  on  11  February
         2016, to a sentence  of  6  weeks  imprisonment  suspended  for  12
         months, to run concurrently. On 10 September 2015 she was convicted
         of handling stolen goods and received a fine and a community order.
         This sentence was also varied on 11 February 2016  to  a  suspended
         imprisonment of 6 weeks, suspended for 12 months.  She  received  a
         further conviction on 15 October 2015 for failing  to  comply  with
         the requirements of a community order, and another  conviction  for
         failing to comply with a community order on 11 February 2016. On  2
         May 2016 the Claimant was convicted of shoplifting and sentenced to
         6 weeks imprisonment. On the same date she was convicted of  having
         committed a further offence during  the  operational  period  of  a
         suspended  sentence  order  (that  resulting  from   the   original
         conviction of 11 September 2016) and  her  suspended  sentence  was
         activated  and  she  received  a  further  sentence  of   6   weeks
         imprisonment, to run consecutively.


      6. On 16 May 2016 the Claimant was served with a notice that  she  was
         liable to deportation in accordance with the 2006  Regulations  and
         requested to provide reasons as to why she should not be  deported.
         No reasons were received from  her  and  a  deportation  order  was
         signed on 6 June 2016. The Appellant subsequently received evidence
         sent on behalf of the Claimant including a  letter,  dated  9  June
         2016 from her parents and a letter dated 21 June 2016 from her  ex-
         partner.


      7. The Appellant noted the Claimant's claim to have worked as a  self-
         employed cleaner who was paid cash in hand. No evidence however was
         provided in support of this assertion. The Appellant did not accept
         that the Claimant had resided in the UK in accordance with the 2006
         Regulations for a continuous period of 5 years. She  was  therefore
         treated as an EEA national who had not attained a  permanent  right
         of residence. The Appellant did not accept that  the  Claimant  had
         continuously resided in the UK for 10 years in accordance with  the
         2006 Regulations. This was because she failed to  provide  evidence
         of lawful residents for 10 years prior to her  recent  imprisonment
         and because she  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  that  she  had
         acquired a permanent right of residence.


      8. Having regard to the Claimant's history of offending the  Appellant
         concluded that she was a persistent offender. Although the  details
         of her offending were not generally known the Appellant was of  the
         view that crimes of dishonesty were not victimless  and  that  they
         had a wider impact upon  society.  The  Appellant  noted  that  the
         Claimant received 3 convictions  relating  to  Class  A  drugs  and
         considered that drug offences had a serious detrimental  impact  on
         the health and well-being of those who became addicted to them  and
         had adverse consequences for society. The fact  that  the  Claimant
         failed to comply with court orders demonstrated a  lack  of  regard
         for the law and  indicated  that  she  had  not  been  deterred  by
         previous  convictions.  She  was  consequently  said  to   have   a
         propensity to reoffend. There was said to be no evidence  that  the
         Claimant used her time in the UK constructively and  there  was  no
         evidence that she had adequately  addressed  the  reasons  for  her
         offending behaviour. The  Appellant  concluded  that  the  Claimant
         posed a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
         public such as to justify her  deportation  on  grounds  of  public
         policy.


      9. The Appellant considered  the  proportionality  of  the  Claimant's
         deportation, noting that she had been  diagnosed  with  Parkinson's
         disease and that she took  medication  every  day  to  control  the
         symptoms. There were said to be no evidence that the  Claimant  had
         culturally integrated in the UK. The  Appellant  noted  the  letter
         from the  Claimant's  parents  but  concluded  that  she  may  have
         relatives and friends  in  Lithuania  who  could  assist  with  her
         reintegration and that she had spent her formative, youth and adult
         years in Lithuania and would  be  familiar  with  the  culture  and
         customs of that country. The Appellant was not satisfied  that  the
         Claimants son, born on 20 November 2005, was resident in the UK, or
         that the Claimant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
         her son. There was  no  evidence  before  the  Appellant  that  the
         Claimant had undertaken any rehabilitative work whilst  in  custody
         and there was no evidence of any significant integration  into  the
         community in the UK. The fact that her parents resided  in  the  UK
         did not stop the Claimant from committing offences.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     10. There was no appearance by the Claimant at her  appeal  before  the
         FTT. The  case  file  indicates  that  she  was  granted  temporary
         admission on 21 July 2016. The  Claimant  had  not  instructed  any
         legal representative to represent her at  her  appeal  hearing  and
         there was no attendance by any family member or other person on her
         behalf. The Presenting Officer at the FTT hearing provided  written
         submissions.


     11. In his  decision  the  judge  set  out  the  limited  evidence,  as
         described above, relating to the  Claimant's  immigration  history,
         her family relationships, her state of health and her  criminality.
         It was unclear to the judge whether the Claimant  actually  resided
         with her parents as  the  letter  from  the  Specialist  Nurse  was
         addressed to the Claimant at a different address.


     12. The judge found that the Claimant's assertion to  have  resided  in
         the UK continuously  since  March  2005  was  corroborated  by  the
         statements from her parents and was  further  corroborated  by  the
         letter from the Specialist Nurse. At [28] the judge found,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, that the Claimant had resided in  the  UK
         for a continuous period of at least 10 years prior to the  decision
         to deport  her.  At  [29]  the  judge  reasoned,  by  reference  to
         Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations, that the  Claimant  could
         not be removed except on imperative grounds of public security. The
         judge found that the Appellant's decision  was  not  in  accordance
         with the law as it was not in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.


     13. The judge proceeded to consider, in the  alternative,  whether  the
         Claimant represented a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  (with
         reference to Regulation 21(5) of the 2006 Regulations).  The  judge
         noted that the Claimant had not been charged with possession of  or
         dealing in Class A drugs. The judge noted  that  the  Claimant  had
         been convicted  of  petty  theft  and  handling  stolen  goods  and
         breaching court orders and the terms of suspended prison sentences.
         The judge noted that the deportation had to comply the principle of
         proportionality and had to be based exclusively on  the  Claimant's
         personal conduct. At [47] the judge indicated that he had  to  "...
         decide whether  the  [Claimant's]  conduct  represents  a  genuine,
         present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the
         fundamental interests of society."


     14. At [49] the judge noted that the  Claimant's  criminal  convictions
         spanned a period of less than a year but  that  she  had  not  been
         convicted of any offences from 2005 until 2015. The judge found  it
         likely that something had triggered her criminal offending. At [50]
         the judge concluded that the Appellant's offending  fell  into  the
         category of "relatively minor ones". At [51] the judge stated,


            I am  not  prepared  to  conclude  that  the  [Claimant]  is  a
            persistent offender. I have  found  she  has  resided  in  this
            country continuously for a period in excess of  10  years.  Her
            criminal  offending  is  confined  to  the  last  year  of  her
            residence. In those circumstances, I have  come  to  the  clear
            conclusion that her conduct does not represent  a  sufficiently
            serious threat affecting one of the  fundamental  interests  of
            society.  Without  wishing  to  play  down  her  offences,  the
            [Claimant] is a nuisance rather than a hardened  criminal.  Her
            parents stated that what she had done was "wrong"  and  a  "big
            shame". The evidence before did not lead me  to  conclude  that
            she is an evil individual. It leads one to conclude  she  needs
            help. She is clearly very seriously ill, at least physically.

     15. Having found that  the  Claimant  did  not  constitute  a  genuine,
         present and sufficiently serious threat, the  judge  addressed  the
         question of proportionality. After again  summarising  the  limited
         evidence relating to the Claimant's residence in  the  UK  and  her
         family relationships, and noting the absence of any details of  her
         social or cultural integration  in  the  UK,  the  judge  satisfied
         himself that the Claimant had no links with Lithuania and  had  not
         been  there  since  2005.  The  judge  accepted  that  all  of  the
         Claimant's family were in the UK.  Having  considered  all  of  the
         evidence the judge concluded that the Claimant's deportation  would
         be disproportionate and that the public interest  did  not  require
         it. The judge  consequently  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  2006
         Regulations.

The Grounds of Appeal

     16. The grounds content that the judge misdirected himself  as  to  the
         issue of imperative grounds. In  order  to  avail  herself  of  the
         highest level of protection, the Claimant had to first  demonstrate
         her entitlement to permanent residence. The judge  failed  to  take
         into account the Supreme Court decision in  SSHD  v  Franco  Vomero
         (Italy) [2016] UKSC 49 (FV(Italy))  when  determining  whether  the
         Claimant  was  entitled  to  the  'imperative  grounds'  level   of
         protection. The grounds further contend that  the  judge's  finding
         that the Appellant was not a persistent offender was irrational and
         not one rationally open to him on  the  evidence.  It  was  further
         submitted that the judge failed to give appropriate weight  to  the
         Claimant's offending, which involved offences relating to drug use.
         The judge was  not  subsequently  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant did not constitute a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
         society.


     17. Mr Staunton expanded upon the grounds in his oral submissions.  The
         judge failed to consider the break  in  the  Claimant's  continuous
         residence caused by her imprisonment. The commission of 10 offences
         over a period of less than 12 months  demonstrated  persistence  in
         offending and the judge could  not  rationally  conclude  that  the
         Claimant was not a persistent offender. The fact that the  Claimant
         had resided for a 10 year period in the UK without any  convictions
         did  not  entitle  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's
         offending was not persistent, and the nature of the  offending  was
         irrelevant  to  the  question  of  whether  she  was  a  persistent
         offender.


     18.  Mr Hamid submitted that the judge was entitled to his conclusions.
         He referred me to a dictionary definition  of  persistent,  meaning
         "continuing to exist and occur over a long  time".  The  judge  was
         aware that the Claimant had been resident in  the  UK  since  March
         2005 and was entitled to take that period of time into  account  in
         determining the issue of persistence, which was, in turn,  relevant
         to the question  of  whether  she  posed  a  genuine,  present  and
         sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the  fundamental  interests   of
         society. The nature of her offending  was  also  relevant  to  this
         fundamental issue, and the judge was entitled to conclude that  the
         offending was very much towards the lower end of the spectrum.

Discussion

     19. Mr Hamid did not seek to persuade me that the judge had  not  erred
         in his assessment of the Claimant's entitlement to the  'imperative
         grounds'  level  of  protection.  Regulation  21(4)  of  the   2006
         regulations provides, so far as material:
             A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-
             (a)has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
             of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision;

     20. In MG (prison - Article 28(3)(a) of Citizen's  Directive)  Portugal
         [2014] UKUT 392 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal considered  the  judgement
         of the Court of Justice of the European Union  in  case  C-  400/12
         (SSHD  v  MG)  with  respect  to  the  meaning  of  the   "enhanced
         protection" provision. The CJEU case made clear that  the  10  year
         period should be calculated by counting back from the date  of  the
         expulsion decision and that, in principle, periods of  imprisonment
         interrupted the continuity of the period of residence. A period  of
         imprisonment during those 10  years  did  not  however  necessarily
         prevent a person from qualifying for enhanced  protection  if  that
         person was sufficiently integrated, even though, according  to  the
         same judgement, a period of imprisonment had a negative  impact  in
         so far as establishing integration was concerned.


     21. In Ahmed Warsame  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  16  Counsel  for  the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department accepted that there is a
         "maybe" category of cases under MG where a person  has  resided  in
         the  host  state  during  the  ten  years  prior  to  imprisonment,
         depending on an overall assessment  of  whether  integrating  links
         have been broken, and that in such cases it might  be  relevant  to
         determine, by way of overall assessment, the degree of  integration
         in the host member state or the extent  to  which  links  with  the
         original member state have been broken.


     22. It is readily apparent from the judge's decision that  he  did  not
         take into account the two sentences, each of 6 weeks  imprisonment,
         which  ran  consecutively,  and  which,  in  principle,  broke  the
         Claimant's continuous  10  years  residence  for  the  purposes  of
         Regulation 21(4). Given the break in continuous  residence  it  was
         incumbent on the judge, in considering  whether  the  Claimant  was
         nevertheless entitled  to  the  highest  level  of  protection,  to
         undertake a detailed assessment as to whether  she  fell  into  the
         'maybe category' identified in Warsame. In my judgement the  First-
         tier Tribunal decision does not contain  an  adequate  analysis  of
         whether the Claimant's integration was of a  degree  sufficient  to
         attract the operation of the highest level of protection.


     23. The Grounds of Appeal additionally argued  that  the  Claimant  was
         only entitled to the highest level of protection if she  had  first
         achieved permanent residence.  A  majority  of  the  Supreme  Court
         favoured the view that possession of a right of permanent residence
         was not needed in order to enjoy enhanced protection under  Article
         28(3)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38  (the  equivalent  of   Regulation
         21(4)(a) of the 2006 Regulations). However, as a minority  regarded
         the position as being at least unclear,  the  Court  referred  this
         question to the CJEU. Given the indication of the majority  of  the
         Supreme Court, and the wording of the relevant  Directive  and  the
         manner of its incorporation into the corresponding Regulation, I am
         satisfied that the Claimant does  not  need  to  achieve  permanent
         residence in order to avail himself  of  the  imperative  level  of
         protection.


     24. There was no assessment by the judge as to whether the Claimant had
         attained a right of permanent residence. On the evidence before the
         judge there appears to be little cogent  material  upon  which  the
         judge could, in any event, have reached such a conclusion.  Instead
         the judge considered, in the alternative,  whether  the  Claimant's
         expulsion was justified even on the lowest level of  protection  by
         reference to Regulation 21(5) and (6).


     25. The judge concluded that the Claimant was not a persistent offender
         despite having received 10 convictions in  less  than  a  year.  In
         support of this conclusion the judge referred to the absence of any
         convictions from March 2005 to June 2015,  and  that  her  offences
         demonstrated that she was a 'nuisance' as opposed  to  a  'hardened
         criminal'. With the greatest respect to the judge, and  mindful  of
         the very high test that must be met in order to find  an  error  of
         law on the basis of irrationality, in my judgement  the  judge  was
         not rationally entitled to conclude that the  Claimant  was  not  a
         persistent offender. It is clear  that  the  Claimant  committed  a
         large number of criminal offences within a relatively  short  space
         of time. The fact that she had not received any convictions between
         March 2005 and June 2015 does not logically bear  on  the  question
         whether the Claimant became a persistent offender. I  draw  support
         from the decision in Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT
         00187 (IAC). Although this decision relates to  the  definition  of
         "persistent offender" in s.117D of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002, and is not an EEA decision, it is of assistance in
         determining whether the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
         Appellant was not a persistent  offender.  The  headnote  in  Chege
         indicates that a  persistent  offender  is  someone  who  keeps  on
         breaking the law. That does not mean that the person has to keep on
         offending until the date of  the  relevant  decision  or  that  the
         continuity of the offending cannot be broken. A persistent offender
         is not a permanent status  that  can  never  be  lost  once  it  is
         acquired, but  an  individual  can  be  regarded  as  a  persistent
         offender even though they may not have offended for some time.  The
         question whether a person fits that description will depend on  the
         overall picture and pattern of their offending  over  their  entire
         offending history. Each case  will  turn  on  its  own  facts.  The
         Claimant's offending history covers a short space of time  and  her
         pattern of offending within that time is characterised by  frequent
         and repeated offending. The offending occurred until  the  decision
         to expel her.


     26. The nature and relative low-level of the Claimant's offending  also
         does not logically bear on the question whether she is a persistent
         offender. In relying on the absence of any offending prior  to  the
         commencement of  her  offending  history  and  the  nature  of  her
         offending the judge has taken into  account  matters  that  do  not
         rationally support his ultimate conclusion. In these  circumstances
         I am satisfied that the judge was not entitled to conclude that the
         Appellant was anything other than a persistent offender.


     27. The question whether an individual is a persistent offender is  not
         however the test justifying expulsion under the  2006  Regulations.
         Even if the Claimant is a persistent offender it  does  not  follow
         that she represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
         threat to one of the fundamental interests  of  society.  The  fact
         that she is a persistent offender is a significant factor  to  take
         into account, but it is not determinative. The ultimate question as
         to whether she does represent the requisite threat will depend on a
         thorough assessment of the nature of her offending, the reasons for
         her offending and, in particular, an evaluation of whether  she  is
         likely to continue to offend. This is not an  assessment  that  has
         been undertaken by the judge. At [51] the judge concludes that  the
         Claimant "needs help" but this appears to  be  the  extent  of  his
         assessment as to whether the Appellant  will  continue  to  commit,
         albeit relatively low level offences. I am satisfied that a failure
         to adequately assess the likelihood of the Claimant  continuing  to
         offend given her history of  offending,  her  lack  of  integrative
         links and her apparent abuse of drugs, constitutes a material error
         of law.


     28. Nor am I satisfied that the judge's  conclusions  under  regulation
         21(6) are sustainable. The judge had very  little  evidence  before
         him relating to the nature or quality of the Claimant's ties in the
         UK and the degree of her integration. At [54] the judge  noted  the
         absence of any evidence that the Claimant ever worked, and at  [56]
         he notes the absence of any details  of  her  social  and  cultural
         integration. In the same paragraph the judge  speculates  that  the
         Claimant "no doubt... has friends" but there is no evidential basis
         for this observation. At [57] the judge accepts the  assertions  by
         the Claimant's parents that she has no relatives  in  Lithuania  to
         whom she could turn but there is no consideration by the  judge  of
         the  Claimant's  previous  integration  within  Lithuanian  society
         including the fact that she is  a  Lithuanian  national,  that  she
         lived there for the first 27 years of her life and gave birth to  2
         children in Lithuania, and that she is still likely to be  familiar
         with the language, the culture and the way of life.

Conclusion

     29. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that the First-tier
         Tribunal judge did materially erred in law. Having canvassed the
         views of both representatives, I'm satisfied it is appropriate to
         remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for a full de novo
         hearing.

     30. The First-tier Tribunal will have to consider whether, by overall
         assessment, the nature, quality and length of the Claimant's
         residence prior to her incarceration is sufficient to catapult her
         into the 'maybe category' identified in MG, with reference to
         Warsame (at [9] and [10]), such that she is entitled to the
         enhanced category of protection.

     31. The First-tier Tribunal will also need to consider whether the
         Claimant had been residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA
         regulations, either as a qualified person in her own right, or as a
         result of being a dependent family member of a qualified person,
         since her arrival in the UK. This is relevant both to whether the
         Claimant is entitled to the highest form of protection (on
         imperative grounds), but also whether she is entitled to the medium
         level of protection (such that her removal can only be justified on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security) as a result of
         having obtained permanent residence. Relevant to this assessment is
         the existence of evidence that she and/or her parents were
         exercising free-movement rights since their arrival in the UK and
         whether the Claimant was ever dependent on her parents. The First-
         tier Tribunal will also need to consider any further evidence
         relating to the Claimant's propensity to reoffend.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.
The matter will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
hearing, to be heard by a judge other than judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
Malone.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]                               6 July 2017
Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

