
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00316/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 18 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |BF                                                |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |

                                  Anonymity

The anonymity order issued by the First-tier Tribunal  is  replaced  by  the
following order which is now issued instead:

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order because  the  decision  of
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal refers to minor  children.  Unless
    the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
    proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the minor children of BF. This direction applies to
    all, whether or not parties to this case. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nathan, of Counsel, instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Landes (hereafter the "judge") who, in a decision  promulgated  24  May
    2016, allowed the appeal of BF (hereafter the "claimant"),  a  national
    of the Czech Republic born on [ ]  1979,  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 30 April 2015 to make a deportation order against
    her on the grounds of public  policy  in  accordance  with  regulations
    19(3)(b) and 21 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006  (the  "EEA  Regulations").  The  Secretary  of  State  signed   a
    deportation order on the same date.

 2. The Secretary of State  decided  to  commence  deportation  proceedings
    against the claimant because she, a  Mr  HW  and  others  were,  on  25
    September 2014, convicted by a jury at Manchester  Crown  Court  of  an
    offence of conspiracy to do an act to facilitate the  commission  of  a
    breach  of  UK  immigration  laws  by  a  non-EU  person.  The  factual
    allegation against the claimant and Mr HW was that they were two  of  a
    group of persons who had taken part  in  sham  marriages  organised  by
    facilitators of Czech nationality. The claimant and Mr HW  had  earlier
    (on 27 June 2013) entered into a marriage with each other.

 3. Care proceedings are ongoing before the Family Court in  respect  of  a
    child, Z, born in January 2016, to the claimant and Mr  HW.  The  final
    hearing in the Family Court is due to take place  on  23  August  2016.
    The Upper Tribunal's decision in the instant appeal is likely to be  of
    some  relevance  at  that  hearing.   The  claimant  also  has  another
    daughter, L (born July 2011), who is subject to care proceedings in the
    UK and five children living in the Czech Republic.

 4. It was not disputed before the judge that the claimant was entitled  to
    the lowest level of protection in regulation 21(5) pursuant to which it
    was necessary for the Secretary of State  to  show  that  the  personal
    conduct of the claimant represented a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

 5. The judge found that the claimant's personal conduct did not  represent
    such a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat. In giving  her
    reasons, she referred to the fact that the  risk  of  re-offending  was
    said to be very low in the OASys report that she had  before  her.  She
    therefore considered it unnecessary to consider proportionality in  the
    alternative  but  nevertheless  decided  to  explain  her   conclusions
    briefly, which she did at paras 39-41 of her decision.

 6. It will be necessary for me to set out the judge's reasoning in greater
    detail, which I do below. However, I shall first set out the  Secretary
    of State's case.

The Secretary of State's case:

 7. In her written grounds, the Secretary of State contends that the  judge
    materially erred in law in finding that the claimant's personal conduct
    did not represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society. In summary,  the
    written grounds contend as follows:

    i.     Given that the claimant denies  her  guilt  and  had  failed  to
         engage with "specific risk-reduction courses", the judge had placed
         determinative weight on the assessment of the risk of  re-offending
         in the OASys report.

    ii.    In placing determinative weight on the OASys report,  the  judge
         had erred because the conclusions as to risk  in  the  report  were
         only indicative of the risk within a context that is particular  to
         the National Offender Manager Service.

    iii.   The judge had failed to engage with all of the relevant evidence
         in the case and failed to conduct a qualitative assessment  of  the
         claimant's circumstances. Instead, the judge had left that  enquiry
         to the findings in the OASys report.

    iv.    The judge's conclusion that  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
         failed to accept culpability and failed to engage in specific risk-
         reduction courses did not establish  a  risk  of  re-offending  was
         illogical and  perverse.  It  must  be  relevant  to  the  risk  of
         recidivism that the claimant had failed to address her offending.

    v.     It was clear from the sentencing judge's sentencing remarks that
         the claimant had offended for financial gain. The judge's  decision
         did not suggest that the claimant's  circumstances  had  materially
         improved.

    vi.    As such, the  judge's  assessment  of  the  present  threat  was
         undermined by her failure to take account of those matters that are
         relevant to the risk of recidivism.

 8. In submissions before me, the key point made by Mr Wilding was that the
    judge's finding that the personal  conduct  of  the  claimant  did  not
    present a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat was  founded
    "almost exclusively" on the assessment of the future risk in the  OASys
    report. He submitted that the judge used the  risk  assessment  in  the
    OASys report to answer  the  question  whether  there  was  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat. He submitted  that  the  judge
    should have considered the full  range  of  the  evidence.   It  was  a
    striking feature of the evidence in this case that the claimant had not
    accepted her guilt. There was therefore  a  contradiction  between  the
    fact that the claimant had not accepted her guilt and the assessment of
    the risk of re-offending in the OASys report which the judge had failed
    the resolve. In so doing, the judge had placed determinative weight  on
    the assessment of risk in the OASys report.

 9. Mr Wilding submitted that the judge had failed to conduct a qualitative
    assessment of the circumstances  as  a  whole.  She  had  devoted  four
    paragraphs to the way  in  which  the  criminal  proceedings  had  been
    conducted,  at  paras  25-28.   She  then  said  that  the   claimant's
    conviction "was a given". At paras 34 and 35, the judge noted that  the
    claimant had not accepted her guilt but, Mr Wilding submitted, she  had
    merely flagged up the point without conducting a qualitative assessment
    of the contradiction  between  the  fact  that  the  claimant  had  not
    accepted her guilt and the fact that  the  OASys  report  assessed  the
    future risk of re-offending as  very  low.  The  judge  failed  to  say
    whether the fact that the claimant had not accepted  her  guilt  showed
    that there was a continuing risk.

10. Mr Wilding accepted that the  judge  had  referred  to  the  sentencing
    remarks of the sentencing judge at para 23  of  the  decision  but,  he
    submitted, this concerned the judge's assessment of the submission made
    to her about  the  prospects  of  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    criminal conviction. The judge  had  failed  to  indicate  whether  the
    sentencing remarks impacted upon her assessment of whether the claimant
    did present a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.

11. Mr Wilding submitted that, for all of the reasons given, the judge  had
    in effect treated the assessment of the risk  of  re-offending  in  the
    OASys report as determinative.

Assessment

12. I take the view that the judge's decision speaks for itself.  When  one
    reads paras 21-37 of her decision, it becomes evident that there is  no
    substance in the Secretary of State's case. I shall therefore begin  my
    own assessment  by  first  setting  out  paras  21-37  of  the  judge's
    assessment. These read:


         "Findings and reasons


         21.      The  conduct  on  which  the  respondent  relies  is  [the
             claimant's]  conviction.   Despite  the  directions  given  by
             Designated  Judge  McCarthy  on  2  November  2015   for   the
             respondent to file a schedule of the evidence presented in the
             Crown Court the response on behalf of the  respondent  to  the
             tribunal by letter of 5 November was  that  the  only  details
             available were the judge's sentencing remarks.


         22.      The judge's sentencing remarks are set out in full at A of
             the respondent's bundle.  It is apparent  from  those  remarks
             that there were a total of 10  defendants  on  trial  although
             there were also others involved who were not before the  court
             including at least  one  Czech  woman  who  had  already  been
             convicted of being a participating spouse and had  served  her
             sentence  and  returned  to  the  Czech  Republic   (A4).    4
             defendants, [the claimant] and [Mr  HW]  and  another  couple,
             were convicted on the factual  basis  of  being  participating
             spouses in a sham marriage (A2) and all  received  18  months'
             imprisonment. 1 Czech  national,  Klement  Bucnik,  was  found
             guilty as being one of the significant organisers of the  sham
             marriages (A2) and received 5 years' imprisonment.  The  other
             5 defendants had pleaded  guilty.   2  male  non-EEA  national
             defendants admitted being grooms in a sham marriage  receiving
             12 months' imprisonment after a full third credit being  given
             for their pleas.  I female  EEA  national  pleaded  guilty  to
             involvement in arranging sham marriages including one in which
             she was  the  bride  and  received  a  sentence  of  2  years'
             imprisonment having been given a full  third  credit  for  her
             plea.    2  male   EEA   nationals   admitted   arranging   or
             facilitating the sham marriages one of them being described as
             a "hired  help",  fulfilling  the  roles  of  interpreter  and
             witness (A5) who received a sentence of 16 months  (which  was
             described as being reduced from the 2 years which  would  have
             followed after a trial) and the more involved EEA national  40
             months' imprisonment (reduced from the  5  years  which  would
             have followed after a trial).


         23.      [The claimant] was described  by  the  judge  as  "a  very
             cynical bride who facilitated a marriage for gain.   You  have
             shown nothing but disdain for these proceedings and I  do  not
             sentence  you  for  that  fact.   You  arrived  late  but  you
             nevertheless did arrive, you stood your  trial  but  there  is
             certainly evidence before the Court that you are  perhaps  not
             as attentive to your children as it might be suggested now and
             whilst as I say, I  am  not  going  to  sentence  you  to  any
             increased sentence for the manner and  bearing  in  which  you
             presented yourself in these proceedings, I  certainly  do  not
             accept any submissions that you should be treated  differently
             from anyone else". Whilst I see of course that it can be  said
             that those who enter into sham marriages and then by  pleading
             not guilty maintain their  marriage  is  genuine  and  present
             their behaviour as genuine can be described as cynical,  I  do
             not have any indication from the sentencing  remarks  why  the
             judge made particular reference to  [the  claimant]  as  "very
             cynical".    He did not treat  her  behaviour  as  being  more
             culpable, in sentencing terms, than that of  the  other  bride
             who pleaded not guilty.


         24.      [The claimant] and [Mr HW] received the same  sentence  as
             the other couple who had pleaded not guilty, which was at  the
             bottom of the range of sentence referred to by  the  judge  as
             being indicated by the authorities of 18 months to three years
             after  a  trial  (A8).   Although  the  paragraph   from   the
             sentencing remarks quoted in the decision letter beginning  "I
             have taken full account.." refers  to  sophisticated  planning
             and organisation and the recruitment of others  it  should  be
             noted that there was no suggestion  that  [the  claimant]  was
             herself  involved  in  recruiting  others  or  organising  the
             conspiracy; what the respondent has  done  is  taken  excerpts
             from the full sentencing remarks  and  placed  them  together.
             Those  who  were  involved  in  the   organisation   and   the
             recruitment of others received much longer sentences as I have
             set out above.


         25.      [The claimant] and [Mr HW] still contest  their  guilt  as
             they have set out in the various witness  statements  I  have.
             Before their trial they were not aware that [Mr  HW's]  appeal
             had been allowed by Judge Holmes (they were  in  detention  of
             course when the decision was promulgated).  As set out in [the
             claimant's] skeleton argument from paragraph 11 onwards, it is
             apparent that [the  claimant],  [Mr  HW]  and  their  criminal
             defence team were not  made  aware  of  the  result  of  their
             immigration appeal until after closing speeches in  the  trial
             when the prosecution disclosed simply that  [Mr  HW's]  appeal
             against the refusal of a residence card had  been  allowed  (p
             230) and the prosecution made an admission to that  effect  (p
             231).  Judge Holmes' decision itself was not disclosed to  the
             defence.  He  had  been  very  critical  of  the  respondent's
             reliance on a number of interview discrepancies which he found
             were not in truth discrepancies.  The police  report  prepared
             as  part  of  the  prosecution  (p  243)  referred   both   to
             inconsistencies in interview and (incorrectly) to  the  appeal
             being lost by [Mr HW].  The police  report  would  not  itself
             have been before the jury however.  I do not know if the  Home
             Office marriage interview was put before the jury.


         26.      I understand that [the claimant] was critical of  the  way
             her defence team handled her case and so although she  is  out
             of time to appeal, she has sought assistance from Bindmans LLP
             to appeal  against  the  conviction.   I  am  told  there  are
             difficulties in progressing the matter because of difficulties
             obtaining a transcript of the summing-up.


         27.      Whilst I can see that it might be  possible  depending  on
             what was said by the  judge  in  his  summing-up  to  mount  a
             successful appeal relying on the late  disclosure  and/or  the
             way it was dealt with by the judge (and there is at least  one
             other issue which it is said may not have been  put  correctly
             before the jury namely whether [Mr HW] did have  extant  leave
             at the time of his marriage), a successful  appeal  is  by  no
             means inevitable.  The jury had to decide a different question
             from Judge Holmes and  the  evidence  available  to  them  was
             different.  Judge Holmes' decision would not  prima  facie  be
             admissible evidence before a criminal court to prove that  the
             marriage was genuine.  Equally the fact  that  [the  claimant]
             has not succeeded in  her  judicial  reviews  apart  from  her
             challenge to her detention does not mean that it would not  be
             possible successfully to appeal her conviction - the tests are
             different.


         28.      As I indicated to the representatives I consider I have to
             take the criminal conviction as a given, as it is a finding by
             a competent court, which has not been  as  yet  appealed,  let
             alone successfully appealed, that [the claimant] has committed
             the offence with which  she  was  charged.   The  question  is
             whether [the claimant's] personal conduct which  includes  her
             criminal  conviction  represents  a   genuine,   present   and
             sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the  fundamental
             interests of  society.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  [the
             claimant] has a right of permanent residence in the UK.


         29.      The sentencing remarks explain precisely why the  type  of
             crime of which [the claimant] was convicted is serious.  There
             is no doubt about that.  However as the regulations themselves
             say, a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.  As was said  in  Dumliauskas
             [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40] it is only if there is a  risk  of
             re-offending that the power to make the decision arises.


         30.      The respondent, as I have quoted in the  decision  letter,
             relies on the risk of re-offending.  That is the way the  case
             is put.  Miss Knight's submissions were relatively  brief  and
             directed to this issue.  She pointed to the  conviction  which
             has not been appealed, that the conviction indicates that [the
             claimant] is prepared to commit criminal actions for financial
             motivation, and, she submitted, given [the claimant]  has  not
             accepted the offence this is not  a  case  where  there  is  a
             prospect of rehabilitation and so  she  submitted  that  as  a
             result [the  claimant]  represented  a  genuine,  present  and
             sufficiently serious threat.  She did not rely  on  any  other
             material.


         31.      Mr Nathan  saw  the  issue  of  whether  [the  claimant's]
             conduct  represented  a  genuine,  present  and   sufficiently
             serious threat as a simple  one.   He  pointed  to  the  OASys
             report and said that the risk of re-offending was, as  he  put
             it, remarkably low.  He submitted that Vasconcelos [2013] UKUT
             00378 highlighted that although the tribunal was not bound  by
             a NOMS assessment it should be taken into account as an expert
             opinion.  He said that the writer  of  the  OASys  report  was
             aware that [the claimant] did not accept that she  was  guilty
             of the offence and that had  also  been  taken  into  account.
             Bearing in mind the very low risk  of  re-offending,  and  the
             absence of the criminal history and even without going  behind
             the conviction [the claimant] simply, he  submitted,  did  not
             pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat.


         32.      The OASys report on [the claimant] describes  her  overall
             OGRS probability of proven re-offending as 4% within one  year
             and 9% within two years, OGP proven non-violent  offending  5%
             and 9% respectively, and OVP proven non-violent  offending  4%
             and 7% respectively (p 385).  Such risk  is  described  within
             the low category (the case of Vasconcelos explaining that  the
             low  risk  group  encompasses  scores  of  0  -  24%).    [The
             claimant's] risk of serious harm to anyone in the community is
             described as low (p 386).


         33.      The writer of the report was aware that [the claimant] had
             specifically denied any  wrongdoing  and  that  there  was  no
             evidence that she had  accepted  any  responsibility  for  the
             offence  (2.11)  and  that  finances  would  appear  to  be  a
             motivating factor behind the offending (2.14).  On considering
             the  various  specific  contributory   factors,   the   writer
             identified that [the claimant's] thinking and  behaviour  were
             linked to offending behaviour as she  appeared  to  have  some
             problems with impulsivity, the ability to recognise  problems,
             problem solving skills and awareness of  consequences  (11.1).
             However she had engaged well with Liverpool Probation Services
             (see section 12) and she had complied with the requirements of
             contact having no unacceptable absences.  There  had  been  no
             proven adjudications against her (see section 1).  The  report
             described her as quite motivated to change (p 388).


         34.      [The claimant] was not cross-examined by Miss  Knight  and
             Miss Knight did not point me to anything in the  OASys  report
             which undermined  its  ultimate  conclusions  and  as  I  have
             explained the writer of the report was under no illusions that
             [the claimant] had accepted responsibility for the offence  or
             that there were no difficulties with [the claimant's] thinking
             behaviour.  Of course I must come to my  own  decision  but  I
             bear in mind that [the claimant] has no previous  convictions,
             that she behaved herself  in  custody  and  has  engaged  with
             probation services.  She has not admitted the offence  but  it
             does not follow that  the  fact  a  person  has  not  accepted
             responsibility for  the  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             convicted means they are or remain a serious risk.  Equally it
             does not follow that [the  claimant]  is  or  remains  a  risk
             because she has not completed a  programme  such  as  Enhanced
             Thinking Skills whilst in custody.


         35.      [The claimant], whilst not accepting  that  she  committed
             the offence, has shown some engagement  with  the  process  of
             considering her life and her  behaviour.   Unlike  some  self-
             assessment sections of OASys reports which I have  seen,  this
             self-assessment section does not suggest that  [the  claimant]
             has no problems in her life or no areas which need addressing.
              She did identify in the self-assessment  part  of  the  OASys
             report some areas which were a problem for her and  identified
             that some of those (finding a good place  to  live,  going  to
             places which caused her trouble, and  making  good  decisions)
             were linked to her offending (p 419). I accept from  what  she
             has  said  in  her  witness  statement  which  has  not   been
             challenged that she is motivated to make a life for herself in
             the UK, and that she wants to be able to care for [Z].  She is
             certainly capable of working in the UK, having worked  in  the
             UK in the past (as found by Judge Holmes).   I  consider  that
             her motivation to make a life for herself in the UK  and  live
             with [Z] in the UK are protective factors  and  that  her  co-
             operation with probation services, engagement in  the  process
             of the OASys report, and maintenance of  the  regular  contact
             regime with [Z] (the latter  as  demonstrated  by  the  social
             worker Katie Smith's letter)  are  indications  that  she  can
             comply with what is required of her.


         36.      Taking everything into account I  am  satisfied  that  the
             conclusions of the OASys report are likely to be  an  accurate
             reflection of [the claimant's] risk of re-offending.   A  risk
             of re-offending in single figures  puts  [the  claimant]  well
             into the lower half of the category of those  who  are  a  low
             risk of re-offending.


         37.      Despite the fact that [the claimant] has been convicted of
             a serious immigration  crime,  I  conclude  that  there  is  a
             genuinely very low risk of her re-offending.  Whilst it is not
             a zero risk I am satisfied on  the  balance  of  probabilities
             because the risk is so low that her personal conduct does  not
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  I bear
             in mind the principle of proportionality; a deportation  order
             is a serious sanction which prevents an  appellant  exercising
             free movement rights for a significant period and this is  why
             the personal conduct of an appellant has to be a "sufficiently
             serious" threat.  As I am satisfied, for the  reasons  I  have
             explained that [the  claimant's]  personal  conduct  does  not
             represent such a sufficiently  serious  threat,  I  allow  the
             appeal."

13. I do not accept that the  judge  placed  determinative  weight  on  the
    assessment of risk in the OASys report. When paras 21-35 are considered
    as a whole, it is plain that the judge made her own finding  about  the
    future risk, based on the evidence as a whole. She made  it  clear,  at
    para 35, that she had considered all  of  the  evidence.  There  is  no
    reason at all to go behind her explicit words, that she had  considered
    all of the evidence as a whole and taken all the circumstances  in  the
    round. She made it clear at para 34,  having  summarised  the  relevant
    aspects of the OASys report, that she had to come to her own  decision.
    When read as a whole, it is plain that,  whilst  the  judge  took  into
    account the assessment of risk in the OASys report, this was  only  one
    of the factors she considered amongst others.

14. Contrary to the written grounds, the judge  did  consider  all  of  the
    relevant evidence. It is telling that Mr Wilding did not  explain  what
    evidence or factors the judge left out of account  save  that  he  said
    that the judge had failed to consider  the  contradiction  between  the
    fact that the claimant continued to deny her guilt and  the  assessment
    of risk in the OASys report.  However,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge
    acknowledged that these two factors pointed in opposite  directions  in
    relation to the future risk, at paras 32-34. Since it is clear that she
    was considering the question whether  the  claimant  posed  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat, it is plain that she took into
    account the fact that the claimant had not admitted the offence and the
    fact that she had not completed a programme such as  Enhanced  Thinking
    Skills whilst in custody as factors that increased the likelihood  that
    she did present such a threat. The very fact that she said at the  same
    time that it did not follow from the existence of  these  factors  that
    the claimant was or remained a risk demonstrates  that  she  was  aware
    that these factors were relevant to  assessing  the  existence  of  the
    threat the claimant posed.

15. I do not accept the submission in the written grounds that the  judge's
    conclusion that the existence of the two factors mentioned at  my  para
    14 above did not mean that the claimant was or remained a threat it was
    illogical or perverse.  It simply cannot be said, and  Mr  Wilding  did
    not suggest, that the mere existence of  these  factors  of  themselves
    mean that there is a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat.
    I specifically asked Mr Wilding whether it was the Secretary of State's
    case that whenever an individual denies  his  or  her  guilt,  it  must
    follow that he or she presents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    He did not say that it was. He said that  it  was  a  relevant  factor.
    However, the judge plainly  considered  that  these  two  factors  were
    relevant.

16. Contrary to the written grounds, the judge did take  into  account  the
    sentencing remarks of the sentencing judge. Mr Wilding  submitted  that
    the judge only referred to the sentencing remarks at para 23 which,  he
    submitted, only formed part of  her  consideration  of  the  submission
    advanced on the claimant's behalf that it was relevant to consider that
    the claimant was taking steps to appeal against  her  consider  out  of
    time. I do not accept that the judge  only  considered  the  sentencing
    remarks in considering the  submission  about  the  possibility  of  an
    appeal against the criminal conviction, for two reasons.  Firstly,  the
    judge gave her conclusion about the submissions concerning  the  appeal
    at para 28, but then went on to refer, at para 29,  to  the  sentencing
    remarks. It is therefore plain that the sentencing remarks continued to
    feature in the  judge's  mind  in  the  remainder  of  her  assessment.
    Secondly, the judge said  clearly  at  para  36,  that  she  had  taken
    everything into account.

17. Overall, it is clear that the Secretary of State's case amounts  to  no
    more than a dissatisfaction with the result.  Whilst  it  may  be  said
    that it was open to another judge to have made a different decision,  I
    cannot say that the judge made any error of law in reaching her finding
    that the claimant's personal  conduct  did  not  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

18. The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore dismissed.


    Decision


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 18 August 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
