
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00534/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 January 2020                               |On 20 January 2020             |
|                                                |                               |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                    A K W
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a minor child.  Accordingly, it is appropriate  to  continue
the anonymity direction. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Respondent  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND

     1. By an error of law decision promulgated on 1 November 2019, I found
        an error of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G
        Clarke, itself promulgated on 31 May 2019. I  therefore  set  aside
        the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  My error of  law  decision  is
        appended to this decision for ease of reference.

     2. Some of the background history is set out at [2]  and  [3]  of  the
        Decision and I do not repeat those matters. I do though need to add
        to that for  completeness.   Following  the  Respondent's  decision
        under appeal dated 5 January 2018, made whilst the Appellant was in
        the UK unlawfully in breach of the earlier deportation  order,  the
        Appellant was removed back to Poland  on  5  April  2018  where  he
        currently resides.  I am told that he has made an application under
        the EEA Regulations from Poland to  revoke  his  deportation  order
        which is pending  decision.   Although  Mr  Jarvis  was  unable  to
        confirm that this was the position, Ms Dogra  said  that  this  was
        made in early 2019.  Nothing turns on that for reasons I will  come
        to.

     3. The Appellant returned to the UK at some point in  2019,  again  in
        breach of the extant deportation  order.   I  was  informed  by  Mr
        Jarvis that the Appellant was encountered in the UK by Border Force
        officials.  He told them that he had entered the UK via Belfast but
        did not say when he had done so.  On 25 October 2019, the Appellant
        was  given  a  conditional  discharge  for  assaulting   a   police
        constable.  He made a voluntary departure  back  to  Poland  on  14
        November 2019.  Although Ms Dogra was unaware of this  development,
        it was possible to deal with this development via evidence from the
        Appellant's partner, [SR].  I indicated  that,  if  needs  be,  the
        Appellant could provide a written statement if this  were  disputed
        but, at the end of the hearing, it was agreed  that  this  was  not
        necessary.

     4. The Appellant's mother-in-law [MA] made an application prior to the
        hearing to adjourn to a later date.  She said that she had  misread
        the directions previously given and had therefore not prepared  for
        the hearing by obtaining updated medical evidence.   The  Appellant
        and his family members have been  unable  to  pay  a  solicitor  to
        prepare the case and instruct Counsel on  a  direct  access  basis.
        The application for an adjournment was refused on 8 January 2020 by
        an Upper Tribunal Lawyer on the basis  that  the  medical  evidence
        already before me may suffice and that this was a matter  which  it
        would be best for me to consider.

     5. Although Ms Dogra intimated the need  for  an  adjournment  at  the
        start of the hearing, it was agreed in discussions  that  this  was
        not necessary.  Mr Jarvis indicated that, although  the  Respondent
        did not concede that it would be unduly harsh for  the  Appellant's
        partner and children to go  to  Poland  to  live,  he  intended  to
        present the case on the basis that they could not do so but that it
        was not unduly harsh for them  to  remain  in  the  UK  whilst  the
        Appellant remains in Poland.  I also indicated that I was  prepared
        to deal with the updated position in relation  to  the  Appellant's
        partner and children based on [SR]'s  oral  evidence  and  did  not
        immediately  see  the  need  for  medical   evidence   of   changed
        circumstances.  I was told that the Appellant's eldest child, [LR],
        has now been formally diagnosed with dyslexia.  Mr  Jarvis  pointed
        out that there is some evidence already before  the  Tribunal  that
        this might be the case and, so long as it was  not  being  asserted
        that this was coupled with mental health issues  or  had  any  such
        impact on [LR], he also considered that any  changed  circumstances
        could be dealt with by way of oral evidence from [SR].

     6. A further issue arose as  to  [SR]'s  vulnerability  based  on  her
        mental health issues.  This was a particular concern as her  mother
        (the Appellant's mother-in-law, [MA]) could not attend the  hearing
        with her.  Ms Dogra indicated that, at the hearing before the First-
        tier Tribunal, [MA] had been outside the  hearing  room  when  [SR]
        gave evidence (although present at  the  hearing).   She  indicated
        that the only concern was as to the manner of questioning and  that
        this should be done in a sensitive manner.  If she had any concerns
        as to the nature of the questioning, Ms Dogra agreed that she would
        raise those with me.  [SR] was told at the start  of  her  evidence
        that, if she needed any breaks, she should feel free to  ask.   She
        did not do so, no concerns were raised and she  gave  her  evidence
        without any incident.

   THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND THE ISSUES

     7. Before I set out  the  relevant  evidence,  it  is  appropriate  to
        outline the legal context which applies.  As I have indicated,  the
        Respondent's decision under appeal is that dated  5  January  2018.
        Although the Respondent makes  reference  to  the  EEA  Regulations
        ("the Regulations"), there is no appeal under those Regulations  as
        the Appellant was not entitled to apply to revoke  the  deportation
        order under the Regulations until after he had left the UK, whereas
        the submissions made which led to the decision  under  appeal  were
        made on 12 December 2017 whilst the Appellant was  in  the  UK,  in
        breach of the deportation order.  There is no dispute that the only
        ground before me is that the  Respondent's  decision  breaches  the
        Appellant's human rights and those of his family  under  Article  8
        ECHR.

     8. For completeness, Mr Jarvis  drew  my  attention  to  two  relevant
        decisions  on  this  issue:  Smith   (appealable   decisions;   PTA
        requirements; anonymity) [2019] UKUT 00216 (IAC) ("Smith")  and  MS
        (British citizenship; EEA appeals) Belgium [2019] UKUT 00356  (IAC)
        ("MS").  Smith concerned the issue whether the First-tier  Tribunal
        had jurisdiction to decide an appeal under the Regulations,  having
        particular regard to regulations  34  and  37  (see  [26]  of  that
        decision).  That was of some relevance to the issues.  Consistently
        with my error of law decision, the Tribunal in that case  concluded
        that the only appeal was one on Article 8 grounds (see [33] to [42]
        of that decision).

     9. The point is also developed in the Tribunal's guidance in MS in the
        following terms:


           ".. (3) If P is prevented by regulation 37  of  the  Immigration
           (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016  from  initiating  an
           appeal under  those  Regulations  whilst  P  is  in  the  United
           Kingdom, it would defeat the  legislative  purpose  in  enacting
           regulation 37 if P were able, through  the  medium  of  a  human
           rights appeal brought within the United Kingdom, to advance  the
           very challenge to the  decision  taken  under  the  Regulations,
           which Parliament has ordained can be initiated only from abroad.


           (4) In considering the public interest question in  Part  5A  of
           the 2002 Act, if P is an EEA national (or family  member  of  an
           EEA national) who has no basis under the 2016 Regulations or  EU
           law for being in the United Kingdom, P requires leave  to  enter
           or remain under the Immigration Act 1971. If  P  does  not  have
           such leave, P will be in the United Kingdom unlawfully  for  the
           purpose of section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act during the period  in
           question and, likewise, will not  be  lawfully  resident  during
           that period for the purpose of section 117C(4)(a)."

        Paragraphs [114] to [135] of the decision are worthy of note.

    10. As Mr Jarvis submitted, based on those decisions, and I accept, the
        Appellant's  Article  8  claim  falls  to  be  considered  applying
        Sections 117A to 117D Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
        ("Section 117") notwithstanding that the Appellant  is  Polish  and
        therefore an EEA national.   Via the medium  of  Section  117C  and
        Section 117D, paragraphs A398 to  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
        ("the Rules") are relevant.  Mr  Jarvis  accepted,  however,  that,
        although  Section  117C  might  be  interpreted  as  slightly  more
        generous than the Rules, it was nonetheless  appropriate  to  apply
        Section 117C.   As the Appellant is an EEA  national,  however,  Mr
        Jarvis accepted that neither Appendix FM to the Rules nor paragraph
        276ADE of the Rules applies and nor is it appropriate  to  consider
        the application to revoke the deportation order applying paragraphs
        390 and 391 of the Rules.  As Mr Jarvis pointed out,  by  reference
        to the Court of Appeal's judgment in Connell v Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1329  at  [29]  to  [42],
        although the power to deport arises under domestic legislation, the
        exercise of the power is governed by the Regulations.

    11. Ms Dogra did not dispute  the  applicability  of  Section  117.   I
        therefore set out the relevant parts of the statutory provision:

           "117A Application of this Part
           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and
           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
        Rights Act 1998.
           (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
        and
           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
           question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified under Article
           8(2).

           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
      cases

           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
      public interest.
           (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established
           by a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
           precarious.
           ...

           117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
      foreign criminals

           (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
      interest.
           (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
           the criminal.
           (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4) Exception 1 applies where-
           (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
      of C's life,
           (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
      Kingdom, and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
           (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
           unduly harsh.
           (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
           a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
           interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2.
           ..."

    12. Although Section 117C(5) appears to relate only to those  sentenced
        to a period of four years or more, it is common  ground  that  this
        applies equally to those who are sentenced to a  lesser  period  if
        they are unable to meet either Exception 1 or Exception 2 (see also
        in this regard the Court of Appeal's judgment in  NA  (Pakistan)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 -"NA
        (Pakistan)"- at [24] to [27]).   As was made  clear  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal  in  MS  (s.117C(6):  "very   compelling   circumstances")
        Philippines [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC)  "[i]n  determining  pursuant  to
        section 117C (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above
        those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 in subsections (4)  and  (5),
        such as to outweigh the public interest in  the  deportation  of  a
        foreign criminal, a court  or  tribunal  must  take  into  account,
        together with any other relevant  public  interest  considerations,
        the seriousness of the particular  offence  of  which  the  foreign
        criminal was convicted; not merely whether the foreign criminal was
        or was not sentenced to imprisonment of more than 4 years."  As  Ms
        Dogra submitted, and I accept,  however,  if  the  Appellant  meets
        either of the two exceptions, that is the end of the matter  and  I
        would not then go on to consider whether there are very  compelling
        circumstances above the exceptions.

    13. The Supreme Court, in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 ("KO  (Nigeria)")  held  that,  when
        considering whether the impact of deportation is "unduly harsh",  I
        should not balance the effect  against  the  public  interest;  the
        issue is simply whether that threshold is met.  As I  have  already
        noted, however, when considering whether there are very  compelling
        circumstances over and above the exceptions, that balance does come
        into play (see also Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department [2016] UKSC 60 as to the "balance sheet approach"  which
        should then be followed).


    14. In terms of the threshold which applies to the "unduly harsh" test,
        the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) approved what  was  said  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department [2015]UKUT 223 (IAC) as follows:


           "By way of self-direction, we are mindful  that  'unduly  harsh'
           does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or
           merely difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more  elevated
           threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or
           bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or   comfortable.
           Furthermore, the addition  of  the  adverb  'unduly'  raises  an
           already elevated standard still higher."

    15. In relation to the question whether the impact  of  deportation  is
        "unduly harsh" as the Court of Appeal pointed out in  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ  1213
        one is looking for "a degree of harshness going beyond  what  would
        necessarily be involved for any  partner  or  child  of  a  foreign
        criminal facing deportation" ([38]).  The Court of Appeal  in  that
        case went on to apply the test in the following way:


           "[39] Formulating the issue in that way, there  is  in  my  view
           only one answer to the question. I recognise of course the human
           realities of the situation, and I do not doubt that SAT and  the
           three children will suffer great distress if PG is deported. Nor
           do I doubt that their lives will in a number  of  ways  be  made
           more difficult than they are at present. But those,  sadly,  are
           the likely  consequences  of  the  deportation  of  any  foreign
           criminal who has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
           partner and/or children in this country.  I  accept  Mr  Lewis's
           submission that if PG is deported, the effect  on  SAT  and/or
           their three children will not go beyond the degree of  harshness
           which is necessarily involved for the  partner  or  child  of  a
           foreign criminal who is deported. That  is  so,  notwithstanding
           that the passage of time has provided  an  opportunity  for  the
           family ties between PG, SAT and their three children to become
           stronger than they were at an earlier stage. Although no  detail
           was provided to this court of the circumstances of what  I  have
           referred to as the knife incident,  there  seems  no  reason  to
           doubt that it was both a comfort and an advantage  for  SAT  and
           the  children,  in  particular  R,  that PG  was  available  to
           intervene when his son was a victim of crime. I agree,  however,
           with Mr Lewis's submission  that  the  knife  incident,  serious
           though it may have been, cannot  of  itself  elevate  this  case
           above the norm. Many parents of teenage children are  confronted
           with difficulties and upsetting events of one sort  or  another,
           and have to face one or more of their children going through  "a
           difficult period" for one reason or another, and the fact that a
           parent who is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a position
           to assist in such circumstances cannot of itself mean  that  the
           effects of his deportation are  unduly  harsh  for  his  partner
           and/or  children.  Nor  can  the  difficulties  which  SAT  will
           inevitably face, increased as they are by her  laudable  ongoing
           efforts to further her education and so to improve  her  earning
           capacity, elevate the case above the commonplace so far  as  the
           effects of PG's deportation on  her  are  concerned.  In  this
           regard, I think it significant that Judge Griffith at  paragraph
           67 of her judgment referred to the  "emotional  and  behavioural
           fallout" with which SAT would have to deal: a phrase  which,  to
           my mind,  accurately  summarises  the  effect  on  SAT  of PG's
           deportation, but at  the  same  time  reflects  its  commonplace
           nature.

        As also emerges from this case and paragraph 399 of the Rules,  the
        Tribunal must consider whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
        Appellant's partner and children to go to Poland to be with him and
        whether it would be unduly harsh for  them  to  remain  in  the  UK
        whilst he remains in Poland.

    16. When considering whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances
        over and above" the two exceptions in Section 117C,  the  Court  of
        Appeal in NA (Pakistan) approached the test for "medium  offenders"
        such as the Appellant in the following way


           "[32] Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all he
           could advance in support of his Article 8 claim was a "near
           miss" case in which he fell short of bringing himself within
           either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to
           say that he had shown that there were "very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
           reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to bring
           himself within that fall back protection. But again, in
           principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
           that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions 1
           and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes that they do
           constitute such very compelling circumstances, whether taken by
           themselves or in conjunction with other factors relevant to
           Article 8 but not falling within the factors described in
           Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the Secretary of
           State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters relied upon
           collectively, in order to determine whether they are
           sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high public interest in
           deportation.
           [33]  Although there is no 'exceptionality' requirement, it
           inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
           which circumstances are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the
           high public interest in deportation will be rare. The
           commonplace incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in
           poor health or the natural love between parents and children,
           will not be sufficient.

    17. Finally, Mr Jarvis also  drew  my  attention  to  the  case  of  IT
        (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
        Civ 932 where, at [52] of its judgment, the Court  of  Appeal  made
        plain that "the word 'deportation' is being used to convey not just
        the act of removing someone from  the  jurisdiction  but  also  the
        maintaining of the banishment for a given period of time:  if  this
        were not so, section 117C(1) would achieve very little".

   THE EVIDENCE

    18. Having set out the legal framework against which the evidence  must
        be assessed, I turn now to what the evidence shows  in  this  case.
        [SR] gave  oral  evidence  before  me.   I  do  not  set  that  out
        separately but incorporate that evidence  where  relevant  into  my
        assessment of the remainder of the documentary evidence.

    19. I begin by dealing with [SR]'s own situation.  Her own evidence  is
        to be found in a letter dated 9  December  2017,  a  statement  and
        letter dated 28 April 2018 and a statement dated 27  February  2019
        as well as the oral evidence which she gave at the hearing.

    20. [SR] is a British citizen.  She was born in 1992 and  is  now  aged
        twenty-seven years.  She has known the Appellant from a very  young
        age.  She says in her 2018 statement that she had known him for ten
        years.  They  had  been  a  couple  for  that  period  save  for  a
        separation when she was aged sixteen.  It was at that time that she
        fell pregnant with [LR].  As such,  [LR]  is  not  the  Appellant's
        biological child.  However, [LR] has no contact with her biological
        father and is to all intents and purposes the Appellant's daughter.



    21. [SR]  suffers  from  various  medical  conditions  which  are  best
        explained by the report dated 26 February 2019 from Dr D S  Rattan,
        MRCS, LRCP as follows:


           "[SR] has established diagnosis of the following  mental  health
           conditions and was last seen by Consultant Psychiatrist 23rd May
           2016.  Since then she has been reviewed by her GP.
           1. Emetophobia
           2. Agoraphobia
           3. Obsessional Compulsive Disorder
           4. Depression
           5. Severe Anxiety disorder
           Her condition was most  severe  during  2011-2013  and  she  had
           significant postnatal problems.  During this time she was unable
           to leave the house due to her agoraphobia.
           During her pregnancy when she was  given  formal  'homecare'  to
           meet her needs, her partner cared for her constantly.  [SR]  has
           been on antidepressants only since 2016, which have  helped  her
           cope better.
           However, without her support network (her parents,  partner  and
           close friends) she has in the UK she would not be able to manage
           due to her severe multiple psychiatric conditions.  Without  her
           support network it is very likely she would revert back  to  her
           severe state of phobia and depression.
           [SR] relies on her support network to manage all  her day to day
           activities   including   taking   her   children   to   hospital
           appointments and to the GP.  Her  daughter  [LR]  is  under  the
           Royal London Hospital for investigations of seizures and under a
           gastroenterologist.
           She  was  recently  reviewed  at  her  GP  and  her   medication
           (Citalopram 40mg) anti-depressant does was increased.
           Unfortunately, [SR] has not received any CBT therapy yet for her
           condition.
           [SR] is unable to use public transport due  to  her  agoraphobia
           and anxiety disorder.  She relies on her mother for most things.
           In summary,  [SR]  has  lifelong  multiple  severe  debilitating
           psychological issues that has required psychiatric  involvement.
           She remains  under  her  GP  for  review  and  is  currently  on
           medication.  Without her immediate support network  it  is  very
           likely that she will relapse  and  her  condition  will  worsen,
           which will have a detrimental effect on  her  children  and  her
           family."

    22. [SR] accepted in oral evidence that her conditions were a bit  more
        stable with the medication which she currently takes  (Citalopram).
        However, she is still heavily reliant on  family  support  for  her
        condition which she currently receives from her mother, [MA].   She
        accepted that her conditions are lifelong.  She was diagnosed  when
        she was a  teenager,  aged  fifteen,  sixteen  or  seventeen.   The
        conditions had become easier to cope with as she got older and with
        medication but were still debilitating.  She still struggles.   She
        does not have anxiety as much but that  is  because  she  does  not
        leave the house.  She stays at home and watches TV.  She tries  her
        best for the sake of the children.

    23. Although [SR] accepted that she receives a lot of help  from  [MA],
        she said that she did not consider that she  could  depend  on  her
        mother all of the time.  Her mother has a life as well.   She  also
        works full-time.  She said that the Appellant knows  how  to  relax
        and calm her.   She feels anxious because she does  not  know  what
        the future is.  She is very nervous. In her  2018  statement,  [SR]
        says this about the support she receives from the Appellant:


           "6.   [AW] has supported me in ways no one else  could  and  has
              helped me cope so much better.  I have come such a  long  way
              because of him.  I can honestly say that  he  has  been  more
              help to me and my progress than the  mental  health  services
              ever were and I would not have  come  this  far  without  his
              continued support.
           7. [AW] was able to help me in every way possible, from  calming
              down my anxiety attacks, and helping me to  get  out  of  the
              house, by my knowing he is there with me every  step  of  the
              way, to the more normal things like cleaning, cooking etc."

    24. [SR] suffered a difficult pregnancy with her  younger  child,  [J].
        She says this in her 2018 statement about that period:


           "19.  When I got pregnant with [J], it  was  one  of  the  worst
           stages of my life.  As much as we looked forward to meeting  our
           little baby, the struggle I went through kept me in my bed  once
           again like before and [AW] yet again cared for me, [LR], and  my
           sister [N] so my mum could work.
           20.   [AW] was there every single day and  nearly  every  night.
           He sat up with me in the night when I  was  terrified  to  sleep
           because of my fear of vomiting and being  pregnant.   Knowing  I
           could vomit was scaring me due to my Emotophobia.
           21.   [AW] would hold my hand  and  calm  me  down  night  after
           night.  He made sure we all had a healthy meal and all the  care
           we needed.
           22.   When [J] was born I became very depressed and relapsed, my
           OCD had worsened.  [AW] was there  helping  me  through  it  and
           giving me the best advice he could.
           23.   [AW] is the one that encouraged me to take the medication,
           which was the best thing I could have done.   Taking  medication
           made me feel much better and I finally let  go  of  many  things
           that held me back in the past."

    25. [SR]'s eldest child, [LR] (the Appellant's stepdaughter), also  has
        medical problems.  [LR] was born in 2009 and is now aged ten years.



    26. There were concerns that [LR] suffered from epilepsy.  This is  the
        subject of a medical report dated 9 November 2017  written  by  Hia
        Thu, a locum consultant paediatrician at  Whipps  Cross  University
        Hospital who outlines the concerns as follows:


           "The main concern from her mother is that she is  having  a  few
           prolonged staring episodes.  The first time the  family  started
           realising was in July 2017. [LR] was in  the  car  and  she  was
           sleeping.  When she woke up her eyes were wide open and  staring
           straight to the front.  There was a bit of blue  colouration  on
           her lips.  She was not responding to the  surroundings  and  she
           kept staring for 10-15 minutes.  There was no association with a
           jerky movement.  At that time her body was floppy.  Then she was
           taken to the Accident and Emergency Department.  In Accident and
           Emergency, she still had a bit of a floppy episode.  She  had  a
           whole set of blood tests, including an ECG, and the parents were
           told it was normal.   One  month  after  that  episode  she  had
           another episode.  At that time  she  was  unwell  with  a  viral
           illness.  In the morning, she was sick and her father  took  her
           to the toilet.  At that time, she felt sick  but  there  was  no
           history of vomiting and after the sickness she was  staring  and
           became unresponsive and floppy for 5-10 minutes.  These are  the
           two main incidents that the parents and grandmother thought were
           prolonged seizures.
           Previously, the  family  were  querying  similar  episodes,  for
           example, two years ago, she had an episode of vomiting then  she
           had a very similar staring episode for nearly 2 minutes.  A year
           ago, she had one which lasted for 1 minute.  Other than that she
           had a chronic history of constipation for which she is under the
           paediatrician at the Homerton University Hospital  and  she  has
           been referred to the Royal London Gastroenterologist for further
           investigations."

        A further report dated 15 August 2018 confirms that [LR]  does  not
        have epilepsy.  The "staring episodes" are said to be  "related  to
        having a fever or viral illness".  [LR]  was  therefore  discharged
        from the  epilepsy  clinic.   [SR]  confirmed  that  [LR]  had  not
        suffered from any seizures since then.

    27. [LR] does suffer from what is described in the medical report as "a
        chronic history of constipation".  That is controlled by medication
        although reports in the bundle suggest that [LR] has been resistant
        to taking her medication at all  times.   [SR]  said  in  her  oral
        evidence that [LR] can now take one of her medications in milkshake
        and is therefore more compliant but continues to struggle with  one
        of the other medications.  [LR] may need hospital  admissions  very
        so often if she does not  take  that  medication.   Otherwise,  she
        requires regular hospital  appointments  to  review  her  condition
        every few months.

    28. [SR] in her oral evidence attributed [LR]'s  learning  difficulties
        in part to the fact that she has missed school due to  her  medical
        problems and the need to attend hospital appointments on a  regular
        basis.  [LR] has now been diagnosed with dyslexia.  She is said  to
        be about two years behind her class.  As a result, she now receives
        extra classes with a lot of one to one time.   Although  [SR]  said
        that [LR] was not coping "massively well" she did say  that  [LR]'s
        reading skills were improving.  I do not have a formal report  from
        an educational psychologist or [LR]'s teachers, but Mr  Jarvis  did
        not dispute [SR]'s evidence.   There is some limited evidence  that
        [LR] has problems.  For example, in the  report  dated  9  November
        2017, it is said that she "is far behind her peer group" and was at
        that time "receiving extra support from school".

    29. [SR]'s evidence is that [LR] has been particularly  badly  affected
        by the Appellant's absence.  She said that [LR] is a "daddy's girl"
        and that the Appellant is "everything to her".   She  says  in  her
        2018 statement that [LR] has  called  the  Appellant  "Daddy"  ever
        since she could talk and that "one of her first words was  'Dada'".
        [SR] says that [LR] has been "angry all the  time"  since  she  was
        separated from the Appellant.   [SR] says  in  her  2018  statement
        that "[LR] is struggling in all aspects of her life without him and
        wants to be wherever her daddy is".

    30. [SR] also confirms that the Appellant attended  almost  all  [LR]'s
        hospital appointments.  He also took [LR] to and from  school  most
        days and attended school trips to ensure  that  [LR]  could  go  on
        them.

    31. There is limited evidence about [J].  Contrary to what is suggested
        in the 2019 medical report concerning [SR]s medical conditions, [J]
        was not born in 2013 but in late 2015.   He is now aged four years.
         He has attended pre-school since January 2018.  He is not said  to
        have any medical problems.

    32. [SR] said that [J] "gets on with it as he is very young.  He is not
        the emotional type.  He gets a bit sad and angry because he doesn't
        understand".

    33. [SR] said that she and the children speak to  the  Appellant  on  a
        daily basis, often more than once a day.  [LR] has a  mobile  phone
        and can therefore contact the Appellant directly.  [SR]  said  that
        whilst [LR] is  sometimes  happier  once  she  has  spoken  to  the
        Appellant, she is often unhappy,  and  she  cries  a  lot  for  the
        Appellant when she is down.  [LR] needs reassurance and extra  help
        also at home and when she becomes  stressed,  that  stress  has  an
        effect on [SR] herself.

    34. I have already alluded to the evidence that the Appellant has  been
        in the UK unlawfully on two occasions.  [SR] was unable  to  put  a
        date on when the Appellant had returned to  the  UK  following  the
        first and second deportations.  She said that "she was  in  a  very
        bad place" when the Appellant was first deported in March 2013  and
        she had no idea when he had returned.  She accepted however that he
        must have been back in the UK by the early part of 2015 as  [J]  is
        the Appellant's biological child and was born in late 2015.

    35. In relation to the Appellant's return following the deportation  in
        April 2018, she thought that he had been in the UK for only  a  few
        weeks when he returned voluntarily to Poland in November 2019.  She
        denied that the Appellant was living with his parents.  He had been
        living with her and the children at her mother's house.

    36. [SR] was able to confirm that the Appellant had  been  arrested  on
        that occasion.  From her evidence, it appears that the  arrest  was
        in order to effect deportation.  She said that the  police  officer
        who arrested him had done so whilst she and the  children  were  in
        the car and that the children had been particularly  upset  by  the
        experience.  She suggested that the police officer had been  unduly
        aggressive and even went so far as to suggest that it was he rather
        than the Appellant who had been responsible for an assault.   I  do
        not need to deal with that evidence since, as Ms Dogra accepted, in
        order to qualify for an unconditional caution, the Appellant  would
        have to admit to the offence with which he was  charged.   It  does
        appear however that the assault arose from a resistance  to  arrest
        and that the arrest was for the purposes of deportation rather than
        arising from any other criminal offence.

    37. [SR] said that as a result of this incident, [J] had  become  angry
        and had not spoken to her for a few days,  apparently  blaming  his
        mother for allowing the police to take his father away.

    38. [SR] says that she cannot leave the UK for her own medical  reasons
        as well as because of the children.  In particular, she points  out
        that [LR]  is  reliant  on  medical  services  and  help  with  her
        education which she is now receiving in the UK.

    39. As to the position if she and the children remain in the UK and the
        Appellant remains in Poland, she says this in her 2018 statement:


           "26.  Living outside of the UK is not an option  for  me  or  my
           children but living without [AW] and leaving my children without
           their father, does not seem like an option to me either.
           27.   There is not a day that goes by that I  have  not  had  to
           deal with heartache.  Dealing with [LR]'s tears that she  misses
           and wants her daddy back and watching my son call for his  daddy
           to come, not understanding that he cannot suddenly appear.   Not
           knowing what is going through his mind when he is  calling  out,
           and probably wondering why daddy is not coming.
           28.   They miss him and want him back and so do I.  It is  heart
           breaking to see the effect this is having on  my  children  from
           having their father in their lives to  him  suddenly  not  being
           here."

    40. [SR] said in her oral evidence that she and the children  love  the
        Appellant; "he is [their] world".   She  said  that  the  Appellant
        gives the family the support  they  need  and  she  should  not  be
        relying on her mother who could  not  be  there  for  her  and  the
        children the whole time.

    41. That brings me on to the evidence of [SR]'s mother, [MA].  She  was
        unable to attend the hearing as she was working.  However,  without
        objection from Mr Jarvis, I permitted the production of a  document
        from her  entitled  "Written  witness  statement  for  hearing  9th
        January 2020".   In addition, she has  written  a  letter  dated  9
        December 2017 and an earlier statement dated 28 April 2018 to which
        I have also had regard.

    42. [MA] confirms the support which the Appellant has  given  to  [SR].
        She confirms the deterioration of her daughter's condition when [J]
        was born.  At that time, [SR] and [LR] moved back to live with [MA]
        but the Appellant  was  there  every  day  and  most  nights.   The
        Appellant cared for [SR], [LR] and [SR]'s sister,  [N]  while  [MA]
        went to work.  She also says that the Appellant has supported other
        of their family members at difficult times.

    43.  In  her  2018  statement,  [MA]  says  the  following  about   the
        Appellant's relationship with [SR] and the children:

           "22.  I swear to you that [AW] and my grandchildren have a  very
           strong bond.  My grandchildren deserve both  their  parents  and
           [AW] has earned his right to call himself father  to  [LR].   To
           everyone who knows him, he is [LR]'s real father as  he  is  the
           one that has been there for her.  He has  changed  her  nappies,
           fed her as a baby, attended her hospital  appointments,  and  so
           much more.  She is lost without him and this is  having  a  very
           serious effect on her.  She is sad every day and misses  him  so
           much. She does not deserve this and I pray you will allow him to
           return."

    44.  In  her  recent  statement,  [MA]   speaks   of   [SR]'s   current
        circumstances.  She says that [SR] stays home  most  days  and  "is
        extremely depressed".  She says that [SR] and the children are  "in
        turmoil"and that [SR] and the Appellant "are not able  to  function
        without each other".

    45. The Appellant's parents are in the UK.  His mother,  [IW]  attended
        the hearing with [SR] but Ms  Dogra  confirmed  that  she  did  not
        consider it necessary for me to hear from her orally.  [IW] is aged
        forty-seven  years.   She  suffers  from  "seropositive  rheumatoid
        arthritis" as is confirmed by a report dated 4 November 2017.   She
        has "widespread joint pain  and  swelling  with  morning  stiffness
        lasting 45 minutes".  The Appellant accompanied her for  review  on
        the occasion which led to this report (in October 2017).   [IW]  is
        said to have difficulties with daily living.  She is in receipt  of
        personal independence payment.  The Appellant's father [GW] is  not
        said to have any medical problems.  [SR] indicated in her  evidence
        when asked whether the Appellant had been working during his recent
        stay in the UK that he might have been helping out his  father  who
        works in the construction industry.

    46. [IW] wrote a letter dated 12 December 2017 in support of her  son's
        case.  That sets out her medical problems  and  confirms  that  the
        Appellant was assisting her which allowed some respite for [GW] who
        also  cares  for  her.  She  also  confirms  the  strength  of  the
        Appellant's relationship with [SR] and the children.  [GW] has also
        provided  a  letter  of  the  same   date   which   confirms   that
        relationship.

    47. In addition to the above evidence, there  are  letters  of  support
        from friends  and  other  family  members.   Those  attest  to  the
        Appellant's family relationships  and  also  confirm  some  support
        which the Appellant has given to others,  for  example,  to  [SR]'s
        cousin's son who has ADHD.

    48. Before I turn to the  Appellant's  own  evidence,  I  set  out  the
        evidence about his criminal offences.  Those are as follows:

           24 November 2010: convicted of  resisting/obstructing  a  police
           constable.  Sentenced  to  a  conditional  discharge  of  twelve
           months.

           25 January 2011: convicted of robbery.  Sentenced  to  a  twenty
           weeks' custodial sentence and remanded at a HMP Youth  Offenders
           Institute. Also convicted of attempted robbery and  three  other
           theft offences.   Sentenced  to  forty  weeks  consecutively  in
           custody in a Youth Offenders Institute.

           27 July 2012: convicted of robbery.  Sentenced to twelve months'
           youth custody.

    49. The circumstances of the last of those offences are set out in  the
        sentencing remarks as follows:

           "..You have pleaded to a joint offence  of  robbery  which  took
           place earlier this  year  on  the  24th  April.   It  was  quite
           literally daylight robbery.  You went up to another  young  man,
           approached him  with  your  friend  and  accomplice,  used  some
           moderate force towards him and stole his  Blackberry  and  other
           items.  The Blackberry was recovered, which is a factor  I  take
           into consideration.  What  troubles  me  is  you  are  a  repeat
           offender.  You appeared in front of this Crown Court in  January
           last year and were given a 10-month sentence for no  fewer  than
           four attempted robberies and one robbery.   Anyone  who  doesn't
           learn their lesson once is going to find a court  less  merciful
           on the second occasion, and you will find that  trend  repeated.
           If you carry on committing robberies,  the  sentences  will  get
           longer and longer...There are points to be made on your  behalf.
           First, you pleaded guilty at the  first  available  opportunity.
           Two, you've written a letter to the complainant,  which  I  have
           read, which  I  have  ordered  to  be  passed  onto  him,  which
           expresses regret and remorse.  Three, I have read  a  number  of
           positive features about you which I hope mean  that  this  trend
           will stop.  I have read from tutors at  Feltham  and  I've  read
           from college tutors, I have read personal letters  from  you  to
           me,  and  from  your  family.   I  have  taken  them  all   into
           consideration as I do  the  encouraging  comments  made  by  the
           Probation Officer who has written the report on you.  All  these
           factors enable me to reduce the sentence but  I  can  tell   you
           that on a plea of not guilty, which is the starting  off  point,
           that for this repeat offence, it would have been  21  months  of
           detention in a Young Offenders Institute.  I  shall  deduct  one
           third for your plea of guilty, reducing it to 14 months,  and  I
           will reduce it by a further 2 months  to  reflect  the  positive
           features about your character which I have read about.

           The sentence of the court for this robbery, 12 months in a Young
           Offenders Institute.  Time served already counts, I reduce  that
           sentence by 75 days, and you will serve half the sentence I have
           just  passed,  the  other  half  will  be  on  licence  in   the
           community..."

    50. The Appellant appealed against  the  deportation  order  which  was
        signed following that index offence.  That  appeal  was  under  the
        Regulations (the 2006 version in force at that time).   The  appeal
        was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated
        on 5 February 2013.  The Tribunal accepted that the  Appellant  had
        acquired permanent residence.  An OASys assessment was carried  out
        in August 2012 as a result of the index offence.  The Appellant was
        assessed as presenting a medium risk of serious harm to others  and
        having a medium likelihood of reconviction ([81]).   The  Appellant
        is said to have frequently drunk alcohol, smoked drugs and "behaved
        anti socially to  relieve  his  boredom".   He  said  that  he  had
        distanced himself from his peers ([83]).  Based on the  risk  which
        the Appellant was said to pose, the Tribunal upheld the deportation
        order under the Regulations.  It also found  that  deportation  was
        proportionate both under the Regulations  and  applying  Article  8
        ECHR.  It did not accept that, at that  stage,  the  Appellant  had
        formed a family relationship with [SR] and [LR] ([99]).

    51. The Appellant came to the UK from Poland with his parents in August
        2005.  He was born in 1992 and  was  at  that  date  aged  thirteen
        years.  The offences of  which  he  was  convicted  were  committed
        whilst he was a young man, but he was over the age of eighteen when
        he committed most of them.  I also note that these  were  committed
        when he was already in a  relationship  with  [SR]  and  the  index
        offence occurred after [LR]'s birth.

    52. The Appellant has provided the following written evidence:

           1) Undated statement (apparently from around December 2017)

           2) Statement dated 28 April  2018  and  e  mail  on  which  that
              statement is based

           3) Undated letter written after deportation on 5 April 2018

           4) Statement sent on 28 February 2019

        I have read and taken account of what is said in those  statements.
        There was no application on behalf of the Appellant for him to give
        oral evidence by video link.

    53. The Appellant confirms the  relationship  with  [SR]  and  his  two
        children.  He says that he  has  "a  very  strong  bond"  with  the
        children and "would love to carry on being in their lives and  help
        them grow up into adults".  In his statement  from  2017,  he  says
        that he "doesn't see a point to live my life and  would  rather  be
        dead than not to have them in  my  life"  and  that  he  loves  his
        children and "would do anything for them".  He  says  that  he  has
        turned  his  life  around  and   cut   ties   with   his   previous
        acquaintances.  He says that he is  "a  family  man  who  wants  to
        provide moral and financial support for [his]  children."   Of  his
        relationship with [SR], he says that "she has got me through a  lot
        of dark times in [his] life and helped [him] become the man [he is]
        today".

    54. None of the Appellant's evidence nor indeed  that  of  any  of  the
        other witnesses deals with the dates when he  returned  to  the  UK
        after deportation in 2013 and again in 2018.

    55. As to his circumstances in Poland, the Appellant says that  he  was
        unable to find a job there.   He says that he did not complete  any
        education in Poland and therefore cannot secure  any  trade  there.
        He says that his training for the Passive Fire Protection trade was
        all completed in the UK and that Polish employers will  not  accept
        the certificates obtained.  There is no supporting evidence in that
        regard.  He says that his past experience and training would  allow
        him to obtain employment in that trade in the UK.

    56. There is some evidence of the Appellant's training  and  employment
        in the UK.  The Appellant has produced tax returns which  show  the
        following:

           Tax year 2011/12: did not work, was not  self-employed  and  did
           not trade

           Tax year 2012/13: did not work, and did not earn any money  from
           self-employment

           Tax years 2013/14, 2014/15 and 2015/16:  not  employed  but  was
           self-employed although no figures are given (I  note  also  that
           the front page which would give the Appellant's address  at  the
           time is missing)

        There is also a P45 form showing that the Appellant left a job on 8
        August 2014 although no other details (concerning pay  and  tax  to
        date) are completed.

    57. The Appellant has also provided a document relating to  a  Vodafone
        contract which is dated 20 December 2013.  I note that the  address
        given for the Appellant is in  Enfield.    Similarly,  there  is  a
        letter from NatWest bank to the Appellant dated 24  September  2013
        also at the same address in Enfield.

    58. The Appellant has provided a number of certificates in relation  to
        qualifications obtained and training courses  undertaken  prior  to
        his first deportation.  There is also confirmation that he attended
        school in North London between April 2006 and July 2008.

    59. It appears that the Appellant also  undertook  courses  in  the  UK
        following  his  first  deportation.   In  particular,  there  is  a
        certificate issued on 1 October 2013 in relation to  the  operation
        of "Mobile Elevating Work Platforms" and that he attended  training
        courses in September and December  2013.   There  is  also  a  sub-
        contractor agreement between the  Appellant  and  "Red  Contractors
        Ltd" dated 9 December 2013.  The Appellant's address  is  the  same
        address as above in Enfield.  I note that [SR]'s address  given  on
        various of the documents dating between 2009 and the present is  in
        Leytonstone (her mother's address).

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

    60. The starting point for my assessment, as both  parties  accept,  is
        the Appellant's relationships with [SR] and his children.

    61. Mr Jarvis did not dispute that the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner  and  their  children,
        including [LR] even though she is not his biological child.

    62. The Appellant has been deported on two occasions in March 2013  and
        April 2018 but has on both occasions  returned  in  breach  of  the
        deportation order.  As I have noted, there is no direct evidence as
        to when the Appellant returned on each  occasion  and  I  therefore
        have to do the best I can on the indirect evidence to establish how
        long he was in Poland and therefore apart from his  family.   Based
        on the evidence as set out above, it  appears  that  the  Appellant
        returned to the UK shortly after his first deportation.   There  is
        evidence that he had  returned  by  as  early  as  September  2013.
        However, that evidence suggests that he was not  living  with  [SR]
        and [LR] at that time.  He was giving an address in Enfield whereas
        [SR] has been living with her mother in  Leytonstone.   It  is  not
        clear what degree of contact the Appellant had with [SR]  and  [LR]
        at that time as both [SR] and the  Appellant  are  silent  on  this
        topic and [SR] said she  could  not  remember  when  the  Appellant
        returned on this occasion.

    63. Be that as it may, the couple were evidently  reconciled  by  early
        2015 at the latest as [J] was born in late 2015  (although  I  note
        that his birth certificate also shows that the Appellant was not at
        the same address as [SR] at that time; he gave his parents' address
        in Enfield).

    64. It is also not entirely clear where the Appellant was  living  when
        he returned to the UK in 2019.  Mr Jarvis put it to [SR]  that  the
        Appellant gave his parents' address on this occasion also  but  she
        said that this was not correct; he had been staying  with  her  and
        the children.  I am prepared to accept this was  the  case  as  the
        Appellant was arrested when she and the children were  in  the  car
        with him.

    65. However, the above evidence does cast doubt whether  the  Appellant
        and [SR] were cohabiting at all relevant times.  That is  supported
        by [MA]'s evidence which indicates that [SR] and the children  live
        with her but that the Appellant has spent much  of  the  time  with
        them.  It is also consistent with the Appellant's parent's evidence
        that he has been able to provide support to his mother prior to his
        deportation.

    66. That the Appellant may not have  been  living  with  [SR]  and  the
        children all the time does not mean that their relationship is  any
        less close.  I accept [SR]'s evidence that the Appellant has been a
        support for her and that the children have a very strong bond  with
        him.  However, [SR] and the  children  do  have  a  great  deal  of
        support from [MA].

    67. Mr Jarvis did not  dispute  that  it  is  in  the  children's  best
        interests to have both parents in the UK.  I  accept  that  is  so.
        Although Mr Jarvis did not concede that it would  be  unduly  harsh
        for [SR] and the children to go to  Poland  to  live,  he  did  not
        suggest that this would be  anything  other  than  very  difficult.
        Based in particular on [SR]'s and [LR]'s medical conditions and the
        support on which they are reliant to deal with those conditions  as
        well as the substantial reliance on  their  family,  in  particular
        [MA], I conclude that it would be unduly harsh for them  to  go  to
        Poland to live with the Appellant.

    68. However, I do not reach the same conclusion in relation to the  UK.
        It may well be, based on the indirect evidence to which I have  had
        regard, that the Appellant and [SR]/[LR] were not in fact separated
        for that long following the first deportation.  The  Appellant  may
        well have been out of the UK for only a  matter  of  months.   Even
        though I do not accept that he then went to live with [SR] and [LR]
        at that time (given the differences of address and lack of evidence
        that he did so), I am prepared  to  accept  that  the  relationship
        continued in the UK during the period between late 2013  and  April
        2018 when the Appellant was deported for the second time.   I  also
        accept  that  the  Appellant  and  [SR]  were   in   a   continuing
        relationship from early 2015 at the latest based on  the  birth  of
        their child [J] at the end of that year.

    69. I do not downplay the difficulties which [SR] faces in her life.  I
        also accept the  evidence  about  the  impact  of  the  Appellant's
        deportation on the children.  Whilst [J] has  not  apparently  been
        greatly affected, based probably on his young age and adaptability,
        I accept that the absence of the Appellant has been very  difficult
        for [LR] who has  been  significantly  upset  by  his  deportation.
        However, that is to be expected where a child is separated from his
        or her parent and I do not accept that this is anything other  than
        the normal consequence of deportation.  Similarly, whilst I  accept
        that the impact on [SR] has been very difficult  and  may  even  be
        described as harsh, it is not at a level which can be described  as
        unduly harsh.  It is to her credit that she  admitted  in  evidence
        that she is a bit more stable with the benefit of medication.   She
        is also able to depend on support from her mother and other friends
        and family members.  I recognise that her mother is not able to  be
        there for her all day because she works.  However, [SR] is able  to
        do some things for herself.  I note that she was able to attend the
        hearing even though her mother could not accompany her.  [SR]  said
        that she tries to be strong for the children and,  whilst  that  is
        clearly a struggle for her, the impact is not  of  the  high  level
        which is required to meet the unduly harsh threshold.

    70. For those reasons, applying Section 117C, Exception 2 is  not  made
        out.

    71. I turn then to Exception 1 but only for the sake  of  completeness.
        As Ms Dogra accepted, the Appellant is unable  to  meet  all  three
        limbs of that exception.  He has not been in the  UK  lawfully  for
        half his life.  Even assuming the period from  2005  to  his  first
        deportation in 2013 could all be considered to be lawful (which  is
        doubtful given his periods of imprisonment), that amounts  to  only
        eight years.  I also do not accept that there is evidence  of  very
        significant obstacles  to  integration  in  Poland.   There  is  no
        evidence that he does not speak the language.  Both his parents are
        from that country and he lived there until he was aged thirteen and
        must  therefore  have  learnt  to  read  and  write  the  language.
        Although he says that he has been unable to find work there due  to
        a lack of relevant qualifications, he has provided no  evidence  as
        to the efforts made.  He has not provided evidence about  where  he
        has been living and with what support.  In reality, it is  probably
        the case that he did not stay in Poland for very long at all  given
        the indirect evidence that he returned  to  the  UK  within  months
        after his first deportation and stayed in Poland for no  more  than
        about eighteen months on the  second  occasion.   However,  he  has
        failed to show that there are very  significant  obstacles  to  his
        integration there.

    72. Neither do I accept  that  the  Appellant  has  shown  that  he  is
        socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  He arrived in the UK
        when he was aged thirteen.  By the time that he reached the age  of
        twenty, he had already  committed  a  number  of  crimes.   He  was
        deported on the first  occasion  aged  only  twenty-one  years  and
        although it may well be the case that he has managed to live in the
        UK undetected for a number of years since, that has been whilst  he
        has been here unlawfully and in breach of a deportation order.  The
        flouting of immigration laws does not evidence integration.

    73. For those reasons, Exception 1 is not made out.

    74. I turn finally to consider the circumstances as a whole  to  assess
        whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above  the
        two exceptions.  I do so taking into  account  my  conclusions,  in
        particular in relation to Exception 2.  Whilst I do not accept that
        it is unduly harsh for [SR] and the children to remain  in  the  UK
        without the Appellant I have accepted  that  the  consequences  are
        harsh for them.  I have accepted  that  they  have  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship as a family.  I have accepted that it would
        be unduly harsh  for  them  to  go  to  Poland  to  live  with  the
        Appellant.  Unless the Appellant is able to find another  route  to
        return to the UK  lawfully,  therefore,  the  consequence  of  this
        decision will be a permanent, physical separation  of  the  family.
        [SR] and the children will have to rely as they have done  recently
        on regular telephone contact and perhaps visits to Poland if [SR]'s
        medical conditions improve to the extent of being able to travel.

    75. The evidence indicates that the relationship with [SR]  was  formed
        initially when the Appellant was here  lawfully,  in  around  2008.
        However, the couple were separated for a  time.   The  Tribunal  in
        2013 did not accept that the Appellant had by then formed a  family
        life with [SR]  and  [LR].   Even  if  it  is  the  case  that  the
        relationship was formed  initially  when  the  Appellant  was  here
        lawfully, it has been restored and strengthened at a time when  the
        Appellant has returned and remained here unlawfully and I  give  it
        less weight for that reason.

    76. The Appellant also has a relationship with his  parents,  [GW]  and
        [IW] who also live in the UK.  I  accept  that  [IW]  suffers  from
        health problems.  There  is  however  limited  evidence  about  the
        support which the Appellant can provide which  his  father  cannot.
        His father is said to work but I have limited  evidence  that  this
        has any effect on his ability to care for  his  wife  and,  in  any
        event, if the Appellant were  to  remain  in  the  UK,  it  is  his
        evidence that he would seek and probably find work himself.  I have
        no evidence whether the Appellant has any siblings in  the  UK  who
        could assist with his mother's care.   There  is  limited  evidence
        about the level of care which she requires in any event.    She  is
        not said to be housebound.  I observe that she was able  to  attend
        the hearing before me without apparent assistance from anyone other
        than [SR].  Even if I were to accept that there was any  dependency
        between mother and son which amounts to a family life (as to  which
        there is limited evidence),  I  can  give  little  weight  to  this
        relationship  when  dealing  with   the   interference   with   the
        Appellant's family life or, if family life is not established,  his
        private life.

    77. Turning then to the Appellant's private life, I accept that he  has
        lived in the UK on and off for a number of years and since he was a
        child.  Assuming the indirect evidence is reliable, he  lived  here
        from August 2005 to March 2013 and then from about  September  2013
        to April 2018 and then for a few weeks  in  October/November  2019.
        That amounts to about twelve years.  However, pursuant  to  Section
        117B (4) and (5), I can give little weight to  that  private  life.
        Much of it was formed whilst the Appellant was here precariously or
        unlawfully.  After January 2011, the Appellant  was  in  detention,
        subject to a  deportation  order  and/or  here  in  breach  of  the
        deportation order.  Furthermore, there is  limited  evidence  about
        the Appellant's private life outside his relationships.   There  is
        some evidence of having undertaken some education  in  the  UK  and
        having obtained some qualifications.  There is some  evidence  that
        he has formed friendships, mainly with  friends  and  relatives  of
        [SR].  He is said to have helped some of those  people  with  their
        problems.  There is however limited evidence of  the  formation  of
        social relationships establishing any strong private  life  in  the
        UK.  There is very little evidence  that  the  Appellant  has  ever
        worked in the UK, other than possibly for a short  period  when  he
        was self-employed.

    78. I have already dealt with the issue of the Appellant's private life
        in Poland.  I have limited if any evidence about his  circumstances
        there other than that he has had difficulty finding employment  and
        there is no evidence that he has tried.  It may well  be  the  case
        that he has no  relatives  there.   His  parents  are  in  the  UK.
        However,  he  is  a  young  and  healthy  man  who   has   obtained
        qualifications in a number of fields whilst in the UK and says that
        he has experience in a number of areas of employment.  He has shown
        resourcefulness in obtaining jobs in the UK in the absence of  very
        much education here.  I am not prepared to accept that he could not
        adopt the same resourcefulness to find employment in Poland.

    79. Turning then to the other side of the balance, I recognise that the
        index offence was committed over seven years ago.   Even  prior  to
        that, though,  the  Appellant  had  committed  offences.   The  two
        offences for which he was detained were ones of robbery; the  first
        offence was of resisting/obstructing a police  officer.   They  did
        not  apparently  involve  any  serious  violence.    However,   the
        Appellant started to commit offences after only five years  in  the
        UK.  His conduct showed blatant disregard  for  the  laws  of  this
        country.  I have already concluded that his conduct  overall  shows
        that he has not become socially or culturally integrated here.

    80. Moreover, as Mr Jarvis points out, the Appellant has re-entered the
        UK now on two occasions in breach of the deportation order  against
        him.  He may consider he has good reason to do so given his  family
        relationships with [SR] and the children but, nonetheless,  he  has
        acted unlawfully in doing so and that is  something  which  I  take
        into account.  It is yet more evidence that the Appellant  pays  no
        heed to the law.  His most recent re-entry was late last  year  and
        whilst this appeal was ongoing.  That he left  voluntarily  is  not
        something to which I give credit.  It appears that he did  so  only
        after being arrested for being here unlawfully.

    81. I also take into account the offence committed whilst he  was  here
        on that occasion.  I note [SR]'s evidence about  the  circumstances
        in which that offence was committed.  I accept  that  it  may  well
        have been because the Appellant was concerned about the  effect  of
        the arrest on [SR] and the children that he resisted  that  arrest.
        However, the fact remains that he committed that offence  and  this
        too shows that he continues to ignore the laws of this country.

    82. I also take into account the maintenance of  effective  immigration
        control.  I make clear as I did at the outset that I  am  not  here
        concerned with an appeal under the Regulations.  An EEA national is
        not ordinarily subject  to  immigration  control  (Immigration  Act
        1988).   However,  the  Appellant  is  the  subject  of  an  extant
        deportation order and for the purposes of an Article 8  assessment,
        the maintenance of effective immigration control  is  a  factor  in
        favour of the public interest which I can and indeed must take into
        account.

    83. As Mr Jarvis also pointed out, the Appellant, as the subject  of  a
        deportation order, is not allowed to work.  Although I did not hear
        direct evidence about this, Ms  Dogra  did  not  dispute  that  the
        Respondent was entitled to rely on the Appellant  having  illegally
        worked.  Some of the documentary evidence  to  which  I  have  made
        reference above certainly suggests that he has worked at  times  in
        the UK when he has not been permitted to do so.   That  is  also  a
        factor which favours the public interest.

    84. Although I did not hear evidence from the Appellant,  I  accept  Ms
        Dogra's  submission  that  the  Appellant  speaks   English.    His
        statements and letters are in  English  and  there  is  nothing  to
        suggest that those were translated for him.  I also accept that  he
        has not had recourse to public funds whilst in the UK.   Given  his
        unlawful presence, it is understandable  that  he  would  not  have
        sought benefits.  However, those factors are in any  event  neutral
        when weighing up the public interest.

    85. Balancing the interference with the Appellant's family and  private
        life, including  the  impact  of  deportation  on  the  Appellant's
        partner, children and family members, against the  public  interest
        in maintaining deportation, I conclude  that  the  public  interest
        outweighs the interference.  I have some sympathy for the situation
        facing [SR] and the children for whom this decision will  doubtless
        be difficult to accept.  However, they have others who can  support
        them  in  the  UK.  The  consequences  for  them  arise  from   the
        Appellant's past conduct.  The impacts are no more than are  to  be
        expected in a deportation case.  The Appellant's  conduct  is  such
        that this impact, whilst harsh, is proportionate  when  the  public
        interest is taken into consideration.

   CONCLUSION

    86. For the above reasons, I dismiss the Appellant's  appeal.   I  make
        clear once again that I am considering  this  appeal  only  on  the
        ground whether deportation is proportionate under the Human  Rights
        Act 1998 and nothing I say above is or is intended  to  affect  any
        decision or later appeal based on the Regulations which may involve
        different considerations.

DECISION
The Appellant's appeal is dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
ECHR) which is the sole ground of appeal.


Signed           [pic] Dated:  16 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  DA/00534/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 15 October 2019                    |                             |
|                                              |On Friday 1 November 2019... |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    A K W
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The
appeal involves a minor child.  Accordingly, it is appropriate  to  continue
the anonymity direction. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Respondent  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND

     1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
        reference, I refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge G Clarke  promulgated  on  31  May  2019  ("the
        Decision") allowing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
        decision dated 5  January  2018  maintaining  a  deportation  order
        signed against him on 12 March 2013.  The Respondent's decision  is
        a refusal of a human rights claim, as I will come to below.

     2. The Appellant is Polish.  He claims to have come to the UK with his
        parents in 2005.  His parents live in London.   Between  June  2010
        and April 2012, the Appellant was convicted of a number of offences
        and sentenced to three terms  of  custody  (in  a  Young  Offenders
        Institute  on  account  of  his  age).   The  Respondent  signed  a
        deportation order against him, applying the EEA Regulations then in
        force.  The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was dismissed on EU law
        grounds and human rights grounds by the First-tier Tribunal (First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Cooper and Mrs L R Schmitt, JP) by  a  decision
        promulgated on 5 February 2013.  Onward appeal rights failed.   The
        Appellant was deported to Poland on 23 March 2013.

     3. On 6 December 2017, the Appellant was arrested by police in the  UK
        for driving related matters.  The Appellant  was  noted  to  be  an
        illegal entrant, having returned in breach of a  deportation  order
        and he was detained and served with an enforcement notice  for  his
        removal to Poland.  He made further submissions on 12 December 2017
        based on his family and private life and therefore raising  Article
        8 ECHR.  As the Respondent noted in her decision, under  regulation
        34 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
        ("the EEA Regulations"), the Appellant may only apply to revoke his
        deportation order on EU law grounds whilst he is  outside  the  UK.
        The Appellant accepts that this is so.   As  such,  the  Respondent
        indicated that she would not  treat  the  submissions  made  as  an
        application  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  under   the   EEA
        Regulations.  Nonetheless,  the  Respondent  also  considered   the
        Appellant's case applying EU law.  The Respondent  did  not  accept
        that the Appellant had acquired a sufficient period of residence in
        order to qualify for permanent residence or that the need  to  show
        imperative  grounds  arose.   She  concluded  that  the   Appellant
        represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  and
        that his deportation continued to be proportionate in EU law.

     4. The Respondent also addressed  the  Appellant's  Article  8  claim.
        Although she indicated that the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and
        Part 5A  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  do  not
        directly apply  to  EEA  nationals  ([57]  of  the  decision),  she
        nonetheless applied the same approach  when  assessing  Article  8.
        She went on to consider the claim on the basis that  the  Appellant
        needed  to  show  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
        paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules  which  apply  to  deportation
        cases and Section 117C (4) and  (5)  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") because  he  was  unable  to  meet
        either of those provisions.

     5. The Appellant's human rights claim is based on his  life  with  his
        parents who continue to live in the  UK,  his  partner,  [SR],  son
        ([J]) and his partner's daughter, [L].   The  Respondent  concluded
        that the Appellant would fail under the suitability requirements of
        the Rules.  She did not accept that the Appellant was in a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship with [SR] or his children but indicated
        that  family  life  could  continue  in  Poland   in   any   event;
        alternatively, the Appellant could apply for entry clearance to re-
        join his family (although  of  course,  as  an  EEA  national  such
        requirements do not apply).

     6. At [138] of the decision, the Respondent said this:

           "Your further submissions on  human  rights  grounds  have  been
           examined but it is considered your removal pending  the  outcome
           of any appeal would not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
           Rights Act 1998 and therefore your case has been certified under
           regulation 24AA of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 on  15
           November 2012"

     7. The Respondent went on to consider whether deportation pending  the
        Appellant's appeal would cause serious irreversible harm.  At [144]
        of the decision, the Respondent decided  to  maintain  the  earlier
        decision  to  deport  applying  regulation   27(5)   of   the   EEA
        Regulations.   The  earlier   deportation   order   was   therefore
        maintained  in  force.   Following  a  reference  to  the   earlier
        unsuccessful appeal,  the  Respondent  went  on  at  [146]  of  the
        decision to say the following:

           "If you decide to bring an EEA  appeal  under  regulation  36(7)
           from outside the United Kingdom, and  section  82  human  rights
           appeal  from  outside   the   United   Kingdom,   it   is   your
           responsibility to bring this to the attention of the First  Tier
           Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) in order that they can
           consider linking the appeals to be heard at the same time."

     8. By the time of the appeal, the Appellant had already been  deported
        to Poland. The Appellant  was  invited  to  consider  giving  video
        evidence from Poland but indicated that he did not wish  to  do  so
        due to lack of funds and wished  the  hearing  to  proceed  in  his
        absence.

     9. I will come to the relevant paragraphs of the Decision below.   The
        Judge considered the appeal on human rights grounds only, noting at
        [47] of the Decision  that  neither  the  Rules  nor  Section  117C
        applied because the Appellant is an EEA national.  He assessed  the
        Article 8 claim outside the  Rules.   He  made  findings  that  the
        Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  [SR]
        and the children.  Due to [SR]'s  mental  health  condition,  there
        would be insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
        Poland. The Judge applied Section 117B Nationality, Immigration and
        Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section  117B")  at  the  stage  of  assessing
        proportionality.  He found that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
        expect the children to leave the UK but accepted  at  [80]  of  the
        Decision that Section 117B (6) did not  apply  because  this  is  a
        deportation case. Having balanced the factors for and  against  the
        Appellant when his family and private life were weighed against the
        public  interest,   he   concluded   that   the   deportation   was
        disproportionate and allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

    10. Something appears to  have  gone  awry  with  the  application  for
        permission to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  That was  refused
        by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien on 19 June 2019 on  the  basis
        that the Respondent's grounds appeared  to  be  a  challenge  to  a
        decision in a different appeal and accordingly did not disclose any
        error of law in the Decision.  Permission  to  appeal  was  however
        granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  on  16  July  2019  in  the
        following terms (so far as relevant):


           "...2.      Although the appellant is an EEA  national,  he  was
           appealing against a decision to refuse his  human  rights  claim
           under Art 8.  He was not appealing against an  EEA  decision  to
           which the EU regime in the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016
           applied.  It is more than arguable that in  the  context  of  an
           appeal against a refusal of a human rights claim the  provisions
           of Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002, in particular s.117C, applied to
           the appellant.  He is, on the face of it, a "foreign criminal as
           defined in s.117D(2) - not as the grounds contend as defined  in
           s.32(1) of the UK Borders Act 2017 which is only relevant to the
           'automatic deportation'  provisions  in  that  Act.   If  it  is
           suggested that his sentence of 12 months detention in a  YOI  is
           not a "period of imprisonment" - it is (see s.117D(4)(c)).
           3.    For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted."

    11. The matter therefore  comes  before  me  to  consider  whether  the
        Decision contains a material error of law and if I conclude that it
        does, either to re-make the decision or remit  the  appeal  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    12. The Respondent raises only one ground of challenge - that the Judge
        failed to apply Section 117C.  The Respondent also draws  attention
        to what she says is an attempt by the Appellant to  circumvent  the
        EEA Regulations by returning to the UK in breach of  a  deportation
        order and making a human rights claim.  It is  not  said  how  that
        relates to any error of law in the Decision.

    13. Before turning to consider this ground of appeal, however,  I  need
        to deal with a point not raised in the grounds, but which Mr Melvin
        made in oral submissions concerning the Tribunal's jurisdiction  in
        relation to the appeal.  He submitted that there  was  no  decision
        giving rise to a right of appeal.  Although he appeared  to  accept
        that the Respondent had refused a human rights claim, his  argument
        seemed to be that the Appellant had  not  made  an  application  to
        revoke the deportation order made under the EEA  Regulations  until
        after he had  returned  to  Poland.   That  application  was  still
        pending.  There was no decision refusing to  revoke  on  Article  8
        grounds.

    14. Ms Dogra pointed out that this had not been raised in the  grounds.
        I  accept  Mr  Melvin's  point  that  whether  the   Tribunal   has
        jurisdiction is a matter of law and not a matter  on  which  either
        party need make submissions.  I can deal  with  the  point  however
        very shortly.

    15. The Respondent's decision which the Judge accepted was  that  under
        appeal  contained  a  refusal  of  a  human   rights   claim.    By
        implication, the assertion at [138] of  the  Respondent's  decision
        which I have cited at [6] above,  that  removal  of  the  Appellant
        pending the outcome of any  appeal  would  not  be  unlawful  under
        section 6 of the Human Rights Act, amounts to a refusal of a  claim
        by the Appellant that his removal would occasion that breach.   The
        Respondent did not purport to certify under the 2002  Act  (whether
        under section 94 or  section  94B  which  was  probably  intended).
        Instead, she certified under the EEA Regulations having  regard  to
        the earlier deportation decision. That did not have the  effect  of
        preventing  an  appeal  under  the  2002  Act  nor  even   probably
        suspending its effect.  However, I do not  need  to  consider  that
        latter point as the Appellant was outside the UK at the time of his
        appeal hearing.

    16. I also note that at [146] of the Respondent's  decision  (cited  at
        [7] above), she expressly  refers  to  the  Appellant's  option  of
        bringing a "section 82 human rights appeal" from  outside  the  UK,
        thereby indicating an acceptance that such an appeal existed.  As I
        have already indicated, whether a party considers that the Tribunal
        has or does not  have  jurisdiction  is  not  determinative.   That
        reference is however a clear  indication  of  what  the  Respondent
        intended by the decision - namely to refuse a human  rights'  claim
        but to certify it so that the appeal had to be brought or continued
        from outside the UK as has since occurred.

    17. I therefore turn to the  only  ground  of  appeal,  namely  whether
        Section 117C applies.

    18. I begin by noting that the Judge allowed the appeal  on  Article  8
        grounds outside the Rules  but  applying  Section  117B  (with  the
        exception of Section 117B (6) which he found  not  to  apply).   He
        concluded though that  Section  117C  did  not  apply  because  the
        Appellant is an EU national.  There is an evident contradiction  in
        that position for reasons which I now set out.

    19. Both Section 117B and Section 117C form part of an  overall  scheme
        which begins with Section 117A.  That reads as follows:


           "(1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
           life under Article 8, and
           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
        Rights Act 1998.
           (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
        and
           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
           question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified under Article
           8(2)."

    20. As such, the entire part of the 2002 Act  comprising  both  Section
        117B and Section 117C  applies  where  the  Tribunal  is  asked  to
        determine an Article 8 claim.  The fact that such a claim  is  made
        by an EU national makes no difference.  In any event,  either  both
        sections apply or neither does.  Here, the  Judge  found  that  one
        section did but the other did not.  There is no basis  for  such  a
        distinction unless it can be said that the case did not concern the
        deportation of a foreign criminal.

    21. In order to answer that latter question, one must turn  to  Section
        117D which also forms part of the overall scheme set  out  in  this
        part.  That section states as follows, so far as relevant:





           "117DInterpretation of this Part

           ..
           (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
           (a) who is not a British citizen,
           (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
      and
           (c)who-
           (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
      12 months,
           (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious
      harm, or
           (iii) is a persistent offender.
           ...
           (4) In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-
           ...
           (c)include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered or
           directed to be detained, in an institution other than a prison
           (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution for
           young offenders) for that length of time; and

           ..."

    22. That definition applies to the Appellant.   He  is  not  a  British
        national nor does he assert  that  he  is.   As  I  understand  the
        position, he was sentenced to  a  period  of  twelve  months.  That
        appears to be the position from what is set out at [9] and [45]  of
        the Decision and as set out at [76] of the decision in the  earlier
        appeal. That detention was in a Young Offenders Institution due  to
        the Appellant's age makes no difference.

    23. It is not clear to me why the Judge considered  that  Section  117C
        did not apply. The closest one comes to a reason is that  given  at
        [47] of the Decision that "the Appellant is an EEA national and his
        deportation falls under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016  as
        distinct from the Immigration Rules in relation to the  deportation
        of foreign criminals. The implication of this is that Section  117C
        of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does  not  fall
        to be considered as  it  relates  to  the  deportation  of  non-EEA
        nationals".  The Judge provides no  analysis  in  support  of  that
        assertion.  As I have already indicated, in any event, if the Judge
        were right to say that Section 117C did not apply  then  nor  would
        Section 117B.

    24. It may be that the Judge thought  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
        foreign criminal on the basis that he would  not  fall  within  the
        definition of such in section 32 UK  Borders  Act  2007.   However,
        first, whilst I accept that the deportation regime for EU nationals
        is the EEA Regulations and not either the Immigration Act  1971  or
        the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007 Act, in  principle
        the Appellant does not fall outside the terms of the definition  in
        the 2007 Act either as he is not a British national and he has been
        sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  of  twelve  months.   The
        definition there is in similar  terms  to  that  in  Section  117D.
        However, I do not need to deal with this point as  the  Appellant's
        deportation is squarely based on the EEA Regulations as a result of
        the earlier deportation decision.

    25. For the reasons I give therefore, the Judge has erred by failing to
        apply Section 117C.  Ms Dogra asked me to conclude that such  error
        is immaterial if I accepted there was an error, based on the family
        and private life which the Appellant has in the UK and the  Judge's
        assessment.  I am unable to so conclude.  The thresholds in Section
        117C are very different from those in Section 117B.  Even I were to
        accept that [SR] and the children cannot be expected to relocate to
        Poland for the reasons given at [73] of the Decision (and  for  the
        present I am not inclined to do so  given  the  difference  in  the
        thresholds which apply to that question), there is no consideration
        whether it would be unduly harsh  for  [SR]  and  the  children  to
        remain in the UK without him  (assuming  that  is  the  test  which
        applies depending on their qualifying status).   There  is  also  a
        nuanced difference in relation to the level of the public  interest
        which applies to deportation cases due  to  the  additional  public
        interest in preventing crime and disorder.

    26. For those reasons, I find that there is an error of  law  disclosed
        by the Respondent's grounds.  I  find  that  error  of  law  to  be
        material.  I therefore set aside the Decision.

    27. I have given consideration to the directions required in this case.
         I would wish to receive evidence from [SR] at the very  least  (if
        she feels able to  give  oral  evidence)  and  for  that  reason  I
        consider it appropriate to convene a resumed hearing.  I have  also
        considered whether it is necessary to make any directions about the
        pending  application  under  the  EEA  Regulations  to  revoke  the
        deportation order.  I have decided not to do so.  Although there is
        some artificiality about considering the Appellant's position  only
        under the Human Rights Act 1998 and not also EU law,  there  is  as
        yet no decision which the Appellant is able to  appeal  on  EU  law
        grounds.  The Appellant's current appeal is firmly pleaded only  on
        the basis of Article 8 ECHR.  Any appeal on EU law grounds  against
        a decision under the EEA Regulations would have to  be  dealt  with
        first by the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, I see no purpose in
        delaying the consideration of this appeal pending  the  outcome  of
        the application to revoke made under the EEA Regulations.




   CONCLUSION

    28. For the above reasons, there is an error of law  disclosed  by  the
        Respondent's grounds.  For the reasons given above, I set aside the
        Decision. I make directions below for a further hearing prior to re-
        making the decision.

DECISION
I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of  Judge  G  Clarke
promulgated on 31 May 2019 contains a material error  of  law.  I  therefore
set aside the Decision.  I make  the  following  directions  for  a  resumed
hearing:
    1. Within 28 days from  the  date  when  this  decision  is  sent,  the
       Appellant is to file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent
       any further evidence on which he relies.
    2. The resumed hearing will be relisted on  the  first  available  date
       after 6 weeks from the date when this decision is sent with  a  time
       estimate of  day.  The Appellant's representative is to inform  the
       Tribunal within 28 days from the date when  this  decision  is  sent
       whether an interpreter is required (and for which language) so  that
       one can be booked and confirm whether any further  arrangements  are
       required for the hearing (for example if  the  Appellant  wishes  to
       give evidence by video-link from Poland).


Signed           [pic] Dated:  31 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

