


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00125/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 17 July 2014                             |On : 23 July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     EAG
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbahani, instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 23 December  1969.  Following
a grant of permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal allowing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  deport
him from the United Kingdom, it was found, at an error of law hearing  on  7
May 2014, that the  Tribunal  had  made  errors  of  law  in  its  decision.
Directions were made for the decision be set aside and re-made by the  Upper
Tribunal with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  10  September  1992  as  a
visitor, at the age of 22 years,  and  was  subsequently  granted  leave  to
remain as a working holiday maker. In September 1995 he made an  application
for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  his  common-law  relationship.  That
application was refused on 22 December 1997 and a  decision  to  deport  him
was made the same day as a result of his conviction and  sentencing,  on  19
August 1994, to three years' imprisonment for supplying Class  A  controlled
drugs  (crack  cocaine).   The  decision  was  upheld  on  appeal,  but  the
appellant was subsequently granted leave to remain as a spouse on  16  April
2001 followed by indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  his  marriage,
granted on 15 April 2002.

   3. On 31 July 2010 the appellant was  convicted  of  the  index  offence,
      namely possession with intent to supply a Class A  controlled  drug  -
      crack cocaine, for which he was sentenced to five years  imprisonment.
      On 9 December 2010 he was notified of his liability to deportation. He
      responded to that notice and subsequently claimed  asylum.  His  claim
      was refused. A deportation order was signed on 14 January 2013  and  a
      decision made the same day that section 32(5) of the  UK  Borders  Act
      2007 applied.

   4. The respondent decided to exclude the appellant from the protection of
      the Refugee Convention by virtue of Article 33(2), on the  basis  that
      he had failed to rebut the presumption  under  section  72(2)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  that  he  constituted  a
      danger to the  community.  He  was  also  excluded  from  humanitarian
      protection. His Article 3 human rights claim was rejected  as  lacking
      in credibility and it was not accepted  that  he  faced  any  risk  on
      return to Jamaica. With regard to Article  8,  paragraphs  399(a)  and
      399A of the immigration rules did not apply  to  the  appellant  as  a
      result of the length of his sentence. The respondent  did  not  accept
      that there were exceptional circumstances such  that  the  appellant's
      right to family and/or private life outweighed the public interest  in
      his deportation. Whilst it was accepted that  he  had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with  his  five  children  from  four
      different women and that family life therefore  existed,  it  was  not
      considered that there were exceptional circumstances  with  regard  to
      that family life. It was also accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his partner  AR  but  again  it  was  not
      considered that there were exceptional circumstances arising.  It  was
      accordingly concluded that his deportation would not breach Article 8.



   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 6 February 2014, before a panel consisting of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Cameron and Mrs L R Schmitt. The panel heard  from
      the appellant and his current and former partners, the mothers of  his
      five children. With respect to his asylum claim, they  found  that  he
      had  failed  to  rebut  the  presumption  that  his  offence   was   a
      particularly serious one and that he was a danger to the community and
      they accordingly found that he was excluded from the protection of the
      Refugee Convention and excluded  from  humanitarian  protection.  They
      rejected his Article 3 claim as lacking in credibility. However,  with
      regard to Article 8 they concluded that, because  of  the  appellant's
      relationship with his  children  and  the  role  he  played  in  those
      relationships, he had demonstrated  that  his  case  came  within  the
      exceptional  circumstances  envisaged  under  paragraph  398  of   the
      immigration rules and they accordingly  allowed  his  appeal  on  that
      basis.

   6. Permission was granted to the respondent to appeal  that  decision  to
      the Upper Tribunal and at an error of law hearing on 7  May  2014  the
      First-tier Tribunal's determination was found to be materially flawed,
      for the following reasons:

"11. As I informed the parties,  the  grounds  of  appeal  appear  on  first
    glance  to  be  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  panel's
    conclusions on the existence of "exceptional circumstances" pursuant to
    paragraph 398 of the rules. Indeed,  had  there  been  no  findings  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection, and had the findings  commenced  at
    paragraph 156 of the determination,  that  may  arguably  have  been  a
    proper conclusion.

12.  However  those  findings  followed  detailed  and   relevant   findings
    commencing at paragraph 113  and  it  seems  to  me  that  the  panel's
    findings from paragraph 156 onwards appear to ignore  those  previously
    made, in particular those relating to the  section  72  certificate.  I
    find particular merit in Mr Saunders' submission, reflecting  paragraph
    g) of the grounds, in that regard. Although the findings on the section
    72 certificate were relevant to the appellant's asylum claim, they were
    plainly also relevant to the question  of  "exceptional  circumstances"
    for the purposes of Article 8 and the  immigration  rules,  given  that
    they related to the question of risk, which in turn  was  an  essential
    aspect of the public interest considerations.

13. It does not seem to me that it  could  reasonably  be  argued  that  the
    panel had those findings  in  mind  when  considering  the  appellant's
    circumstances for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  398,  given  that  the
    findings appear  if  anything  to  be  contradictory.  As  Mr  Saunders
    submitted, the finding that the  appellant  had  failed  to  rebut  the
    presumption under section 72, in particular the presumption that he was
    a danger to the community (and I refer in particular to paragraphs  135
    and 136), does not sit well with  the  findings  under  Article  8,  in
    particular those at paragraphs 181, 198 and 190.

14. Clearly, that is a  matter  that  directly  affects  the  assessment  of
    weight given  to  the  public  interest.  In  such  circumstances,  and
    considering in particular that the panel found the appellant's case  to
    be a borderline one (paragraph 188), their  conclusions  in  regard  to
    paragraph 398 and Article 8 cannot be considered to be safe.

15. Accordingly I conclude that the panel made material errors of  law  such
    that its decision has to be set aside  and  re-made,  with  respect  to
    Article 8.

16. Mr Behbahani requested that, in the event an error of law was found  and
    the decision set aside, the appeal remain in the Upper Tribunal for the
    decision to be re-made, preserving the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings
    of fact. I see no reason why the findings of  fact  as  to  the  family
    relationships should not be preserved, as there has been  no  challenge
    to them. It is also the case that the panel's decision on  the  section
    72 certificate has not been challenged, but it may be that  that  is  a
    matter to be considered by the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  light  of  the
    contradictory findings identified above.  Accordingly  submissions  are
    invited from both parties in advance of the hearing as to which of  the
    panel's findings ought to be preserved."

Appeal hearing and submissions

   7. The appeal then came before us for a resumed hearing on 17 July 2014.

   8. Mr Walker sought to adduce further documentary  evidence  relating  in
      particular to one of the appellant's children. Mr  Behbahani  objected
      to the production of the document at  such  a  late  stage,  given  in
      particular that its contents were  challenged  by  the  appellant  and
      would thus necessitate  a  further  adjournment  in  order  to  obtain
      rebutting evidence. Having carefully considered the matter we  decided
      not to admit the document, on the basis that there had been plenty  of
      opportunity for it to have been produced earlier and given the lack of
      any satisfactory explanation as to why it was only being  produced  at
      the last minute. We have therefore had no regard to  the  document  or
      its contents.

   9. Mr Walker advised us that he was content to  accept  the  most  recent
      witness statements produced for the appellant and his four ex-partners
      and therefore did not need to  cross-examine  the  witnesses.  It  was
      agreed that there was therefore no need for any further oral  evidence
      and the appeal proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

  10. Having sought initially to clarify the views of  the  parties  on  the
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal that  were  to  be  preserved,  we
      agreed with Mr Behbahani that the decision with respect to the section
      72 certificate had  to  be  re-made  in  light  of  the  contradictory
      findings  identified  in  the  error  of  law  decision.  Whilst   the
      Tribunal's findings of fact on the relationship between the  appellant
      and his children were to be preserved, we considered that the question
      of the children's best interests was dependent to an extent  upon  the
      assessment of risk and therefore had to be re-visited.

  11. Mr Behbahani then made submissions  before  us.  With  regard  to  the
      presumption under section 72 he accepted that  the  appellant's  crime
      was  a  particularly  serious  one.  However  he  submitted  that  the
      appellant did not constitute a danger to the community of  the  United
      Kingdom, given the remorse he had demonstrated by way of  his  conduct
      in prison (as evidenced by letters from prison officers) and since his
      release, as evidenced by his relationship with his children and in the
      letter from the London Probation Trust at page 528 of the main  appeal
      bundle. Mr Behbehani referred us  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      appellant's children, including school reports, evidence from his  ex-
      partners and the evidence of prison visits,  in  submitting  that  the
      best interests of the children lay in him being able to remain in  the
      United Kingdom where he continued to be the main steer in the  family,
      keeping the family unit together.

  12. Mr Walker, in his submissions, referred to the appellant's current and
      previous convictions and a previous deportation decision made  against
      him, and asked us  to  find  that  he  constituted  a  danger  to  the
      community. He submitted that the appellant retained a propensity to re-
      offend and it was not accepted  that  he  posed  a  low  risk  of  re-
      offending. Mr Walker referred to the Court of Appeal judgment in Lee v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  348  in
      submitting that deportation resulted in families being  split  up.  In
      this case, the best interests of the children lay  in  remaining  with
      their mothers in the United Kingdom.

  13. In response, Mr Behbahani sought to reiterate  the  crucial  role  the
      appellant played in the lives of his children.

Consideration and findings

  14. We turn first of all to the presumption under section 72. It is not in
      dispute that the  appellant  has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
      serious crime. The serious nature of the crime was referred to by  the
      Judge when  sentencing  him,  on  22  October  2010,  to  five  years'
      imprisonment for his involvement in the supply and production of crack
      cocaine. Mr Behbahani does not challenge that part of the  section  72
      certification.

  15. The question before us is whether or not the  appellant  has  rebutted
      the presumption that he constitutes a danger to the community  of  the
      United Kingdom. We find that he has not done so.

  16. The evidence relied upon by the appellant  in  seeking  to  rebut  the
      presumption under section 72 consists of various letters  from  prison
      officers produced at pages 441 to 446 of the main  appeal  bundle  and
      evidence of training courses undertaken  and  qualifications  achieved
      whilst in prison, at pages 447 to 482, as well as the evidence of  his
      ex-partners in their statements and before the First-tier Tribunal. We
      have considered all that evidence, including the appellant's  detailed
      statements of 24 October 2013, 27 January 2014, 6 May 2014 and 4  July
      2014 in which he expresses his remorse for his past behaviour and  his
      intention to move on with his life, particularly for the sake  of  his
      children. We also take account of the fact that he  has  not  offended
      again since the index offence, although we note that it  was  only  in
      March 2014 that he was released from prison, on immigration bail.

  17. With regard to the time spent by the appellant in prison, we have  had
      regard to the positive comments made by some prison officers and  note
      that he sought  to  improve  himself  through  attending  courses  and
      training sessions. However, it  is  also  relevant  to  note  that  he
      received  two  adjudications  whilst  in  prison.  The  incidents  are
      detailed in the OASys report at page  500  of  the  main  bundle,  and
      include one in 2010 when a saw-blade was found concealed behind a pipe
      which he claimed to have used to hollow out his table in order to hide
      a mobile telephone and another in 2012 in which he was  found  with  a
      substance containing alcohol in his possession.

  18. We have also had regard to the OASys  report  prepared  on  21  August
      2013, several months after the appellant's  conditional  release  date
      (but whilst he remained in immigration detention) in which the risk he
      posed was assessed. We note from page 514  that  he  was  assessed  as
      presenting a medium risk of harm to the public and at page  512  as  a
      medium risk of serious harm in the community. "Medium risk of  serious
      harm" is explained as meaning "there are  identifiable  indicators  of
      risk of serious harm. The offender has the potential to cause  serious
      harm  but  is  unlikely  to  do  so  unless  there  is  a  change   in
      circumstances,  for  example  failure  to  take  medication,  loss  of
      accommodation, relationship breakdown, drug or alcohol abuse."  We  do
      take account of the constantly changing circumstances in the past with
      respect to the appellant's relationships and to his  past  history  of
      drug abuse and consider these to be relevant factors in assessing  his
      potential to cause serious harm.

  19. We note that the report also concluded, on the  basis  of  his  scores
      following  a  statistical  analysis  of  various  factors,  that   the
      appellant posed a low  risk  of  re-offending  and  of  re-conviction.
      However, we are not prepared simply to import that conclusion into our
      findings for the purposes of an assessment of risk in relation to  the
      section 72 presumption, given the basis upon which the assessment  was
      made and in light of what we consider to be some inconsistency in  the
      report, as well as in the light  of  our  observations  above.  It  is
      relevant to note that the OASys report, at  page  489  of  the  appeal
      bundle, concludes that in view of the length of time elapsed since the
      commission of an offence leading to a conviction for the supply  of  a
      class A drugs in 1994, a pattern of offending is not assessed as being
      in existence. Yet later in the report, at section 2.12 on page 491  of
      the bundle, under the heading of "Pattern of Offending" various  other
      convictions are referred to and reference is made to  the  appellant's
      history  of  drug  offences  and  to  his  latest  offence  being   an
      "escalation". We do not see how it can be concluded at one stage  that
      there is no pattern of offending when at a later  stage  reference  is
      clearly made to an escalation in the nature of his offending. We  note
      from the appellant's PNC record that, aside  from  his  conviction  in
      1994 which led to a three year prison  sentence,  a  caution  in  1996
      related to drugs, a caution for public disorder offences in  2001  and
      convictions in 2006  and  2008  apparently  unrelated  to  drugs,  the
      appellant was also convicted in May 2004 and sentenced to  six  months
      in prison, for possession of  cocaine.  Accordingly  we  approach  the
      assessment in the OASys report of low risk of re-offending  with  some
      caution.

  20. The only other evidence relating to risk, other than  the  appellant's
      own views and those of his family,  consists  of  a  letter  dated  16
      September 2013 from a  probation  officer  on  behalf  of  the  London
      Probation Trust advising of  the  lack  of  concerns  with  him  being
      released into the community. We  note  the  officer's  view  that  the
      appellant did not have the potential to cause serious harm, but we are
      also mindful of the fact that that view appears to be based  upon  the
      conclusions of the statistical analysis in  the  OASys  report  rather
      than upon personal contact with and knowledge of  the  appellant.  For
      the reasons given above, we have concerns about the conclusions in the
      OASys report. It is, furthermore, of some relevance to note that there
      is no other and more recent evidence from the probation services since
      the appellant was released on bail in March  2014,  despite  the  fact
      that he remains on licence until July 2015.

  21. In all of these circumstances, whilst considering the evidence  relied
      upon by the appellant as supporting his claim to be "a changed man" as
      he states in his most recent statement, but having had regard  to  his
      criminal history, the escalation in offences, his adjudications whilst
      in prison and the  seriousness  of  the  index  offence,  we  are  not
      prepared simply to accept the assessment in the OASys  report  of  low
      risk of reoffending and do not reach such a conclusion  ourselves.  We
      are aware, from the Upper Tribunal's decision in Vasconcelos  (risk  -
      rehabilitation) Portugal [2013] UKUT 378, that we are not bound by the
      conclusions following statistical assessment of  re-offending  and  we
      consider such circumstances exist in  the  appellant's  case.  On  the
      basis of the evidence before us, and having regard to  the  assessment
      of medium risk of serious harm in the community, we conclude that  the
      appellant poses at the very least a medium risk  of  re-offending.  In
      the light of that conclusion, and considering the  devastating  effect
      of drugs on society, we conclude that the appellant does constitute  a
      danger  to  the  community  and  that  he  has  failed  to  rebut  the
      presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act.

  22. Having made such a finding, we now turn to our assessment  of  Article
      8,  in  which  the  only  relevant  issue   is   whether   exceptional
      circumstances exist such that the public interest in  the  appellant's
      deportation is outweighed  by  other  factors,  for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 398 of the immigration rules. With regard to the question of
      "exceptional circumstances", the Upper Tribunal in Kabia (MF: para 398
      - exceptional circumstances) (Gambia) [2013] UKUT  569,  said  in  the
      head-note to the case:

"3. The new rules speak of "exceptional  circumstances"  but,  as  has  been
    made clear by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria), exceptionality is  a
    likely characteristic of a claim that properly succeeds rather  than  a
    legal  test  to  be  met.  In   this   context,   "exceptional"   means
    circumstances in which deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the individual or their family such that a deportation
    would not be proportionate"."

  23. The "unjustifiably harsh consequences" relied upon  by  the  appellant
      are the destruction of the extended family unit in which  it  is  said
      that he is the focal point and the "steer", ensuring that his children
      from his various  former  partners  maintain  a  relationship  amongst
      themselves and with him. However, as the Court of Appeal in Lee found,
      that (ie the splitting up of families) is what deportation does and is
      the tragic consequence of  the  appellant's  bad  behaviour.  We  find
      nothing unusual about the appellant's circumstances. It  is  the  case
      that he has five  children  from  four  different  women.  He  is  not
      currently in a relationship. His relationship with AR  has  now  ended
      and he has returned to live with his ex-wife AG and their two sons  in
      accordance with the conditions of his bail. Whilst it is accepted that
      he maintains a close relationship with his children and that he did so
      whilst in prison, it is also the case that his  involvement  in  their
      lives has been limited due to his imprisonment and that he  has  never
      been  a  permanent  fixture  in  their  lives  in  terms   of   living
      circumstances. The  children's  mothers  have  so  far  maintained  an
      interest in sustaining the inter-relationships  between  the  children
      and there is no reason why that would not continue in the  appellant's
      absence.

  24. Whether it is in the children's best interests for  the  appellant  to
      remain in the United Kingdom is questionable, given the  influence  he
      brings  to  bear  as  a  result  of  his  criminal  history.  However,
      proceeding on the basis that it is in the children's best interests to
      have their father living nearby and being able to visit him and  spend
      time with him, particularly given the close ties that it  is  accepted
      exist between  them  and  the  supporting  evidence  in  that  regard,
      including letters from the children's schools, we conclude that  those
      interests, albeit a primary consideration, are nevertheless outweighed
      in this case by the public interest in preventing disorder and  crime.
      We find no factors weighing in the appellant's favour other  than  his
      children and his length of residence in the United  Kingdom.  We  note
      that he committed the index offence at a time when he had all five  of
      his children and thus had no regard to the implications of his actions
      on them at the time. He has contributed little  to  society  thus  far
      and, whilst he has commenced work with  Foundation  4  Life  with  the
      intention of becoming a youth mentor,  we  note  from  the  letter  of
      support at page 24 of the most recent bundle that  is  only  a  recent
      development and is in the very early stages, with training  and  other
      requirements yet to be met. The crime that he  committed  was,  as  we
      have already said, a serious one,  with  potentially  serious  adverse
      effects on society. We have not agreed with the OASys assessment as to
      him posing only a low risk of re-offending, but in any event note from
      relevant jurisprudence that that is  not  the  most  important  public
      interest  factor  (N  (Kenya)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1094). We take note of the strength of  the
      public interest consideration, as emphasised by the Court of Appeal in
      SS (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 550.

  25. In all the circumstances, we do  not  consider  that  the  appellant's
      deportation would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the
      appellant or his children or their respective mothers. Whilst it would
      no doubt cause some initial distress to  the  children,  there  is  no
      reason why they would not able to continue their lives as  previously,
      meeting each other with the support of their respective  mothers  and,
      whilst not an ideal substitute for regular direct contact, maintaining
      contact with the appellant  through  occasional  visits  (albeit  with
      regard to the reservations stated in the social worker's letter  of  8
      July 2014), telephone calls and other means. It is always open to  the
      appellant to seek to persuade the respondent, in the future, that  his
      presence in the United Kingdom is no longer  contrary  to  the  public
      interest, in order that he may return and join his children.  We  find
      that there are no exceptional  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
      interest in the appellant's deportation and that his deportation would
      not be in breach of his Article 8 human rights.

  26. We find, accordingly, that the appellant has failed to establish  that
      he falls within the exceptions set out at section 33 of the UK Borders
      Act 2007 and his appeal must be dismissed under the immigration  rules
      and on human rights grounds.

DECISION

  27. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and the  decision  has  accordingly  been  set
      aside. We re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  We  continue
    that order, pursuant to pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, in view of  the  fact  that  children  are
    involved  who  may  not  be  named  or  identified  in  any   published
    proceedings or reports.



                               Signed                                  Date
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
