
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00098/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 May 2014                                   |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     F C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               The secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Short, instructed by Hammersmith & Fulham
Community
      Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  Anonymity  Direction  granting  the
    Appellant anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No  application  has
    been made to discharge this Direction and we conclude that it should be
    maintained. As such no report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly  identify  the  Appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with   this
    direction could lead to a contempt of court.


 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  25  November  1955.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 4 May 2002 in possession of a  six  month
    visitor visa in the false name of M M.  She  subsequently  successfully
    applied for leave to  remain  as  a  student  and  thereafter  obtained
    numerous further extensions of her leave, all in this false  name.  The
    last such extension was granted so as  to  expire  on  30  April  2007.
    Thereafter, the Appellant's leave was statutorily extended  whilst  the
    Secretary of State considered a further application made by  her,  this
    time for leave to remain as a work permit holder.  This application was
    refused on 10 August 2007.

 3. On 7 May 2008 the Appellant was  arrested  for  working  illegally,  at
    which time she made an asylum application in the name  of  M  M.   This
    application was refused and a  decision  was  made  to  remove  her  to
    Zimbabwe on 5 November 2008.  The Appellant appealed this  decision  to
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on Refugee Convention, Humanitarian
    Protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 4.  The  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  Turkington  in  a
    determination promulgated on 6 January 2009.  When doing so  the  judge
    comprehensively rejected the truth of evidence given by the  Appellant,
    save for that relating to her name, age, nationality  and  gender.   In
    particular, the judge did not accept that the Appellant, or any of  her
    family members, had had any involvement in MDC activities in  Zimbabwe,
    or that she, or any members of her family, had ever  been  targeted  by
    pro-government activists in her homeland.

 5. On 23 January 2009 the Appellant pleaded  guilty  to  three  counts  of
    possession of false identity documents with the intent  of  using  them
    for establishing registerable facts about herself.  She  was  sentenced
    at Portsmouth Crown Court to 12 months imprisonment on  each  count  to
    run concurrently.

 6. The Appellant suffered a mini heart attack in  2009  and  in  2010  she
    suffered a stroke.

 7. On 13 December 2012 the Respondent served the Appellant with:

      i) a decision that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applies to
         her; and

     ii) a signed deportation order drawn in her name.

    The Appellant appealed the former decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    That appeal was dismissed by a panel [Judge Thanki  and  Ms  Street  JP
    (non-legal member) - "the Panel"] in a determination promulgated on  25
    February 2014.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade on 18  March  2014,  and  thus  the
    appeal comes before us.

 8. Before the panel of the First-tier Tribunal ("the Panel") the Appellant
    relied, in her asylum and Article 3  claims,  on  ostensibly  the  same
    factual matrix as she had previously relied upon before the Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal in 2009, with an additional limb that she would be
    at risk upon return to Zimbabwe as a consequence of  having  undertaken
    activities on behalf of the MDC in the United Kingdom.

 9. In relation to her circumstances in Zimbabwe prior  to  coming  to  the
    United   Kingdom,   the   evidence   about   which   Judge   Turkington
    comprehensively disbelieved in 2009; the Appellant sought  to  rely  on
    new evidence not available to Judge Turkington in order to persuade the
    Panel to come to a different conclusion as to the truthfulness  of  her
    assertions.  This, though, was to  no  avail  because  the  Panel  took
    exactly the same view of  the  Appellant's  credibility  as  had  Judge
    Turkington.  The process by which it did  so  is  now  the  subject  of
    challenge before us.

10. Before turning to the specific challenges made by the Appellant, it  is
    prudent to set out the binding guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  the
    starred determination of Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT  00282;  a  decision
    which has been widely approved of by the Court of Appeal.

11. Devaseelan concerned a second appeal made on human rights grounds by an
    asylum seeker whose asylum appeal had been  previously  dismissed.  The
    IAT gave guidance as to the weight to be attached to  the  findings  of
    the Adjudicator who had rejected the  asylum  appeal.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that this guidance is of application  in  the  instant  appeal.
    Insofar as is relevant, the IAT said as follows in paragraphs 39 to  42
    of its decision:

          1) The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
             starting point.  It is the  authoritative  assessment  of  the
             Appellant's status at the  time  it  was  made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

          2) Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination
             can always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          3) Facts happening before the first  Adjudicator's  determination
             but having no relevance to the issues before him can always be
             taken into account by the second Adjudicator.

          4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to  the
             attention  of  the  first  Adjudicator,  although  they   were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  the  available
             facts in an effort to obtain  a  more  favourable  outcome  is
             properly regarded with suspicion from the  point  of  view  of
             credibility ... for this reason, the adduction of  such  facts
             should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of   the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

          5) Evidence of other facts - for example country guidance  -  may
             not suffer from the  same  concerns  as  to  credibility,  but
             should be treated with caution.

          6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts
             that are not materially different from those put to the  first
             Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what  is  in
             essence the same evidence as available  to  the  Appellant  at
             that time, the second Adjudicator should regard the issues  as
             settled by the first Adjudicator's determination and make  his
             findings in line with that determination rather than  allowing
             the matter to be re-litigated ...

          7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)  and  (6)
             is greatly reduced if there is some very good reason  why  the
             Appellant's failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before  the
             first Adjudicator should not be as it were held  against  him.
             We think such reasons will be rare."

  12. Turning back to the grounds of challenge, it  is  submitted  that  the
      Panel erred  in  its  consideration  of  the  evidence  given  by  (i)
      Professor Katona, a consultant psychiatrist,  in  a  report  dated  22
      January 2014; and (ii) Ms Mercy Mwakipeseli.

  13. Taking these in turn, the Panel summarised Professor Katona's evidence
      in paragraphs 26 to 30 of its determination.   It  accepted  Professor
      Katona's expertise [26], but also observed in the same paragraph  that
      the letter of instruction to the Professor had not  been  provided  to
      the Tribunal.

  14. Professor Katona diagnosed  the  Appellant  as  having  complex  post-
      traumatic stress disorder  ("PTSD")  and  depression,  caused  by  her
      traumatic experiences in Zimbabwe.  Specific consideration  was  given
      to whether the Appellant could have feigned the symptoms  and  it  was
      concluded she could not.  It was further concluded  that  the  illness
      provided   an   explanation   "for   the   apparent   omissions    and
      inconsistencies in the Appellant's asylum interviews".

  15.  Having  observed  that  Professor  Katona's  conclusions  were  based
      entirely on the history provided by the Appellant [27] the Panel  said
      as follows:

           "[33] It is submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
           diagnosis  of  PTSD  by  Professor  Katona  is  significant  new
           information which was not before the  previous  appeal  hearing.
           We accept that the diagnosis of PTSD is made for the first  time
           in the psychiatric report dated 22 January 2014.  We  also  note
           in that context that the Appellant's medical conditions  include
           heart problems and a significant stroke.   In  relation  to  the
           latter she is prescribed  appropriate  medication  and  receives
           necessary medical care.

           [34] What is clear is that the Appellant has given an account of
           her difficulties in Zimbabwe in the  psychiatric  interview  and
           this account is the account which  was  before  the  Immigration
           Judge in 2008.  It is said that  her  psychiatric  condition  is
           because of the trauma she suffered in Zimbabwe.  We have no  new
           evidence which could cast doubts on the findings of  credibility
           in the previous determination. ..."

  16. The Appellant's grounds of application to the  Upper  Tribunal  assert
      that the Panel erred in "dismissing the report out  of  hand  as  they
      have failed to give  any  reasons  for  rejecting  Professor  Katona's
      conclusions."

  17. Contrary to what is submitted in the grounds, the Panel did not reject
      Professor  Katona's  diagnosis  that  the  Appellant  has   PTSD   and
      depression.  This is plain from reading paragraphs 33 and  34  of  the
      determination together with paragraph 38, in which the Panel  come  to
      the conclusion that  the  Appellant's  psychiatric  condition  is  not
      exceptional.

  18. The Panel was entitled to conclude that the state of  the  Appellant's
      mental health and the diagnosis of PTSD and depression as at the  date
      of her  examination  by  Professor  Katona  did  not  undermine  Judge
      Turkington's assessment of her credibility. As the  Panel  identified,
      Professor Katona's evidence  as  to  the  events  which  caused  these
      illnesses was based on the word of the  Appellant,  whose  account  of
      such events had been comprehensively disbelieved by Judge Turkington.

  19. Like the Panel, we find that the evidence given by Professor Katona is
      not capable of undermining Judge Turkington's findings. First, as  the
      Panel identified, the letter of instruction to  Professor  Katona  was
      not produced before it, and  has  still  not  been  produced.  Second,
      despite Professor Katona being in  possession  of  Judge  Turkington's
      determination he makes no reference to its findings in his  conclusory
      paragraphs and provides no evidence  as  to  the  possibility  of  the
      Appellant's mental health issues being caused  by  events  other  than
      those relayed by the Appellant to him. Third, Professor  Katona  comes
      to his conclusions as to the  current  diagnosis  of  the  Appellant's
      mental health  problems  on  the  basis  of  the  symptoms  that  were
      presented to him on the day of his assessment.  He does  not  seek  to
      identify when it is said that the Appellant's symptoms first presented
      themselves, how it might be that health professionals in the  criminal
      detention environment did not diagnose the Appellant's illness at  the
      time of her detention, or as to what her symptoms were, or were likely
      to have been, at the time of her asylum interviews and appeal  hearing
      in 2008. The Appellant also  was  represented  by  the  Refugee  Legal
      Centre at  that  time  of  her  2008  hearing,  an  organisation  with
      considerable experience of dealing with mental health issues presented
      by asylum claimants, and yet no evidence relating to  the  appellant's
      mental health was presented to Judge Turkington.

  20. In addition, the Appellant has not provided any evidence herself as to
      these matters; in particular as to why no medical evidence relating to
      her mental health problems was put before Judge Turkington.

  21. Moving on to the ground relating to the Panel's consideration  of  the
      evidence given by Ms Mw, Ms  Mw  provided  evidence  relevant  to  two
      aspects of the Appellant's claim by way of  an  undated  and  unsigned
      witness statement.  She did not attend before  the  Panel  to  provide
      live evidence.

  22. In her witness statement Ms Mw spoke both to events said to have taken
      place in Zimbabwe prior to  the  Appellant's  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom (in particular in relation to her, and  the  Appellant's,  MDC
      activities in Zimbabwe) and also to her, and the Appellant's,  claimed
      United Kingdom based MDC activities.

  23.  The  Panel  considered  this  evidence  in  paragraph   36   of   its
      determination, stating as follows:

         "In her typed but unsigned witness statement  she  [reference  here
         being made to  Ms  Mw]  states  that  she  knew  the  Appellant  in
         Zimbabwe.  She states that she and the Appellant were both involved
         in the MDC.  The witness, Ms Mw made a claim  for  asylum  and  her
         appeal was heard on 23 January and 21  March  2008  by  Immigration
         Judge Milligan-Baldwin.  The judge had rejected the witness's claim
         for asylum on the basis that the  account  had  been  concocted  to
         avoid being removed from the UK.  However, she allowed  her  appeal
         on the basis that she had a well-founded fear of persecution on the
         basis of her sur place MDC activities in the UK.  We note that this
         witness did  not  attend  the  appeal  hearing  before  us  despite
         previous Tribunals having been provided with a copy of her  witness
         statement which suggested that the  Appellant  was  active  in  MDC
         activities in the UK.  We have little evidence of  this  before  us
         and we reject the sur place claim as it does not  satisfy  us  that
         the Appellant is involved in MDC activities in the UK  and  further
         that her activities have come to the attention of  the  authorities
         in Zimbabwe so as to place her in danger upon return  to  her  home
         country."

  24. We can find no basis upon which the Panel would have been entitled  to
      disturb the adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  Judge  Milligan-
      Baldwin in Ms Mw's appeal and it is plain to us that for  this  reason
      the  Panel  rejected  Ms  Mw's  evidence  regarding   her,   and   the
      Appellant's, involvement in the MDC in Zimbabwe.

  25. Before us Ms Short submitted that the Panel  erred  in  rejecting  the
      evidence given by Ms Mw as to her own involvement in the  MDC  in  the
      United Kingdom.  As we identified during the course  of  the  hearing,
      this submission is based on a clear misreading of paragraph 36 of  the
      Panel's determination.  The Panel did not reject the evidence given by
      Ms Mw as to her own involvement in the  MDC  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      indeed it referred to  Judge  Milligan-Baldwin's  acceptance  of  that
      evidence. The Panel did, however, reject Ms  Mw's  evidence  given  in
      relation  to  the  Appellant's  alleged  United  Kingdom   based   MDC
      activities, as it was entitled to. In any event, the  Panel  concluded
      in the alternative that even if the Appellant had been active  in  the
      MDC in the United Kingdom, as claimed, she would nevertheless  not  be
      at risk upon return to Zimbabwe [see paragraphs 36 and 40]. Again,  in
      our conclusion this was a finding open to the Panel.

  26. Ms Short further maintained that the Panel's conclusions  in  relation
      to the Refugee Convention were  flawed  by  legal  error  in  that  it
      conflated (or in the words of the  grounds  "muddled")  considerations
      under the Refugee Convention with those in relation to Article 8 ECHR.
       We do not accept that this is so.

  27. The Panel clearly and carefully  dealt  with  the  Refugee  Convention
      ground in its reasoning up to paragraph 36 of its determination.   Had
      its consideration of that ground stopped  there,  anyone  reading  the
      determination would have been in no doubt as  to  its  conclusion,  or
      about the reasons why it came to such conclusion.

  28. Thereafter, the Panel gave consideration to the Appellant's Article  8
      claim, a relevant aspect of which was the findings made by  the  Panel
      in relation to  the  Refugee  Convention  claim.  These  findings  are
      relevant to the Article 8 proportionality assessment in two  respects:
      first, that the Appellant faces no risk of ill-treatment  upon  return
      to Zimbabwe and, second, that the Appellant  has  maintained  a  false
      asylum application and given false evidence to the Secretary of  State
      and the Tribunal on more than one occasion.

  29. Even if we are wrong in our consideration  of  the  structure  of  the
      determination and the Panel did initially consider the refugee  claim,
      then interposed considerations of Article 8 and  then  came  back,  in
      paragraph 40 of its determination, to conclude its assessment  of  the
      refugee claim, there is nothing inherently unlawful in this  approach,
      as long as the reader of the determination can properly  identify  the
      reasons given by the Panel for its conclusions in respect of  each  of
      the grounds.  In this case the reasons why  the  Panel  dismissed  the
      appeal on both Refugee Convention grounds and Article  8  grounds  are
      readily identifiable from reading the determination as a whole.

  30. We turn finally to the grounds relating specifically  to  the  Panel's
      consideration of Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.   It  is
      incorrect to say, as is asserted in the grounds, that the Panel failed
      to consider either the Appellant's physical and moral integrity or her
      caring responsibilities.

  31. At the hearing Ms  Short  clarified  that  in  the  former  submission
      reference was being made to the failure of  the  Panel  to  take  into
      account the Appellant's mobility problems.  In  paragraph  38  of  its
      determination the Panel took account of the fact  that  the  Appellant
      suffers from serious medical problems.  There is no reason to  believe
      that in so  doing  the  Panel  excluded  from  its  consideration  the
      problems the Appellant has with her mobility.

  32. As to the ground relating to the Appellant's caring  responsibilities,
      the Panel refer to evidence in relation to these  responsibilities  in
      paragraphs 11, 12, 20 and 24  of  the  determination  and  extensively
      further reference this evidence in paragraph 38, accepting its truth.

  33. Ms Short additionally placed reliance on the decision of the Court  of
      Appeal in UE  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975,  in  support  of  the
      submission that the Panel erred in failing to  treat  the  Appellant's
      caring responsibilities as a matter reducing the weight to be given to
      the public interest in her deportation.

  34. We can find nothing in the Panel's consideration  of  the  Appellant's
      caring  responsibilities  that  is  inconsistent  with  the   approach
      commended by the court in UE  (Nigeria).  There  is  ample  authority,
      including from the House of Lords  and  the  Supreme  Court  (see  for
      example R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27) establishing  that  what  is
      required in the assessment of proportionality is a broad  exercise  of
      striking a fair balance between the individual and  the  interests  of
      the community. This is the approach taken by the Panel in the  instant
      appeal.  The  court  in  UE  was  not  seeking  to  depart  from  this
      established  authority,  but  rather  was   considering   a   specific
      circumstance in which a Tribunal judge had specifically excluded  from
      his considerations the loss to the community of the value of a  person
      whom the Secretary of State intended to remove. The Panel did not fall
      into such error.

  35. Even if we are wrong, and the Panel did err in the manner suggested by
      Ms Short, in our conclusion such an error was not capable of affecting
      the outcome of the  appeal.  As  Sir  David  Keene  identified  in  UE
      "[w]hile this factor of public value can be relevant...I would  expect
      it to make a difference to the outcome of immigration cases only in  a
      relatively few where the positive contribution to this country is very
      significant..." [36]. In our view, the loss of 'public value' is  even
      less likely to make a difference in a case such as  the  instant  one,
      where the Appellant is being deported from the United Kingdom pursuant
      to the operation of section 32(5) of the 2007 Act.

  36. Turning lastly to paragraph 11 of  the  grounds,  there  has  been  no
      suggestion from any quarter that the  Appellant  presents  a  risk  of
      reoffending, and we have no doubt that it was on this basis  that  the
      Panel proceeded in its determination.  We are fortified in  this  view
      by the terms of paragraph 41 of  the  determination  in  which  it  is
      implicit that the Panel took the view that the Appellant  was  not  at
      risk of committing further offences. The Appellant's offending relates
      to her attempts to remain in the United Kingdom.  It  is  self-evident
      in our view that if she is granted a right to  remain  here  she  will
      have no motivation to commit further offences of this type.

  37. Looking at the determination as a whole, as we must, we find that  the
      Panel took into account all materially relevant matters, did not  take
      into account any irrelevancies, gave legally adequate reasons for  its
      conclusions and came to conclusions which  were  open  to  it  on  the
      available evidence. As a consequence  we  conclude  that  the  Panel's
      determination is to remain standing and the Appellant's appeal  before
      us is dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 8 May 2014
