
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00304/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2018                           |On 15th March 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of  the  Netherlands  born  on  25  August  1998.  His  appeal  against
    deportation was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard  on  27
    June 2017 under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  on  the
    grounds that the judge arguably misdirected himself in law  in  finding
    that the Appellant was entitled to an enhanced level of protection when
    the evidence failed to show that the Appellant had  acquired  permanent
    residence.

3.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge  erred  in  law  in  concluding,  at
    paragraph 13, that by virtue of Regulation 27(4) the decision to deport
    could only be made on imperative grounds of public  policy.  The  judge
    failed to  look  at  the  quality  and  substance  of  the  Appellant's
    residence and consider whether it was qualifying  residence  under  the
    Regulations.

4.   I indicated that I  agreed  with  that  submission  and  the  Appellant
    stated that he had evidence to show that  he  and/or  his  mother  were
    exercising Treaty rights and that he was integrated in the UK.

5.   I find that there is an error of law in the decision of  27  June  2017
    because the judge has only  considered  the  length  of  residence  and
    failed to consider whether it  was  'qualifying'  residence  under  the
    Regulations. The judge found that the Appellant had been living in  the
    UK since at least September 2006 and stated at paragraph 12 "That is  a
    period of more than 10 years to the date of the Respondent's decision."
    The judge failed to make any findings on whether the Appellant  or  his
    mother were exercising Treaty rights.

6.   I set the judge's decision aside. None of his findings  are  preserved.
    I adjourn the hearing with the following directions:

    (i)  The Appellant to file and serve any further evidence upon which he
         intends to rely no later than 14 days before the hearing.


    (ii) The Appellant to file and serve a skeleton argument no later  than
         14 days before the hearing.


    (iii)    The Respondent to file and serve a skeleton argument no  later
         than 7 days before  the  hearing,  including  an  up  to  date  PNC
         printout.


    (iv) The skeleton arguments should deal with the following issues:


         a.  Whether  the  Appellant  has  acquired   permanent   residence,
            including the exercise of Treaty rights; and


         b. Whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  enhanced  protection,
            including the Appellant's integration in the UK.




Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 12 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
